I last met Sir Stephen House on Tuesday 14 January, and I will next meet him on Monday coming. Policing in Scotland is performing excellently, crime is at a 39-year low, violent crime is down by almost half since 2006-07, homicides are at their lowest since records began, the risk of being a victim of crime is falling and confidence in the police is high and rising.

The member raises two issues. First, I will meet Sir Stephen House and Vic Emery to discuss various matters, including the financial challenges that the police face. Those are challenges that are faced in every other walk of public and private life in Scotland, given the Westminster cuts that are coming in. It is right and appropriate, given the legislation that Parliament passed for a single police service, that Police Scotland is held to account by the Scottish Police Authority. We must also bear it in mind that we should not have routine political interference by a Cabinet Secretary for Justice in a public service that is meant to be kept non-political. I will discuss matters with Sir Stephen House and Vic Emery, but if John Pentland has concerns, it is important that he approach the Police Authority. However, given what I have said, it appears to me that Scotland’s police service is outstanding. That is how it was and that is how it remains. Indeed, as the records and statistics continue to show, the service is improving.

5. Cameron Buchanan (Lothian) (Con): To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of Police Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02891) I last met representatives of Police Scotland in Inverness on 30 January, to discuss how communities in the Highlands are benefiting from the single service. As I said earlier, not only is policing in Scotland performing excellently but, in stark contrast to England and Wales, we are protecting police numbers and have more than 1,000 more police officers than we had in 2007.

I do not accept that at all. I was recently at a meeting with Councillor Gavin Barrie and other councillors who sit on the relevant board in the council. They had, quite rightly, been in discussions with Police Scotland and the local commander, Mark Williams. I fully understand the decision that was taken by the City of Edinburgh Council, and think that it is appropriate. Equally, Police Scotland will continue to enforce the law and, as has always been the case with the police approach to prostitution, put at the heart of the issue the protection of those who are vulnerable. That has always been the situation, in Strathclyde, in Lothian and Borders and in Police Scotland.

The Legal Services (Scotland) Act 2010 gave the Scottish Legal Aid Board the new function of monitoring the availability and accessibility of legal services, with reference to relevant factors that relate to urban and rural areas. Ministers will be guided by the board on access to justice in communities in South Scotland, but the judicially led and independent Scottish Court Service—not the Scottish Government—is responsible for Scotland’s courts. As part of its long-term vision for the court estate, the Scottish Court Service has outlined to the Justice Committee that it intends to consider integrated justice centres in four areas. The first feasibility study is under way in the Borders. The SCS and Scottish Borders Council are jointly undertaking the study with other justice partners.

I welcome the continuing discussion between the Scottish Court Service and Scottish Borders Council. They appear to be seeking to reach the best possible and most workable solution for the Borders that will take into account demographic, topographic and a variety of other changes as they take place. No proposals have been put to us beyond what has been discussed with the Justice Committee. Such matters remain with the Scottish Court Service. I encourage Jim Hume to continue the dialogue with the council and the Court Service.

That is a matter for Police Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority. However, I understand that the number of calls to the 101 non-emergency number is steadily increasing, which has helped to make the police more accessible while reducing pressure on the 999 system. There are, on average, 280,000 non-emergency calls to the 101 number per month and around 46,000 emergency 999 calls per month. The 101 non-emergency number replaces all local police station numbers with one easy-to-remember number that can be used to contact police anywhere in the country. It is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It can also be used to arrange for a police officer to visit a member of the public in their own home at a time that suits them.

I understand the member’s point and I will feed that back to both the chief constable and the Scottish Police Authority. The Police Scotland advice is clear: if people are in any doubt, they should use the 999 number. When a crime is in progress or somebody nearby is suspected of acting in a way that may endanger life and limb, people should not hesitate to use the 999 number, which, as Linda Fabiani said, is free to call. The non-emergency 101 number is intended to allow people to contact their local police station or police officer to get advice, to make arrangements and to address non-emergency matters. As Linda Fabiani correctly points out, the number is charged at a flat rate of 15p from a land-line or mobile network, no matter what the time of day or how long the call lasts. In many instances, that will be cheaper than previous non-emergency numbers and cheaper than calling the local police station. However, I will happily feed back her suggestion to those who are responsible for the number.

The Police Scotland and Scottish Fire and Rescue Service proposals, which will enhance the service that is offered to the public, are subject to approval by the respective boards this week. New jobs will be created as the Inverness control room is expanded to become the new national control centre for Scotland. In Aberdeen, Police Scotland will strengthen the offshore resource and establish a multi-agency facility, and the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service has established a fire investigation unit and will invest in the Portlethen training and development centre. It is right for the services to consider the issue at this time. Our budgets are being squeezed by the Westminster Government, and it is crucial that the services ensure that resources are used in the most effective and efficient way. Scotland is safer now than it was, and the proposals will help to sustain the hard-fought gains that we have delivered since 2007. We have a policy of no compulsory redundancies, so staff who are affected will be offered alternative posts or retrained to help them to find suitable employment.

I think that everyone accepts such things with a heavy heart when they come around, whether they come from the board or the chief. Such matters affect people’s livelihoods. That is why this Government has always had a commitment to no compulsory redundancies, which we expect the boards and agencies that operate with us to maintain. That stands in stark contrast to the action of the United Kingdom Government, in which the member’s party is in coalition. Yes, I have a heavy heart. I will meet other representatives as I meet Unison—something that I think has occurred only since I came into office. We are acting to ensure that we are able to protect local services and provide the best technology that is available, to keep our communities as safe as possible as we face the challenges of the 21st century, allied with the challenges that the coalition Government down in Westminster has imposed on us.

Absolutely not. The new Police Service of Scotland is doing a remarkably good job. I accept that individuals are having to suffer pain as jobs are lost. However, when I was down in Dumfries and Galloway I met armed response officers. Prior to the Police Service of Scotland’s establishment, Dumfries and Galloway did not have mobile armed response vehicles; it now has two, which attended an armed robbery in Dumfries on Sunday night. I was told that the helicopter that is part of the Police Service of Scotland would come to the area today to search for someone who is missing. I met officers from the rape investigation unit, who welcomed the national rape investigation unit and the additional expertise that will be available to help them to deal with major incidents. We are seeing the enhancement of and improvement on what was an outstanding service from the legacy force. I point out that Ms McInnes has asked me to stay out of directing and becoming involved with the chief or with the Scottish Police Authority board. In a press release on 1 December 2012, she said: “We urgently need a resolution that protects the independence of the Chief Constable and Scotland’s police.” Her colleague Willie Rennie, who is sitting next to her, said: “People want police and fire services to be laser focussed on local needs, not subject to political control from ministerial offices.” We are seeing the delivery on the ground of an outstanding police service. We are adhering to the need to ensure that the police are not politicised or subject to direction, whether by me or by any future Cabinet Secretary for Justice.

The member makes many valid points. First, I, too, have visited Bucksburn and Queen Street over the years and I agree with Kevin Stewart that the staff there have provided an outstanding service. He mentioned the pooling and sharing of resources. That matter has been raised with the boards. Indeed, Vic Emery, the chair of the Scottish Police Authority, is seeking to pursue it. The Government thinks that the idea has a lot of merit, so we are encouraging the boards and the services to do that. As I say, it is not simply a matter for the police and fire services; there are other-blue light services that should work together more. We see some elements of good practice, but we concur with Kevin Stewart’s point. As I say, I am aware that Vic Emery has raised the matter and that he will be pursuing it over forthcoming months and years.

Absolutely—I concur fully. I echo the points that I made to Kevin Stewart. The service given has been exemplary and the work is outstanding, as is the case for all the legacy forces. The quality of service provided has be a criterion that the board must take into account.

If the member is asking me to give a direction to the police and fire boards and their chiefs, then the answer is no. I repeat the points that I made to Alison McInnes. We accept the desire of the chamber, enshrined in the legislation that we introduced, to ensure that there be no political interference by the current or any future Cabinet Secretary for Justice in what are important operational matters. The situation is one for them. What Nanette Milne says is a bit rich. I accept the pain and the doubtless and understandable anger that some people will have, but when we contrast the position with the situation south of the border, where the fire and rescue service is on strike and the relationship between the Tory Government and the police is one that none of us would have ever imagined would get to such an appalling state, this Government does not need any lectures from the Conservative Party.

I am happy to discuss matters with the member and with Alison McInnes. As I say, I will visit Aberdeen and Inverness very shortly. I recognise the on-going outstanding work. Work will need to be carried out by the Scottish Police Authority and the board of the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service to decide on the new landscape not only with regard to command and control centres but with regard to other aspects of the national services to ensure that there is a fair dispersal around the country. However, the whole ethos behind moving to single services was to ensure that we maintain delivery locally, with the bobby on the beat and the fire station in the community, at the same time as providing access to national resources such as helicopter support, armed response or significant investigative units.

I discussed the matter with the local commander, Kate Thomson, yesterday. There will, of course, be the opportunity for staff to relocate to other remaining control rooms, and those in Glasgow and Motherwell are the closest. However, this is not simply about transferring to other control rooms. Retraining will be offered so that those whose jobs are going have the opportunity to consider working in other areas of the police service and the police family, which is not simply those who operate in uniform or in civilian clothes with a warrant card. Other opportunities are available locally, whether in Dumfries or Stranraer, and retraining will be offered. To the eternal credit of the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, prior to advertising locally the next round of recruitment for firefighters, it prioritised giving those whose jobs are going the opportunity to become firefighters. Several people who were civilian staff have taken up that opportunity and are currently training to become firefighters, and that opportunity will remain available. That is to the credit of the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service in Dumfries and Galloway as in other areas of the country.

I heard from the deputy leader of the council and the SNP group as well as from the council leader, and I know their position. I was also grateful that Detective Chief Constable Rose Fitzpatrick went down there and engaged. There will be on-going discussions between the trade union, staff representatives and the board, and the member would require to address the matter to the police. These matters have been subject to review for some time and have been discussed in my continuing discussions with Unison. It would also be fair to say that we currently have in the region of 200 to 300 members of civilian support staff in the police who have made an application for voluntary redundancy but whom we are unable to release until such decisions are made.

The member can raise that with the board, whose representatives will be in discussion directly with the union and representatives. As I said to Aileen McLeod, this has been a matter of on-going discussion between me and Unison, the major representative union, although I also meet Unite and the Scottish Police Federation. Discussions between unions and staff have been on-going for some considerable time, and matters have also been open for some time with regard to the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service. If the member has counterproposals to make, he should speak to Mr Emery and the Scottish Police Authority.

The plans for local policing going forward are to build on the outstanding legacy service in Dumfries and Galloway. As I said in an earlier answer, we have seen the addition of two mobile armed response vehicles, which I think are beneficial and long overdue given the difficulties and challenges that are faced, as was evident on Sunday night. There is also the ability to access the helicopter and the new road traffic unit, of which I have met the inspector and his crew. As I said, the management and the Scottish Police Authority will continue to consult with the unions. There have been discussions—albeit truncated—between the SPA and police. We will maintain what I believe the people of Dumfries and Galloway want, which is a visible police presence in their community. We are maintaining bobbies north of the border, while the numbers are haemorrhaging south of the border. At the same time, we are, as a result of moving to the single service, getting access to the specialist resources that are necessary in every part of Scotland in the 21st century. No area in Scotland can work on the basis that it will not require to address gun crime, access the helicopter, or deal with specialist investigations into rape, sexual offences and so on. Local areas get the best of both worlds: local police are maintained, and access to all those specialist resources will be available when it is required.

That will be a matter for the boards of both authorities, the chief fire officer and the police to discuss with the unions. Given the nature of the issues, it is important that the unions and the staff representatives are the primary people involved in articulation and engagement. I will do all that I can—as I have done in the past months and years—to encourage those discussions. That will ensure that the relationships between Unison and the Scottish Police Authority, and between the Fire Brigades Union Scotland and the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service board, continue and that those who require retraining or who wish to take the benefit of voluntary redundancy have their position represented.

Absolutely. I am very grateful for the service that is provided in Edinburgh and elsewhere in Scotland, whether by full-time or retained firefighters. I engage with my own fire service at local stations in Newcraighall and Marionville in my constituency, and I have no doubt that the news will come as a relief there. Clearly, it will be tinged with the sadness that is felt elsewhere, but we are trying to provide the best service for the whole of Scotland, wherever people are.

That is just not possible. There is not one single IT system, but a multiplicity of systems across the board. The reason that we require to move is that in some instances the technology is very aged, and in other instances it is simply unable to locate and speak to other areas. The change is about addressing that. As a member of the Justice Committee, Ms Mitchell will know that one of the major priorities—if not the major priority—for the chief is to ensure that the police computer systems are brought up to date for the 21st century, in the control rooms as well as for operational policing.

I meet Mr Emery regularly, and I did so a matter of days—or a week—ago. To be fair to Mr Emery, he has considered applications for voluntary redundancy from between 200 and 300 individuals whom he has been unable to allow to go. Discussions have been on-going and will continue to be so—that is the commitment that I can make on Mr Emery’s behalf.

I am happy to answer the question. Local policing is at the heart of police reform and Police Scotland is engaged with local authorities and local partnerships on a range of matters. That will continue to be the case in relation to parking matters that are identified as an issue and agreed as a local priority. The Police Scotland review of the traffic warden service was part of its approach to ensuring that resources are being utilised in the most efficient and effective manner, and I have been assured by Police Scotland that it will continue to address dangerous or obstructive parking. Indeed, police officers regularly carry out those duties. The Scottish Government is engaging with local authorities to discuss the issues and possible solutions arising from Police Scotland’s decision to withdraw the service. However, the action that local authorities take is a matter for them and will take into account their local circumstances and priorities.

That is just not the case. At least 12 local authorities are operating decriminalised parking enforcement; that had been the case for several years with regard to the Strathclyde legacy force and, indeed, Mr Fraser’s own region of Fife operates it. In such circumstances, it seems to me that Police Scotland is helping to provide a more uniform basis across Scotland and to ensure that police officers are available to deal with the kind of dangerous and obstructive parking that they should deal with as well as assist with individual local priorities. However, there is also a recognition that other such matters are better dealt with by local authorities, and it might be appropriate for Stirling to engage with Fife to work out how these arrangements appear to be working relatively and reasonably well there, never mind in the city of Edinburgh, which Mr Fraser clearly knows well.

I think that we will find that it is Police Scotland that already deals with those major matters. Mr McArthur can correct me if I am wrong, but I think that we would speak of the traffic warden—not wardens—in the Orkney Islands. Discussions are on-going between Police Scotland and Orkney Islands Council on that circumstance.

Discussions took place between Police Scotland and the local authorities. As I indicated, 12 local authorities have been operating decriminalised parking enforcement, including, of course, the City of Edinburgh Council, which has done so for some considerable time. I am not aware of Ms Boyack seeking to change that circumstance, which would be a matter for the local authority.

The Scottish Government, in partnership with local authorities, the police, the Scottish Prison Service, the third sector and others, is committed to supporting the implementation of a whole-system approach across Scotland, to improve responses to people under 18 who offend. The aim of the approach is to intervene early with young people to divert them from the criminal justice system, while recognising that, for the minority who receive a custodial sentence, supporting their reintegration back into the community is key. That includes developing a holistic plan for their release and ensuring that appropriate services are in place. Crime is at a 39-year low and, since 2008-09, the number of detected crimes by under-18s has decreased by 52 per cent. During 2011-12, the average daily under-21 population in Scottish prisons decreased by 8 per cent for people who had been sentenced and 1 per cent for people on remand. The Government is also supporting a mentoring programme for young prolific male offenders.

The member makes a fair point. It is about the measures that we undertake collectively. That is why tomorrow I will be chairing the cabinet and ministerial sub-committee that includes ministers across the portfolios that deal with offending. We must ensure that there is accommodation for people to go to when they are released, and we must ensure that there is a seamless link between the institution and the person’s home, in relation to access to medical care, continuing education, tackling literacy and numeracy et cetera. We must ensure that there is purposeful activity for people during the day. The ministerial group, along with other organisations, is dealing with those matters. I take on board the member’s point; that is what we are seeking to do.

The member makes a valid and important point. Literacy and numeracy difficulties are an issue not just for young offenders but for many offenders and need to be addressed if we are to get people active in the labour market on their release. That is fundamentally a matter for the Scottish Prison Service, which is doing good work with HM inspectors of education to ensure that Polmont young offenders institution is as good as it can be. When someone is serving a short sentence, the Prison Service’s ability to detect and address matters, never mind impose a regime, is limited. However, good work is going on and is being built on.

The Scottish Government has a number of measures in place that are designed to reduce reoffending. Phase 2 of our ambitious reducing reoffending programme is now under way and is focused on making sure that people who have offended make the most of opportunities to fulfil their responsibilities as citizens and move away from offending. The Scottish Government continues to work closely with the Scottish Prison Service, which recently launched its vision for the future of the organisation. The focus on unlocking potential and transforming lives will help break the malicious cycle that sees the same individuals returning through a revolving door into custody. Reconviction rates continue to fall, particularly among young people under 21, and currently stand at their lowest level in 14 years.

Ken Macintosh raises the paradox that we face. Crime is at its lowest level in 39 years, yet we face an increase in the prison population. It is clear that there are issues for the judiciary regarding people whom they deal with who have multiple problems, which results in their having difficulty issuing sentences that may be served in the community, and we work with them on that matter. There is an issue regarding women offenders that needs to be addressed, which is why we instructed Dame Elish Angiolini to carry out a review of women offenders. We are working not just with the Scottish Prison Service but with the judiciary—with Tom Welsh and others at the Judicial Institute for Scotland. It is a matter of ensuring that those who commit an offence, who have to be dealt with, are dealt with appropriately. Not all people have to go to jail; many do, but not all. We have to ensure that there are appropriate alternatives, which is why the Government is committed to building on the work of Dame Elish Angiolini and those who assisted her in the review of women offenders.

I very much regret that the UK Government saw fit, with no pretence of consultation, to put our participation in the European arrest warrant system at risk. The Lord Advocate and I gave evidence on its usefulness to the Westminster Parliament, and we were supported by practitioners including the police and the Law Society of Scotland. Therefore, I welcome the fact that the UK Government has indicated that it wishes to opt back in to the European arrest warrant. It also considers that formal steps can be taken by the UK and the European Union institutions before 1 December 2014 that will facilitate the UK rejoining pre-Lisbon measures. That means that such warrants would continue to be available for use in Scotland.

I certainly agree. For that reason, there was uniform concern across organisations in Scotland, including the Crown, defence lawyers—the Faculty of Advocates as well as the Law Society—and Police Scotland. Only a few months ago, BBC Scotland ran a programme on forensic science in murders, in which it was shown that, after the murder of Moira Jones, a European arrest warrant was issued and Marek Harcar was detained not within days but within minutes. That shows the co-operation that can take place, should take place and has been taking place. Anything that would jeopardise that would jeopardise the security of our communities.

That is a matter for Police Scotland, but I understand that there are currently 440 authorised police firearms officers in Scotland.

Fundamentally, those are matters for the Scottish Police Authority, but I am happy to try to drill down to ensure that John Finnie’s comments are raised and answers are provided, either by the chief constable himself or by HM inspector of constabulary. The Government believes that the rare use of firearms of Scotland is reasonable and proportionate. However, it is necessary for the safety of our communities. John Finnie’s point about Taser guns has been brought up not only by the police and HM inspector of constabulary, but by the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner, so I think that there has been a suitable review in that regard. However, I will endeavour to come back to John Finnie on that. I am happy to meet him to discuss the issue further.

Police Scotland already operates a national confidential reporting system for employees, called safecall. The system is run by an independent company and callers can remain anonymous if they wish. Police officers and staff have access to a range of routes to report improper behaviour. In order to maintain the confidentiality of the person who raises any issue, that includes anonymous reporting.

I think that I detailed fully what is happening in my first answer. The position of the police is fully supported by the Scottish Police Authority. If Liz Smith has concerns, she should speak either to the chief constable, to his head of human resources—John Gillies—or to Vic Emery. The systems are there; those who have concerns can raise them individually. They can raise them anonymously or they can raise them through organisations such as the Scottish Police Federation or the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents. No doubt there will be issues that will correctly be raised in that manner, although it seems to me that Police Scotland is operating remarkably well, given the regularly improving statistics and the evidence that shows that Scotland is safer.

Scotland has in place a strong legislative framework and robust monitoring arrangements, and agencies work well together using their expertise to minimise the risks posed by sex offenders. Thirty-one of the 33 recommendations have been implemented. I note that only nine were implemented before 10 May 2007 and that 22 have been delivered since then. On 11 November 2010, I advised that we are unable to implement recommendation 20 because it is not compliant with the European convention on human rights. Work is on-going on the one outstanding recommendation, which is number 12. More generally, we have introduced a number of changes to enhance the measures that are available for management of sex offenders and of those who pose a risk of causing sexual harm. Recently, we legislated to strengthen Scotland’s sexual offences prevention order and risk of sexual harm order regimes, and we have introduced regulations that tightened the notification period requirements in relation to foreign travel and periodic notification for homeless registered sex offenders. We have also consulted on options to develop the use of electronic monitoring, including for sex offenders, and analysis of the responses is under way.

I have provided the information. The recommendation is not ECHR compliant. Paul Martin is well aware that Government legal advice is not normally published. We have sought to ensure that we deal with matters in other ways, which is why changes have been made in that the courts now have powers, whether in terms of disposals or sexual offence prevention orders, to ensure that we have notification. We are aware that there are difficulties in keeping track of individuals. As Mr Martin well knows, Government legal advice is not routinely published but, as I said, we are clear that the advice is that the recommendation is not ECHR compliant, and on that basis we have—with regret—been unable to implement it. We have, however, sought to ensure that the issues that Professor Irving raised are dealt with in other ways and that our communities are given that appropriate protection.

That is a matter for the police. If people seek to avoid compliance with the regime, we have to leave that to police officers. I do not think that any anonymity, as such, is given. In cases of pursuit by the police, to go public would sometimes cause greater concern because it would cause the person to evade detection and capture. We should trust the authorities to use their discretion. When it is appropriate that advice be given that an offender is at large and the public should be aware, that is done in order to ensure that the public are able to make appropriate arrangements. At other times, that could jeopardise the person’s apprehension or could cause them to flee when the police are closing in on them. We should leave the matter to the discretion of officers who are involved in such investigations.

I met Sir Stephen House on Tuesday to discuss important issues around keeping people and communities safe in Scotland.

Duncan McNeil has raised an important issue and I am more than happy to ensure that the Government makes the appropriate input. In fact, I not only met Sir Stephen House on Tuesday, but met George Graham of HMIC just yesterday, although I have to say that this particular matter was neither raised nor discussed. Nevertheless, it is right that we ensure some commonality. That relates partly to the previous forces’ recording of such incidents; it is quite clear that Police Scotland is taking on board HMICS’s advice on the issue. I am more than happy to ensure that Duncan McNeil is kept apprised of developments either by me or through Sir Stephen House’s office.

I meet regularly with representatives of Police Scotland to discuss important issues around keeping people safe in Scotland. The Scottish Government values its good relationship with Police Scotland, and policing in Scotland is performing excellently. Crime is at a 39-year low, violent crime is down by half since 2006-07 and homicides are at their lowest since records began. The risk of being a victim of crime is falling and confidence in the police is high and rising. In stark contrast to England and Wales, we are protecting police numbers and have more than 1,000 extra police officers compared with the situation in 2007.

Those matters were quite correctly raised by the late David McLetchie prior to the inception of Police Scotland. Discussions have taken place and are on-going between local authorities and Police Scotland. The particular issue of Edinburgh is being addressed by the chief constable, who is meeting with the leader and deputy leader of the council. As far as I am aware, no decision has been taken, and I am reassured by the chief constable that he is confident that the situation to which Mr Lamont referred will not arise. Mr Lamont is quite correct that additional officers are provided by that funding—officers that a local authority requires and seeks to have in its area. There are on-going discussions regarding the priorities that local areas have, but neither Police Scotland nor I have any concerns that we face challenges to police numbers. The challenges to the police budget come not from within Scotland but from the huge cuts that are being imposed by Westminster. It is only through the good governance of this Administration that we are managing to avoid the debacle that is playing out in relation to police numbers south of the border.

The allocation of police resources in line with national and local priorities is a matter for Police Scotland. However, Police Scotland has demonstrated its commitment to tackling wildlife crime at a national level. Wildlife crime co-ordinations sits within the specialist crime division of Police Scotland. There is a national portfolio lead at superintendent level, supported by a lead senior officer and a wildlife crime liaison officer in each of the 14 divisions and a network of wildlife crime officers who operate across the country. That approach ensures better co-ordination, greater consistency and improved communication with partner agencies to tackle wildlife crime and to make links between wildlife crime and other serious and organised crime. In addition, the Scottish Government provides dedicated funding for the national wildlife crime unit based in Livingston. The wildlife crime unit operates with partners across the United Kingdom to assist in the prevention and detection of crime by obtaining and disseminating intelligence, as well as supporting law enforcement with specialist advice.

Detecting and prosecuting wildlife crime is always difficult: the crimes usually take place in remote parts of the country where there are few if any witnesses; crimes may not be discovered until days or often weeks after they have taken place; and the evidence is usually exposed to the elements and deteriorates fast. That is not to say that prosecutions are impossible. For example, badger baiting has seen a number of successful prosecutions in recent years. Indeed, for the five-year period from 2007-08 to 2011-12, 15 offences under the Protection of Badgers Act 1992 were proceeded against, with 13 guilty outcomes. The Scottish Government’s “Wildlife Crime in Scotland - 2012 Annual Report” published in September 2013 contains details of other court proceedings. There is a desire and intention to ensure that criminals are brought to account. As announced by the Minister for Environment and Climate Change in July 2013, the police are looking to bring in all the modern investigative techniques at their disposal to bear down on such crimes. It is a matter of partnership, working with those who operate in rural areas. There is also a recognition that the crimes are not simply rural but tie into criminals and serious crime gangs who operate out of urban areas, which is why it is important to realise that the matter is not simply for police officers who operate in rural Scotland but for all police officers wherever they operate. Partnering and working with other agencies, whether the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or others, is important and my cabinet colleagues and I are intent on maintaining that.

I am not aware of the specifics but I am happy to inquire and come back to the member on that issue. However, I can say that the specialist unit provides and maintains the sharing of information across the police and the constabulary, ensuring that information is disseminated downwards, so that it is not simply officers in some of the rural areas who will be viewed as taking this as an important and serious matter, but all officers in all 14 divisions. That is necessary, given the comments that Ms Grahame made. The likelihood is that the dogs will be kept in areas that are not necessarily the ones in which they are used. I have no doubt that there will be capacity, whether through Crimestoppers or other means, to ensure that information in that regard can be not only received but acted on. I will be glad to get back to the member with additional information.

These are challenges that the police face across the spectrum, whether we are talking about fraud or other criminality where movement is frequent or about the use of social media in the context of offensive behaviour in relation to football. The member can rest assured that the police monitor social media, to ensure that they keep abreast of what is happening and deal with unacceptable and criminal actions. I have no doubt that Police Scotland will be happy to brief the member or her group if she wants further information. She can rest assured that the police monitor social media and internet use, because that is essential if the police are to be able to deal with criminality in the modern age in which we live.

The poisoning of the young golden eagle was a disgraceful and barbaric act, especially given that it happened at the end of the year of natural Scotland, during which the golden eagle was voted as the favourite of Scotland’s big five species. I must be constrained in what I say about the incident, because there is a live police investigation—members would expect no less, especially given recent comments. I can say that there has been progress in reducing the number of raptor poisonings to three in 2012, although it appears that 2013 saw an increase in confirmed poisonings—the final number is yet to be confirmed, due to on-going police investigations. There were also a number of illegal shooting and trapping incidents that involved raptors. Those incidents reinforce the need for the measures that the Minister for Environment and Climate Change announced in July, which include reviewing the penalties for wildlife crime, looking at ways to restrict the use of general licences in areas where there are good reasons to believe that wildlife crime is taking place and, most important, supporting the Lord Advocate in encouraging the police to use all the investigative tools that are at their disposal to identify and bring to book the criminals who are behind attacks on Scotland’s precious wildlife. Whether such crime is committed by people in the rural environment who should know better or by serious organised crime gangs, it is entirely unacceptable, and the full weight of the law and law enforcement will be brought to bear on those responsible. It will perhaps be for others to comment on vicarious liability in the context of developments in recent years. Progress has been made, but we require to be ever-vigilant, because the recent incident reminds us that such crime is still going on, with tragic consequences.

There has not been a 7 per cent fall in the conviction rate in criminal cases. The conviction rate, which is the proportion of court proceedings that resulted in the main charge being proven, was 87 per cent in 2012-13. That is the same as in 2011-12. There was a 7 per cent fall in the total number of persons with a charge proven between 2011-12 and 2012-13. That reflects the fall in the volume of court business, as recorded crime is at a 39-year low.

The conviction rate for rape and sexual offences has risen because of increased reporting, which is down to a variety of factors: an increase in awareness among and actions taken by police and prosecutors, with dedicated squads; an increase in people’s willingness to report such crimes, because of the support, sympathy and treatment given to them not only by law enforcement agencies but by other agencies such as Victim Support Scotland, Rape Crisis Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid; and factors such as the media and the raising of awareness of historical abuse. For those reasons, people to their great credit have shown great courage and stepped forward. The increase in the number of people reporting has resulted in an increase in convictions. However, we still face significant challenges in ensuring that things are improved. The matter of corroboration is with the Justice Committee, to which I will give evidence next year. Yesterday I spoke with the Faculty of Advocates and today I spoke with the Law Society of Scotland. I stand by the Lord Justice Clerk’s position: this is an archaic rule. It does not serve the victims of rape and sexual offences or domestic abuse. We have to provide access to justice for those who have incapacities, whether they are aged or young. The proposed change to corroboration is not about increasing the conviction rate; that is for the judiciary and juries. It is about allowing access to justice, because at the moment far too many people are denied even that.

We should not be complacent, but the fall in violent crimes, excluding homicide, is welcome and reflects the 21 per cent fall in the number of violent crimes recorded by the police between 2011-12 and 2012-13. We also must remember that the homicide rate fell by 32 per cent and is at its lowest level since records began in 1976. However, any crime of violence—any murder—is one too many. We must continue to be ever vigilant, in terms of supporting law enforcement, making legislative changes where necessary, supporting the position of victims and witnesses and changing cultural matters—in particular, the abuse of alcohol at this time of year.

The Scottish Government welcomes the positive and proactive approach that is being taken by Police Scotland to target what is a most upsetting crime, especially at this time of year. That targeted approach to housebreaking is set against a backdrop of an overall 39-year low in crime across Scotland, and it demonstrates that policing in Scotland is alert to the real issues and concerns of our communities. The ability to quickly provide additional dedicated resources to target the crime in local communities across Scotland is a testament to the responsiveness and agility of our single police service. The Scottish Government welcomes the joint approach that is being taken with the Crown Office, which will see anyone accused of the offence facing trial on indictment. We hope that that, matched with the targeted action, will be a strong deterrent to those who are engaged in such activity.

The housebreaking initiative, operation RAC, has been implemented in areas where there has been an increase in the number of housebreakings involving homes, sheds and garages. Implementation resulted from a review of crime trends and a commitment to communities on the priorities that matter most to them. The member will know that such operational matters are for the chief constable, and I have every faith that the decisions that are taken are in the best interests of the safety and security of local communities. On launching the initiative, Assistant Chief Constable Wayne Mawson stated: “We recently launched our local policing campaign, which provides us with the opportunity to speak with individual communities and identify the issues or concerns specifically affecting their area. As a result, housebreaking has been highlighted as a priority for a number of our divisions and officers in these areas will be taking targeted action to detect anyone involved and deter further offences from occurring.” Local communities and the member may care to raise the matter with police representatives. I have no doubt that good work is on-going, whether in regard to housebreaking or on other aspects of criminality that affect her area. I give her an assurance that the whole intention of operation RAC is to target that particular crime, taking account of the needs and requirements of individual communities. I suggest that she speak to the divisional commander.

Much of this boils down to police and Crown statistics. Some areas of Scotland that have been hotspots were addressed earlier in the year, particularly Edinburgh and Kirkcaldy. It may be that other crimes are affecting the member’s area more. Her willingness to consult the police will result in what we seek to get from Police Scotland—local policing with the ability to access national resources.

Absolutely. I am happy to do so. When I was at the forensic science laboratory in Dundee recently, I saw the new specialised equipment that allows crime scenes to be examined much better than ever before. The service is sometimes a victim of its own success in that greater information can now be obtained. No new concerns were raised with me in recent discussions with Tom Nelson, the head of forensic science at the Scottish Police Authority, but I am happy to seek the reassurance that the member wants. The forensic science service in Scotland is in a good place, although it faces pressures because of the nature and extent of recent advances in forensic science. Nevertheless, the service has served us well. The single biggest benefit that we could give it would be in stopping some of the routine work that is necessary because of the requirements of the law of corroboration. That would free up resources that it could concentrate on aspects such as those that have been raised by Graeme Pearson.

In September this year, I invited the Judicial Complaints Reviewer to prepare and publish her annual report for 2012-13. She published it yesterday. As the Judicial Complaints Reviewer is an independent office-holder, it would not be appropriate for me to comment on the content of her annual report. I am grateful to her for the work that she has undertaken.

I am perfectly happy with the report that I have received and with the current structure, which follows from the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008. Although Alison McInnes was not a member of the Justice Committee when it considered the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill, a former parliamentary colleague of hers was. The then Liberal Democrat justice spokesman, Margaret Smith MSP, said: “The bill proposes the creation of a judicial complaints reviewer. As we have heard, there has been some disagreement about that.” Bill Aitken had said that he was happy to leave conduct issues to the Lord President: “I would not be happy if some elaborate bureaucratic procedure involving a judicial complaints reviewer was set up.” Margaret Smith went on to say: “However, there is merit in an external view being taken on how the judiciary handles complaints about itself, and I am sure that the public at large agree.”—[Official Report, 14 May 2008; c 8563, 8557, 8563.] It might be that there has been a change in the Liberal Democrat position but, as an Administration, we stand by the fact that we have an independent Judicial Complaints Reviewer. We also have the 2008 act, which enshrines an independent judiciary, with the Lord President at the helm. The Government is satisfied with both and with both those officer-bearers.

We have sought to do so. Premises within the Scottish Legal Complaints Commission’s offices were secured for the Judicial Complaints Reviewer to allow her access to all workplace essentials and some administrative staff support, but those arrangements did not work out as expected and the Judicial Complaints Reviewer elected to work from home. This Administration has always been willing to put appropriate resources at the disposal of the Judicial Complaints Reviewer, but we should remember that she deals with remarkably few complaints. It appears that we established the correct structures under an act that the Parliament supported in 2008. On that basis, we are satisfied with the current structures.

The Scottish Government’s response to the commission’s report in June 2012 advised that we would keep the recommendation for a review under consideration while we prioritised work to respond to the commission’s recommendations regarding the actual provision of mental health support for women offenders. That has included funding NHS Lothian to improve responses to women offenders with borderline personality disorders and post-traumatic stress disorders, development by the Scottish Prison Service of mental health training within its staff induction programme, and ensuring that the new women’s prison at Inverclyde and the rest of the female prison estate meet the mental health needs of women offenders.

These are complex and difficult matters. Borderline personality disorders are difficult to diagnose and are even harder to treat. They are matters that I have discussed not only with the chief executive of the SPS but with Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons, and I would be willing to discuss them with Alison McInnes. Alison McInnes will be aware that such issues are operational matters for the SPS. As Colin McConnell remarked when he discussed it with the Justice Committee on 5 November, there are occasions when an individual has to be kept under close supervision for her own safety and wellbeing, and that of other prisoners. Not only can they be violent towards other prisoners and staff but, frequently, that behaviour is conjoined with self harming. The steps that we are discussing are taken reluctantly, but often involve an element of trying to ensure the safety of the individual concerned. There is a small number of women whose consistently aggressive or disruptive behaviour has required that they spend longer periods in the separation and reintegration unit. Management of those women focuses on addressing their behavioural problems and on developing strategies to help them to cope in the usual prison environment. The Scottish Prison Service takes professional advice from the national health service’s clinical psychology and psychiatric services in considering its procedures. I have also discussed the matter with health officials. However, when the women are clearly sane and fit to plead, it is not possible to send them to any mental health institution; under the order that has been imposed by the court, it is required that they be dealt with by the Scottish Prison Service. The service does that as best it can, taking into account the requirement to protect its staff and other prisoners as well as its responsibility to maintain the wellbeing of the individuals in question. I am happy to discuss the matter with Alison McInnes, but I give her an assurance that such measures are taken extremely reluctantly by the SPS and usually because there is no alternative.

The Public Services Reform (Prison Visiting Committees) (Scotland) Order 2014 was laid in Parliament on 4 October 2013. The order abolishes prison visiting committees and creates a new independent prison monitoring service under the auspices of Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons for Scotland. The order requires a statutory consultation period, which is under way and will end on 31 January 2014. Following that, it is anticipated that the final report on the findings from the consultation will be published by the end of April 2014.

We have not repudiated Professor Coyle’s recommendations; the Government has accepted the vast majority of Professor Coyle’s recommendations, including his recommendation to abolish visiting committees and replace them with a new system of voluntary independent prison monitors. The issue on which Professor Coyle disagrees is the proposed introduction of salaried prison monitors. He has stated that he believes that that could produce “unnecessary and expensive duplication”. However, the Government, supported by Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons for Scotland, whom I met just last week, believes that the introduction of paid monitors to oversee the work of lay monitors will be an essential part of the new system. The paid monitors will perform a secretariat function, which will ensure that the system of independent monitoring is robust, accountable and consistent throughout Scotland. I am grateful to Professor Coyle for his work. However, I believe that our proposals will add to, not detract from, his work, and will ensure that lay monitors will be enhanced by a professional secretariat under the auspices of HM inspector of prisons.

Amendment 25 would insert an overarching definition of “victim” into the bill. The amendment is a revised version of an amendment lodged at stage 2. I welcome the consideration that Margaret Mitchell has evidently given to the points raised last month. That said, I remain of the view that by attempting to insert into the bill an overarching definition of such a clearly understood term, we significantly complicate matters and risk inadvertently excluding individuals who should benefit from the proposals in the bill or including those who would not fall into any reasonable interpretation of “victim”. After all, as I have argued throughout the passage of the bill, the word “victim” is used and understood without definition by justice organisations and victim support organisations throughout Scotland. In relation to concerns that the word “victim” would negatively impact on the presumption of innocence, I am still of the view that by providing clarity in the context of individual sections, no assumption could be made that the accused is guilty. The relevant sections in the bill refer for example to “a person who is or appears to be the victim of an offence” or to circumstances in which an offence “is alleged to have been committed against the person”, with the reference tailored to the context. Furthermore, the presumption of innocence is a right of the accused in every criminal case. That is enshrined in article 6(2) of the European convention on human rights and there are no circumstances in which that right can be departed from. I note that amendment 25 has no consequential amendments. That means that, should it be agreed, it will sit alongside the section-specific definitions of “victim” in the bill, including the power for the Scottish ministers to prescribe relatives of victims in certain sections. To my mind, that will cause uncertainty and confusion. While there has clearly been an attempt to deal with some of the concerns raised about the amendment lodged at stage 2, there remain similar concerns with amendment 25. There is still an implication that offences against property are not covered by the term “victim”, despite the inclusion of damage to property as a form of harm in subsection (2) of the amendment. In subsection (1)(a) of the amendment, a person can be considered a victim only where the person has suffered harm “because an offence has, or is alleged to have, been committed against the person”. There is no mention of offences against property. For those reasons, I consider it better to qualify and explain the use of the term “victim” only where necessary and to make it applicable to the circumstances, as in the bill as at present. I invite Margaret Mitchell to withdraw amendment 25.

Section 1 sets out a number of general principles that are deliberately both high level and aspirational and are intended to inform the creation of standards of service under section 2. The intention behind the inclusion of a section on general principles was to set out the underlying aim of the bill for the justice system as a whole and to ensure that there is a level of consistency when justice agencies consider how they interact with victims and witnesses. Elaine Murray’s amendments 1, 2 and 26 are identical to amendments that were lodged at stage 2. As I said then, I would expect the bodies that are listed to consider the needs, rights and wishes of children in the same way that we expect them to consider the needs, rights and wishes of all other victims and witnesses who are involved in criminal proceedings. My views on that have not changed. At stage 2, I also asked whether, if we were to single out child victims and witnesses, as Elaine Murray’s amendments propose, we should not also include persons with mental or physical disabilities, older persons—and the list goes on. I think that the point remains valid. I simply reiterate that, while I absolutely agree that organisations should consider children’s requirements, I remain of the view that the general principles should be precisely that: general, and equally applicable to all groups of victims and witnesses who come into contact with the criminal justice system. Section 2 requires various criminal justice organisations to set and publish standards of service for victims and witnesses. Elaine Murray’s amendment 3 places a duty on a person who sets and publishes standards under section 2, in so far as they could relate to a child, to do so in such a way that the child’s welfare is a paramount consideration. It is identical to an amendment that the member lodged at stage 2. Amendment 27 is consequential to amendment 3. As I said previously, I welcome Elaine Murray’s commitment to child victims and witnesses. However, as with the amendments on the general principles, amendment 3 is simply unnecessary. I expect the bodies that set standards to give due consideration to children, as they would to any other group. Again, if we were to single out child victims and witnesses, should we not also single out other groups of victims and witnesses? The list could be considerable. On amendment 7, I do not see that there would be any additional benefit from placing an obligation on the organisations that are listed in section 2(2) to prepare and publish guidance as to how they will consider the needs, rights and wishes of children when having regard to the general principles, setting standards of service and providing information. Surely it is better to let those organisations get on and set their standards, which will, no doubt, reference those matters with respect to all victims and witnesses. To put a duty on the organisations to prepare such guidance and lay it before the Parliament, which would require to be done before any standards of service were prepared and published, would inevitably slow down the setting of standards and remove organisations’ flexibility to change them quickly in the light of experience. In summary, although I appreciate the intention behind the amendments in the group, they are unnecessary. I therefore invite Elaine Murray to withdraw amendment 1 and not move amendments 2, 26, 3, 27 and 7.

Section 2 requires various criminal justice organisations to set and publish standards of service for victims and witnesses. As a result of a Government amendment that was agreed unanimously by the Justice Committee at stage 2, each of the named organisations in section 2 will be required to consult all the others and those with a significant interest before publishing their standards of service. That will ensure a level of consistency in approach to the standards while still allowing organisations to develop specific standards for the type of service that they provide. The Justice Committee also agreed at stage 2 to a Government amendment that placed a duty on the named organisations to publish a report assessing how their standards have been met, setting out how they intend to continue to meet them and highlighting any modification that might have been made to the standards during the reporting period or which they propose to make in the following year. That reporting will ensure that the criminal justice organisations not only reflect on how they have met the standards during the period covered in the report but think ahead about how they intend to meet the standards in future. Amendments 4, 5 and 6, in the name of Elaine Murray, are very similar to elements of the member’s alternative proposal at stage 2 for a reporting mechanism and, although I appreciate the intention behind them, I consider them to be unnecessary. With regard to amendment 4, I find it difficult to imagine how the named organisations could prepare reports on how they have met their standards of service in relation to victims and witnesses without taking into consideration the views of victims and witnesses who have come into contact with the organisation. That does not need to be provided for in legislation. Amendment 5 seeks to require Scottish ministers to consult the named persons in section 2(2) before adding to the list of information to be covered in reports on standards of service. Although it is clearly sensible to discuss any such changes with those who will be affected by any regulations, I am not persuaded that a statutory duty to consult is necessary. Such consultation would take place as a matter of course. Furthermore, the drafting of the amendment is such that the Scottish ministers would be required to consult themselves as they, too, are among the persons named in section 2(2). Amendment 6 seeks to provide that the persons named in section 2 can review their standards of service to meet the needs of victims and witnesses following a report and to oblige them to publish any revised standards. That is simply unnecessary. The organisations in question are free to revise their standards at any time under section 2, as section 7(2) of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 provides that “A duty imposed by an Act of the Scottish Parliament ... may be performed from time to time.” Indeed, sections 2A(3)(c) and (d) of the bill specifically require the organisations in question to list any modifications made to their standards during the reporting year and any modification that they propose to make in the following year. In any event, I expect those organisations to review their standards regularly to ensure that they remain fit for purpose. In addition, the named organisations are required to publish their standards of service under section 2(1) and the same would apply to any modifications made to the standards. No explicit provision is necessary to achieve those aims. As they are already provided for, I invite Elaine Murray to withdraw amendment 4 and not to move amendments 5 and 6.

As with a similar amendment lodged by Margaret Mitchell at stage 2, I welcome the underlying principles behind amendment 28. I think that members would agree that encouraging justice organisations to work more closely together to improve the experience of victims and witnesses is a laudable aim. However, I can only reiterate that I do not consider that that requires primary legislation. For the benefit of those who did not follow proceedings at stage 2, I note again that we are already participating in discussions between all justice organisations to explore how they can work more effectively together and deliver a more joined-up experience for victims. I would see the improvement of communications as being part of that wider work and, in particular, I would expect it to be something that is considered when justice organisations are developing their standards of service under section 2, during which process they will be required to consult each other and relevant stakeholders. In relation to the proposal for a single point of contact, I am still of the view that that does not require a statutory basis. We are currently considering the feasibility of establishing an online information hub to provide easier access for victims and witnesses to case-specific information. Although the establishment of such a system will not happen overnight, given the complexities of sharing potentially sensitive information between various organisations, I think that it will bring great benefits. In the meantime, victims and witnesses will have new rights to access certain information directly from the Crown Office, Police Scotland and the Scottish Court Service, under section 3. Although amendment 21, in the name of Graeme Pearson, is clearly well intentioned, I fear that it could cause significant practical issues. In certain criminal cases, victims have the right, under section 16 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003, to receive information about the release of an offender, and other relevant details. In practice, that is provided by the Scottish Prison Service through the victim notification scheme. Section 23 of the bill removes a list of prescribed offences in relation to the VNS so that victims of all offences will potentially be eligible. Further, I have already expressed my intention to lower the sentence threshold for the VNS. Those changes are likely to increase the numbers of victims who are registered with the VNS, and the administrative burden on the SPS. Although a phone call might be viewed as a reasonable method of communication, it would be a significant burden on any organisation if a high volume of correspondence suddenly had to be dealt with by phone or, potentially, through face-to-face meetings, if requested. Moreover, the obligation to seek the views of all victims registered with the VNS before communicating with them would have significant resource implications for the SPS in delivering the scheme. I believe that a more appropriate way of improving communication with victims is not through an impractical statutory obligation but through better training and guidance for those involved. Amendment 24, also in the name of Graeme Pearson, is completely unnecessary. The bill already establishes in statute essential rights and obligations that will ensure that victims and witnesses have access to important information about criminal proceedings, including in relation to the most serious cases. I therefore cannot see what is to be gained from the Scottish ministers issuing guidance on the matter to the Scottish Court Service specifically in relation to solemn proceedings. Furthermore, in the unlikely event that any guidance is necessary, no specific provision is required. Under section 69 of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008, the Scottish ministers can already issue guidance to the Scottish Court Service to which it must have regard in carrying out its functions. Amendment 24 therefore replicates a provision that is already laid out in statute. Although I cannot support amendment 24, I restate the commitment that I made to Graeme Pearson at stage 2. The Scottish Government will continue to work with our justice partners in this area to ensure that any information that is provided to victims is clear and easy to understand. Although I support the broad principles behind amendment 28, I consider it unnecessary and invite Margaret Mitchell to withdraw it. I also urge Graeme Pearson not to move amendments 21 and 24.

At stage 2, the Justice Committee accepted an amendment on restorative justice that was lodged by Alison McInnes. That amendment, which is now section 2C, places a duty on the Scottish ministers to make provision, by regulations, for the referral of victims and offenders or alleged offenders to restorative justice processes. In principle, I welcome that. I appreciate why Alison McInnes lodged the amendment and agree that more consideration should be given to the potential benefits of restorative justice to victims. We already know that it can be useful in relation to youth justice, in particular. However, I have some concerns that section 2C, as it stands, could be interpreted as giving individuals a statutory right to access such services, which would be premature. Detailed consideration would need to be given to the nature and effectiveness of the services that were to be offered and to the potential cost, which cannot be ignored in the current financial situation.

I am happy to work with all stakeholders and to meet the member to discuss the matter further. We are keen to build on what we already know—that is why Alison McInnes moved her amendment—which is that restorative justice services can have outstanding success at youth level. We must ensure that we build on that and have a solid base. Rather than commit to a short-life working group, I am happy to meet her. I am sure that all the other stakeholders would equally commit to that. Given the voluntary and case-specific nature of any restorative justice services, there are compelling reasons for adopting a more flexible approach than would be possible through a statutory scheme. In particular, it would be difficult to establish definitive circumstances in which referral would be appropriate, reflecting the very personal and specific circumstances of each case and giving due consideration to issues such as the potential risk to and safety of victims. Similar points were raised with me by victim support groups such as Victim Support Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid, which agree that further consideration and a more flexible victim-focused approach is required. My amendment 8, which is supported by both Victim Support Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid, seeks to allow for a more measured approach to be taken. It would replace the duty in section 2C to make regulations with an ability for the Scottish ministers to issue guidance relating to the referral of individuals to and the provision of restorative justice services. That would allow clear guidelines to be established, taking into consideration any obligations in the recent European Union directive on victims’ rights while retaining more flexibility than would be possible if such detail were set out by statutory instrument. A duty may also be placed on persons who will be specified by order to have regard to the guidance. The order-making power could be used to place such a duty on those persons referring individuals to or providing restorative justice services. If the bill is passed, I intend to issue guidance with a particular focus on the appropriate use of that measure and on the safeguards that would be in place to ensure that victims are protected if they choose to participate in any available restorative justice services—an issue that Alison McInnes rightly highlighted at stage 2. However, before issuing guidance, we will need to discuss what specific matters should be covered with those who have detailed knowledge and experience. I have signalled to Sacro, Victim Support Scotland, Scottish Women’s Aid and others that we will be seeking their input, and I look forward to constructive discussions on the matter next year. I assure Alison McInnes that amendment 8 is not intended to negate or weaken section 2C; rather, it is intended to adapt it into a more practical form. I am happy to continue discussions with her at a later date. I move amendment 8.

I am happy to accept Alison McInnes’s points and to meet her to discuss the matter. I think that we share a common view that restorative justice has worked and does good service, but we must ensure that it works for all because there are some for whom it would be counterproductive. Amendment 8 agreed to. Section 3—Disclosure of information about criminal proceedings

Section 3 gives victims and witnesses the right to access certain information about their case from various bodies and reflects the requirements of article 6 of the EU victims’ rights directive. Following the introduction of the bill, however, the Office of the Advocate General for Scotland raised concerns that the obligation in section 3 could, in rare cases, lead to disclosure of confidential information supplied by the United Kingdom Government. An exception to the duty to provide information in section 3 already exists, whereby information does not have to be disclosed if the qualifying person considers that that disclosure would be inappropriate. I consider the level of discretion that the wording of that exemption provides to be essential as it allows the police, the Crown Office and the Scottish Court Service to exercise their professional judgment in response to the individual circumstances of the case. However, I also recognise that that gives the qualifying person discretion about whether to disclose confidential information supplied by the UK Government as there is no obligation to withhold that confidential information. My amendment 9 therefore obliges qualifying persons to refuse a request relating to a decision not to investigate, a decision to end an investigation or a decision not to prosecute the alleged offender in so far as complying with the request would involve the disclosure of information supplied by the UK Government or a minister of the Crown and held in confidence. It is intended to ensure that, for example, the bodies that are named in section 3(5) of the bill are obliged not to disclose information received from the UK Government in relation to national security and held in confidence. I do not expect the exception to be widely applicable, but I hope that members will agree that we should do all that we can to avoid inadvertently revealing confidential information that could prejudice serious investigations. Amendments 10, 13 and 14 are minor technical amendments to correct a reference to certain offences in the Sexual Offences Act 2003. Amendments 11 and 15 are also minor technical amendments and substitute references to “an offence consisting of domestic abuse” in sections 5(5)(d) and 6(a) respectively with “an offence the commission of which involves domestic abuse”. The purpose of those amendments is simply to make it clear that, although domestic abuse is not, in itself, a statutory offence, any offence that contains an element of domestic abuse is covered by the provisions in sections 5 and 6 of the bill. Amendment 16 relates to the process for submitting vulnerable witness notices to the court containing details of specific measures that are required for vulnerable witnesses. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has been examining ways of streamlining the process to increase efficiency and lower costs. Amendment 16 will assist in that process. Where a vulnerable witness notice specifies only standard special measures, the amendment will remove the requirement for a summary of the witness’s views and, where the victim is a child, those of the witness’s parent in relation to the special measures to be contained in, or attached to, the notice. The party submitting the vulnerable witness notice will still be required to take account of the witness’s views, but as the court has no discretion as to whether to authorise any standard special measures requested—it must grant them—it follows that there is little point in providing it with a summary of views expressed. In all other cases in which the court has discretion to authorise the use of special measures, the requirement for it to be informed of any views expressed by the witness or the witness’s parents will remain. Amendment 20 is a minor drafting amendment to section 21 of the bill to insert the word “or” to make it clear that the paragraphs in proposed new section 253B(4) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 are intended as alternatives. I move amendment 9. Amendment 9 agreed to. Section 5—Certain offences: victim’s right to specify gender of interviewer Amendments 10 and 11 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. Section 5A—Certain medical examinations: gender of medical examiner Amendment 13 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. After section 5A

We all accept that there is an issue, and there is a great deal of sympathy. Work is on-going. However, I am not persuaded that putting a pilot in primary legislation is the best approach, as Rod Campbell said. I agree that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service should take an appropriate and consistent approach in seeking access to such information, but amendment 12, in Graeme Pearson’s name, is unnecessary. The Lord Advocate has already issued guidance—post publication of the statistics that Margaret Mitchell mentioned—on seeking sensitive information in such cases, which is set out in the publicly available document, “Policy on obtaining and disclosing sensitive personal records in the investigation and prosecution of sexual crime cases”. Given the range of matters on which the Lord Advocate issues guidance, I would be reluctant to impose a statutory duty in relation to one particular topic, especially one for which guidance already exists. If specific matters are felt to be missing from existing guidance, I know that the Crown Office would be happy to receive and consider any feedback. Amendment 12 is also unnecessary in relation to disclosure of information about the victim. Disclosure of information that is held by a prosecutor is already provided for in part 6 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, and those statutory provisions will take precedence. Amendments 29, 30 and 31, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, would result—as I indicated at stage 2—in a major innovation in the law. There are currently no rights for victims to have independent legal representation in criminal proceedings; as Rod Campbell mentioned, the Crown acts not as a prosecutor but in the public interest. We are being invited to make a major change in a fashion that has not been fully thought through, and which has not been properly explored. The case for such a change has not yet been made. That does not mean that it cannot be, but it certainly has not been to date. Rape Crisis Scotland acknowledges that since publication of the Crown Office guidance that I mentioned, no additional data have been collected on use of medical histories and other sensitive information. The Crown Office has offered to work with Rape Crisis Scotland in that regard. In the meantime, it would be irresponsible were we to act despite having no data. In addition, it is entirely unclear how the provisions would operate in practice. Margaret Mitchell’s amendments would enable victims to appoint a legal representative wherever health or other sensitive information was sought. However, that covers a very broad range of information, much of which is not currently subject to any restrictions on its being introduced as evidence. The amendments would not create an application process for the admission of health or other sensitive information, so it is unclear how the process of appointing a legal representative for the victim would commence. The amendments do not provide for the admissibility of the evidence to be debated at an oral hearing, so it is unclear how submissions on the evidence would be made. If additional hearings were to be arranged, further amendment of the legislation would be required. That is to say nothing of the attendant delays to the court process, which would have an impact on victims and witnesses, and the significant cost that would be involved in arranging those hearings. The amendments do not provide any guidance for the court or the victim about when health or other sensitive information would be admissible. For example, there is no requirement that the court must carry out a balancing exercise between the interests of the victim and the proper administration of justice. It is clear that Margaret Mitchell recognises the scale of the innovation that her amendments propose, given the provisions for carrying out a pilot. However, without a great deal more clarity on how the amendments would work in practice, I fail to see the benefit of them. Moreover, the provisions for terminating a pilot are defectively drafted, with no provision having been made for reversing commencement; regardless of the outcome of the pilot, the provisions would remain in force. If information is being sought, the reasons should be clearly explained to the victims, but that should be dealt with practically rather than requiring advice from a solicitor. As I have mentioned, the Crown Office has in place comprehensive guidance to ensure that victims are given a full explanation of exactly why any sensitive information is being asked for. Furthermore, in the event that legal advice is required, current legal aid legislation already makes that available to victims and witnesses through the advice and assistance scheme, subject to the usual statutory test. On the subject of legal aid, I note that Margaret Mitchell’s amendment 29 proposes that an entirely new fund be established to pay for advice to or representation for alleged victims. Given the complexities that would be involved in setting up a new fund—not to mention the cost, in the current financial situation—I am not convinced that that would be a particularly sensible approach. I and my officials have already met Rape Crisis Scotland to discuss its concerns, and we recently arranged a meeting between Rape Crisis and the Scottish Legal Aid Board to explore the additional support that might be available under current legal arrangements, beyond what is already available through the advice and assistance scheme. Similarly, colleagues in the Crown Office have discussed those matters in detail and have indicated a willingness to assist Rape Crisis in exploring how such evidence is used. In summary, I do not believe that a pilot’s being included in the text of primary legislation is the best way to go. There are on-going discussions between Rape Crisis Scotland and the Scottish Legal Aid Board, and I am happy to commit to their working together constructively. Equally, I am more than happy to engage further with Rape Crisis Scotland regarding other matters that it has raised with me and other members. However, if we are to have a pilot, we should work out the practical details and have the pilot before we embark on primary legislation. I have a great deal of sympathy with where members are coming from, but we have to ensure that we get the approach right; we do not want to make things worse for vulnerable victims. I therefore invite Graeme Pearson to seek to withdraw amendment 12, and I ask Margaret Mitchell not to move amendments 29 to 31.

As I have said before, victims of crime should clearly have the opportunity to communicate to the court the physical, emotional and economic impact of crime. That is why I introduced the victim statement scheme, which allows victims to give a written statement describing how the offence has affected them. However, as I explained to the Justice Committee last month, I have heard first hand from victims of crime who have struggled to fully convey in writing the impact that a crime has had on them, and who have asked why they cannot submit statements in other formats, such as a pre-recorded video. That is why at stage 2 I lodged an amendment introducing an order-making power into section 14 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003, to allow Scottish ministers to specify the format in which victim statements can be made. The Justice Committee agreed to that amendment. Crucially, that will allow alternative formats to be piloted for specific periods of time and in specific areas. Taking a power to pilot new formats will allow for a full evaluation of any new approach to be carried out, taking into consideration the views of victims, the courts, the Crown and the defence. If successful, any new statement formats could then be extended more widely. In making that amendment at stage 2, my intention was to enable Scottish ministers and criminal justice organisations to take a balanced and considered approach to extending the formats in which victim statements can be delivered, while allowing for the development of new formats in response to advances in technology. Amendment 17, in the name of Graeme Pearson, is similar to an amendment that he lodged at stage 2. As I said then, I have concerns regarding the extent of the amendment, in that victims would be able to read their victim statement live in court. I am still doubtful about how well that would work in practice and of the benefits of such a measure. I also have concerns about the potential impact on the victim. I note that England and Wales have recently introduced a new victims code, which allows victims to read their own statements in court, but I am told that that system has not yet commenced. As I said at stage 2, I am keen to monitor the progress of that code before I give further consideration to such a measure in Scotland. Mr Pearson also suggested an additional provision enabling the Lord President to issue guidance as to how such representations may be made. It is unclear why he proposed conferring that power on the Lord President when, under section 305 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, the High Court already has the power to regulate practice and procedure in criminal proceedings. Indeed, procedures have been established by act of adjournal to regulate the submission of child witness notices. It would seem strange for the Lord President to issue guidance on something for which the High Court could produce rules and regulations. Furthermore, the proposed power of the Lord President to issue guidance on how representations under proposed new section 19(5A)(b) might be made does not sit easily with the proposal to confer delegated power on the Scottish ministers under proposed new section 19(5A)(c) to prescribe other means of making a victim statement by order. In light of the existing provisions in the bill that confer powers to pilot new forms of victim statement, and the specific concerns regarding any guidance on how those statements are to be made, I cannot support amendment 17. That said, I would not want to rule out the proposal relating to oral victim statements altogether, and I reiterate the commitment that I gave Graeme Pearson at stage 2, which was that I would be happy to revisit the issue once greater consideration has been given to how such a measure would operate in practice, and once the benefits and risks to the victim have been explored in more detail. On that basis, I invite Graeme Pearson to withdraw amendment 17.

Amendments 32 and 33, in the name of Elaine Murray, are very similar to amendments that she lodged at stage 2. I appreciate where she is coming from. Clearly, there may be very mature young people who want to make a victim statement but cannot do so. Indeed, at stage 2 I lodged amendments, which the committee supported, to lower the age at which children can give victim statements from 14 to 12. However, we tend to take a general view on matters such as the age of consent and the voting age, and I think that a similar approach is appropriate with regard to the age at which victim statements can be made. In addition, if it is felt in the future that children under the age of 12 should be allowed to make victim statements, existing order-making powers would enable Scottish ministers to reduce the age limit accordingly. We are more than willing to give further consideration to that in due course. I also have some concerns about the detail of amendment 33, in that it does not indicate who is to make a decision as to whether a child is of sufficient age and maturity to make a statement, and who is to provide the support mentioned in proposed new subsection 11C. Those are clearly matters of some importance, and a lack of clarity on who those provisions apply to would be confusing. Amendment 18, in my name, proposes making a number of amendments to section 16 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. That section established a system—known as the victim notification scheme—whereby victims can, on request, receive information about the relevant offender. Most of the changes proposed by amendment 18 are required as a consequence of amendments that will be made by section 19 of the bill, which will repeal certain parts of section 14 of the 2003 act that are, in turn, referred to in section 16. Those changes will simply ensure that the victim notification scheme will continue to operate as it does at present. In proposing amendment 18, however, I have also taken the opportunity to seek to lower from 14 to 12 the age at which children can receive information from the victim notification scheme in their own right. At stage 2, the Justice Committee supported my amendments to make a similar change with regard to the making of victim statements. I think that it is only right that that age limit be consistent both with arrangements for making victim statements and with other legislation relating to children, primarily the Age of Legal Capacity (Scotland) Act 1991, which provides that children over the age of 12 have testamentary capacity and are able to make decisions themselves about many issues. Amendment 18 also provides an order-making power whereby Scottish ministers may in future modify the age limits in section 16 of the 2003 act independently of the age limits in section 14 of that act. Amendment 18A, in the name of John Finnie, seeks to amend my amendment 18 to introduce an order-making power for Scottish ministers to be able to change the persons eligible to receive information under section 16 of the 2003 act through the victim notification scheme. I appreciate the intention behind the amendment, which is to give Scottish ministers the flexibility to make any further changes if necessary in the future. In light of that, I am happy to support amendment 18A. Amendment 18B, also in the name of John Finnie, would allow Scottish ministers to issue guidance on the support that should be available to children if they receive information under section 16 of the 2003 act. Again, I appreciate the intention behind the amendment. However, I am not persuaded that there is a need for statutory guidance in relation to such support, and it is not clear who the guidance would be aimed at. I think that a better approach would be to work with our justice partners and with victim support groups to identify what support is available currently and how to improve that if necessary. I therefore invite Elaine Murray to withdraw amendment 32 and not to move amendment 33. I invite members to support amendments 18 and 18A, and I ask John Finnie not to move amendment 18B.

As I explained at stage 2, courts may currently consider imposing a compensation order on an offender but are under no obligation to do so. Section 20 is intended to ensure that the court considers imposing compensation orders in relevant cases but it does not remove its discretion to decide whether such a move is appropriate. In making such a decision, the court considers all the circumstances of the case and would rightly take into account any views expressed by the victim. At stages 1 and 2, the Justice Committee discussed concerns that had been raised by Rape Crisis Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid about compensation orders being imposed in domestic abuse or sexual assault cases in which, as Sandra White has suggested, victims do not wish such an order to be made. As I have said before by way of reassurance, the bill will do nothing to preclude the court from using its discretion and will impose compensation orders only where the court considers it appropriate to do so. Amendment 19, in the name of Elaine Murray, is similar to an amendment that she lodged at stage 2. In light of comments that were made about the practicality of the previous amendment and the potential burden on the court, I welcome the changes that she has made to narrow the circumstances in which views must be sought to those situations in which the court actually intends to impose a compensation order. As I said at stage 2, I have some doubts about whether the amendment is absolutely necessary. The court already considers all the circumstances in making a compensation order. I understand that it is very rare for compensation orders to be awarded in relation to sexual offence or domestic abuse cases, and it is those cases that are at the heart of the concerns raised by Rape Crisis and Scottish Women’s Aid. That said, I appreciate the concerns that have been raised and, given the changes that have been made to the proposal since stage 2, I am happy to support Elaine Murray’s amendment. It is clear that no one wants to cause further distress to victims and, in the small number of cases in which compensation is not wanted, the proposal will ensure that it is not granted. We will continue to work with the Crown Office and the Judicial Office for Scotland to ensure that the provision works well in practice and to ensure that no delays are caused in the majority of cases in which victims are happy to receive compensation. I therefore encourage members to support amendment 19.

As I have said before, I am sympathetic to the idea of extending restitution orders to workers other than the police, provided that the system would actually work. I acknowledge that Alison McInnes has attempted to extend the scope of restitution orders in such a way as to ensure that, for each emergency worker who is the victim of an assault, there could be appropriate beneficiaries who could receive payment from the restitution fund. The amendments would certainly make the operation of the restitution fund more complex. Payments to the fund would require to be ring fenced according to the type of offence for which the restitution order was imposed. It would be inappropriate to use moneys that were recovered in respect of an assault on one type of emergency worker to make payments to organisations that provide support to different emergency workers. The Scottish Court Service would therefore be left with the burden of splitting the charges in the 2005 act into their component categories of worker to ensure that the money may be appropriately ring fenced when it goes into the restitution fund. The operator of the fund would also require to ensure that moneys that were received for certain offences were disbursed to organisations that support victims of those offences. Moreover, the amendments do not address the very obvious practical difficulty that I described at stage 2. In 2012-13, the figures for which are now available, there were 3,137 persons with a charge proved under section 41(1)(a) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, and only 139 persons with a charge proved in respect of all emergency workers under section 1 of the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005. The scale is thus completely different. Crucially, that is reflected in the sums that might be available. While fines for assaults on the police raise six-figure sums every year, as I said at stage 2, the Scottish Court Service advises that there was no fines income at all in 2011-12 and 2012-13 from any of the charges under the 2005 act. Instead, those were dealt with by community payback orders or imprisonment. It is not clear, therefore, that there is any potential income at all for restitution orders for any category of emergency workers. Amendments 34 and 35 are therefore likely to result in a burden on the operators of the restitution fund. The income received in respect of assaults on emergency workers under the 2005 act may well be insufficient to cover the operating expenses incurred by extending the scope of the restitution fund to include them. Rather than providing benefits for the intended recipients, it is quite possible that the amendments would result only in a burden on the operators of the restitution fund. Restitution orders would work in respect of assaults on police officers where there is clear evidence that the volume of potential income is there. The use of financial penalties will result in real benefits from the provision of support services. The same, unfortunately, cannot be said in respect of other emergency workers—certainly not at the present moment. In those circumstances, I urge Alison McInnes to reflect on what I have said and to withdraw amendment 34 and not move amendment 35. These matters can be reviewed and revisited in due course, but at present if we agreed to the amendments we would harm those whom she seeks to benefit.

Amendments 22 and 23 would allow victims to make representations about release and licence conditions directly to the prisoner via videolink. As I said at stage 2, I consider the proposal to be seriously flawed. The prisoner has no involvement in decisions about his release or any licence conditions that may be attached, so there appears to be little purpose in the victim’s speaking directly to the offender about those matters. Decisions on release and licence conditions are rightly made by the Parole Board for Scotland, which takes into consideration all the reports on the conduct and progress of the prisoner. For the benefit of those members who were not present at stage 2, I reiterate that victims in relevant cases are invited to make representations to the Parole Board about possible release and licence conditions. The bill extends that to include oral representations for life sentence prisoners. The prisoner already sees and will continue to see the representations that are made by the victim unless there is good reason to withhold them from him or her, and there is nothing to be added to the effectiveness of the parole process by including the amendments. The primary concern of the Parole Board is the risk attached to releasing a prisoner, and that risk is best assessed by considering relevant representations by the victim to the Parole Board alongside all the other reports that have been prepared on the prisoner. In summary, I do not think that there would be any benefit to either victims or the parole process in allowing such representations to be made to prisoners. As I have said before, that may even be counterproductive in giving the victim unreal expectations of what can be achieved through such a process. I also have concerns about the effect on the victim of such direct contact, which could be extremely traumatic. I therefore urge Graeme Pearson to withdraw amendment 22 and not to move amendment 23.

I am pleased to open the debate. Much time is spent talking about how our criminal justice system works and rightly so. However, in doing so, we must not leave out the discussion of the needs of those arguably most affected by it—the victims and witnesses of crime. I thank the members and clerks of both the Justice Committee and the Health and Sport Committee for their work over the past year. Their scrutiny and discussion of the bill have been detailed and considered and resulted in the clarification and enhancement of aspects of the bill. I also thank those who have been involved in the bill’s development. In particular, I thank those organisations and individuals who responded to the consultation, including the victim support organisations, such as Victim Support Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid, that gave evidence to the committees and provided robust and constructive feedback throughout the bill process, as well as to our justice partners. Most important, I express my gratitude and that of the Minister for Public Health to the victims of crimes and survivors of institutional child abuse. They have shown great strength in sharing their views, knowledge and experiences with us all. The bill contains provisions to improve support for victims and witnesses and to establish a national confidential forum to receive and listen in confidence to the experiences of adults who were placed in institutional care as children, including experiences of abuse. I turn first to the elements of the bill focused on our criminal justice system. The central aim of our proposals is to put victims and witnesses at the heart of our justice system and to improve the information and support available to them. The bill will ensure that offenders pay towards the support needed by victims through the introduction of a victims surcharge, to be used to help meet the immediate needs of victims of crime. The bill will make important improvements to the support available for vulnerable witnesses giving evidence. It will require justice agencies to set and publish standards of service to ensure that victims and witnesses know exactly what to expect when they come into contact with the justice system. Those and other proposals will help ensure that Scotland is compliant with the European Union’s victims rights directive. Earlier this year, the victim support Europe conference was hosted in Edinburgh. That acknowledged the positive progress made in Scotland in meeting the needs of victims and witnesses. A number of important improvements were made to the bill at stage 2, many of which responded to suggestions raised during the Justice Committee’s stage 1 scrutiny. In response to concerns raised at stage 1, Alison McInnes proposed an amendment providing that an objection should not be possible with regard to those standard special measures that are automatically available to certain categories of vulnerable witness. I gave my support to that. I believe that the provisions and special measures now strike the appropriate balance between the rights of victims and the accused. The Justice Committee suggested that a reporting mechanism be introduced to ensure accountability with regard to justice organisations meeting the standards of service that will be required to be set out under section 2. We have introduced such a mechanism, requiring organisations not only to reflect on how they have met the standards during the reporting period but to think ahead about how they intend to meet them in the future. We also introduced a requirement for organisations to consult each other in developing their standards to encourage a consistent and joined-up approach. We introduced a power to pilot alternative formats of victim statements, such as pre-recorded videos, in direct response to calls from victims to consider allowing flexibility in how such statements may be given. I reiterated that commitment today. Furthermore, we introduced an obligation on the Lord Advocate to make and publish rules about the process for reviewing decisions not to prosecute. That will increase transparency in the justice system and reflects the requirements of article 11 of the EU directive on victims rights. I turn to those elements of the bill that relate to the establishment of the national confidential forum. In 2009, the Scottish ministers committed to a pilot forum to test out a model for enabling adults who were placed in institutional care as children to describe their experiences, including, sadly, abuse and neglect. The outcome of that was the time to be heard pilot forum. Provisions in the bill that relate to the NCF are based on that successful pilot. The NCF will give people who were placed in institutional care as children the opportunity to share their experiences through a confidential, supportive and non-judgmental process. It will help to improve the health and wellbeing of such individuals by offering acknowledgement of their experiences, including experiences of abuse and neglect. Lessons may also be learned from those past experiences to help us to inform current and future childcare policies. We listened to the views of survivors and stakeholders and welcomed the Health and Sport Committee’s recommendations. At stage 2, the Minister for Public Health proposed amendments that will enhance the scope of the NCF and give more people an opportunity to participate, all of which received cross-party support. We have extended the eligibility criteria to include 16 and 17-year-olds. We have clarified the definition of institutional care to ensure that a range of care or health services can be included in the eligibility criteria. We have ensured a balance between the ability of the Mental Welfare Commission and the NCF to produce reports and the retention of confidentiality. We also recognised the importance of allowing the NCF to operate as soon as possible, and the bill now provides for the appointments process to begin without delay, so that former residents—in particular, ill and older survivors—will be given the opportunity to participate in the NCF from 2014. Of course, the bill is not, and will not be, the end of the process of reform and improvement. The proposals relevant to the criminal justice system will be implemented in the wider context of the Scottish Government’s making justice work programme, a central objective of which is to improve the experience of victims and witnesses. We will work closely with our partners in the criminal justice system and the third sector to ensure that the provisions are implemented effectively. We will also continue to work to identify non-legislative improvements that can be made. For too long, victims have been treated and made to feel like bystanders in the criminal justice system. The passage of the bill will mean that more consideration is given to the rights and needs of victims and witnesses of crime and will improve their experience of the system to which they turn to see justice served. I look forward to hearing members’ views on the bill. I confirm that it is not the end of the journey but the end of a stage on the journey. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill be passed.

First, I thank Duncan McNeil for his contribution. Understandably, the amendments and, indeed, the debate throughout have concentrated on the victims and witnesses part of the bill, but I think that we would do the nation a disservice if we did not record the important part that the national confidential forum plays in the bill. In putting it in a historical context, it was important to go back to the apology that many of us who were around at that time will know was made by the then First Minister, Jack McConnell. There was a historic wrong and the forum will be unable to resolve what happened to the individuals concerned, but it is the start of a process that we hope will help them. My colleague the Minister for Public Health has been dealing with that matter. I am extremely grateful for the work that was done on it by Duncan McNeil and his colleagues. As I have said, putting on the record the background to the forum does all of us a great service. I can clarify two points that Duncan McNeil raised. First, on good practice, the guidance is in preparation and it will be available by summer 2014. Secondly, on foster care, the results of the survey of those who were in foster care and their interest in the national confidential forum were communicated only yesterday, so perhaps that is in the post for Duncan McNeil. As I said, I am grateful for what Duncan McNeil has done in putting on the record the progress on on-going work with regard to the national confidential forum. In addition, on comments that Elaine Murray made just a few minutes ago, it is fair to say that it is unfinished business, too, with regard to those who have been victims of institutional abuse. There is welcome progress in that regard, and I am grateful to all those involved in it. I am also grateful for the involvement in the bill of all those outside the chamber, although colleagues in other parties have expressed some disappointment in that regard. I will comment on that, but I think that in the main it has been recognised and welcomed that we are making progress. However, I accept that, as Elaine Murray said earlier, it is work in progress. We should remember that this is the first-ever victims and witnesses bill in the Scottish Parliament; it is the first time that dealing with victims and witnesses in Scotland has been enshrined in legislation. That should be put on the record and we should recognise the progress that has been made. There are particular aspects that we still have to consider, but we will address them. I have made it clear that I do not think that putting a pilot on the face of primary legislation is the correct way to go. In that regard, I met Rape Crisis Scotland and encouraged it to meet the Scottish Legal Aid Board, and it has done so. There are options to consider, such as having a women’s law centre or a change in how we address certain matters, and I am open to doing that. I have seen the Legal Services Agency letter that was referred to. I know that agency well and was a director of it for several years. I am happy to consider its proposals. I think that we must look at matters in the cold light of day in order to work out what is best, but I am happy to give that commitment.

We have to look at what will provide best for victims and witnesses, especially those whom Rape Crisis Scotland is dealing with. That may be a pilot, a scheme that is discussed between Rape Crisis Scotland and the Scottish Legal Aid board, or something that none of us has yet thought of. I am committed to recognising that more has to be done. More will be done and how it will be done should be worked out with those organisations; I am happy to give that commitment. Graeme Pearson correctly raised oral statements. Let us see how they operate down south. They have not commenced down there yet. I am happy to indicate that we will keep under review how they are progressing and whether they are working well. The same applies to ages of children. We have gone for the age of 12 because that is when there is testamentary capacity and other aspects that relate to how children are viewed. If that should change, we can address it in years to come. As I said to Elaine Murray, we should recognise that this is work in progress. We have reached the end of a stage of a journey, but it is a significant stage. For the first time ever, we are enshrining in law the rights of victims, ensuring that we also cover those who are witnesses, which can be deeply distressing for many individuals, ensuring that offenders should contribute and pay to alleviate suffering and distress, and ensuring that we address the issue of those who have suffered institutional abuse. I would like to record my thanks to someone who is not in the chamber: the former Lord Advocate, Dame Elish Angiolini, to whom a great deal, if not all, of the credit for the bill’s genesis goes. Her jurisdiction predated the Administration in which I have served—it was a previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration. She correctly recognised that insufficient progress had been made and that a wrong had to be addressed. I pay tribute and great credit to her. Equally, I give credit to the currently serving Lord Advocate, Frank Mulholland, who recognised that the issue was about not just victims but witnesses. I said that in many instances it can be deeply traumatic to be a witness. There can be instances, sadly, in which people can be subject to abuse, harassment or even threats, and we have to recognise that. We have come a long way and I can assure Opposition members that we will keep particular aspects under review. When I first entered into law, more than 30-odd years ago, there was a hierarchy. The judiciary were looked after first of all. They dictated how matters would be dealt with in the court. Thereafter in the pecking order was the prosecution, then the defence, then expert witnesses. Nobody considered victims. At best, there might have been consideration of provision of a Women’s Royal Voluntary Service canteen, so that witnesses could get a cup of coffee. Sometimes that was provided; in many courts it was not. As for those who were witnesses, they were expected to just like it or lump it. They were expected to turn up whether they were civilians or police, and whether they were threatened or intimidated. To be fair, good work was done by the police, the prosecution and, indeed, sheriff clerks to alleviate such matters, but there was no consideration, planning or foresight to address them. There have been some begrudging comments from some on the Opposition benches, but I put on record that now we have that historic first. We have enshrined in statute the rights of victims and witnesses. That is long overdue and we should pay tribute to those responsible for the bill’s genesis, in particular, the current and past Lord Advocates. There is work to be done and I am happy to work to address matters with Opposition parties and the organisations and agencies that they mentioned. However, I would say to Margaret Mitchell that if she wants to address some of the difficulties of those who have suffered rape and sexual abuse, maybe she should reconsider where she is heading on the removal of the requirement for corroboration. Post-Cadder, the difficulty is significant, which is why she should read what Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and Victim Support Scotland are saying. They are all united in the desire that action should be taken. We have reached a historic juncture: we have enshrined in statute the rights of victims. We know the standards that they are entitled to expect and the standards that agencies are expected to achieve, and we know that the offender will pay. I am delighted to have moved the motion to pass the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. It is work in progress, but work that we can be proud of.

The Government’s hugely successful cashback for communities programme is having an enormous impact on young people and their communities across the length and breadth of Scotland. Since 2008, the cashback programme has invested and committed more than £74 million in our communities and has provided 1.1 million activities and opportunities for young people. Fife itself has benefited from more than £1.3 million in cashback investment and more than 55,000 activities and opportunities for its young people.

On 23 October, it was announced that £24 million is to be invested through cashback over the next three years. The application pack has been available on the Government’s website since 1 November. We have received a large number of queries about funding and applications since the start of November. We always welcome the opportunity to discuss new projects with organisations and communities if they believe that those can add to the cashback programme. We expect that demand will exceed the funds that are available and that not all applicants will be successful. From having engaged with YouthLink Scotland and a variety of youth organisations the length and breadth of Scotland, I certainly think that the word is out. If the member wishes to encourage local groups to apply, I am sure that we will see whether we can deliver.

The United Kingdom Government’s timescale for a potential legislative consent motion on the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill did not allow for a public consultation. We are in regular discussion with key stakeholders on the issue and we were aware that there would be an opportunity to feed in views to the Justice Committee for its consideration of the LCM.

I take clearly into account and understand the concerns of those organisations, which the member correctly mentioned. It is certainly the position of this Government and indeed of the UK Government that we require to legislate. It is necessary to deal with forced marriage in that way, given our agreement to the Istanbul convention. Some of the organisations that the member refers to disagree with that requirement, but that is certainly the legal advice here and south of the border, and indeed the position of the police and the Crown. We understand the concerns about driving the practice underground. However, it appears to us that the practice is already, by its very nature, one that tends to be kept under wraps and dealt with secretively. That is why we are happy to work with members of particular organisations, and with the communities in which the practice tends to be more prevalent, to make it quite clear that forced marriage is unacceptable. We are also happy to work with the UK Government on the issue because we believe that there is benefit in having some cross-border parity. We must ensure that we always remember that the victims of forced marriage are to be treated as victims, with dignity and respect. The legislation is not meant to compound the issue; it is meant to ensure that we comply with our international obligations and that those who participate in the practice are dealt with firmly and appropriately.

A breach of the civil order is in fact a criminal offence. I am open to considering whether there would be merit or benefit in making that an aggravated offence, but breaching such an order would instigate criminal proceedings, as can be seen in relation to domestic violence, for example. I am happy to consider the issue and reflect on Margaret Mitchell’s point.

The divisional commander for Dumfries and Galloway last met with Scottish Government officials on 13 November, and the subject matter that was discussed was missing persons.

The Government and all partners involved in law enforcement encourage all members of the public to step forward in whatever capacity, whether it is to give evidence, act as a juror or appear in any other role. As Mr Fergusson will be aware, the decision was arrived at by the Scottish Court Service. I am due to meet the Lord President later this afternoon, and I will pass on Mr Fergusson’s views. However, Mr Fergusson will be aware that, as a result of the considerable budgetary cuts that have been forced on this Government by the Westminster coalition Government, all aspects of public policy and all areas of public and private life are facing financial challenges. The Lord President has made appropriate provision to deal with the financial challenges by implementing some court closures. Mr Fergusson referred to the situation in Kirkcudbright, but he knows that it is replicated and mirrored south of the border, where the court closures are even more extensive.

I meet with Chief Constable Sir Stephen House on a regular basis to discuss important issues around keeping people safe in Scotland. Most recently, of course, I met the chief constable during the aftermath of the tragic incident at the Clutha bar in Glasgow on Friday. On Saturday, we were both at the Helen Street control centre and, on Sunday, we were at the service at Glasgow cathedral.

Absolutely—I can give an assurance on that. The SPA and the chief constable, supported by the Scottish Government and officials in the justice directorate, are attempting to ensure that we have up-to-date figures that are comparable across the nation, as opposed to the previous situation, in which individual constabularies had different ways of reporting. That is why the chief constable welcomed the comments of Audit Scotland. The SPA, the chief constable and justice officials are working together and are working closely with Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary in Scotland to ensure that the best possible information is available, that it is comparable across Scotland and that it is appropriate for those who are charged with holding the police to account, in the Parliament or the SPA.

Our annual bulletin “Recorded Crimes and Offences Involving Firearms, Scotland, 2012-13” was published on 20 November. It showed that gun crime fell by 32 per cent in the year to March, which is down 71 per cent since 2006-07, and that gun crime is now at its lowest level for 33 years.

I absolutely accept that. We have seen the benefit of specialist services and of a single service at the recent tragedies in Glasgow and Shetland. When resources were called on, they were available nationally. Another issue is that we no longer have artificial boundaries. When I met armed response officers from Inverness who cover the Highlands of Scotland, they told me that the historical position was that they could drive to Dalcross and would then have to turn round, but they can now go on to cover Elgin, for example; it is quicker and easier for officers from Inverness to get Elgin than it was for officers from the Grampian Police area to get there from Aberdeen city. Citizens can be reassured that local policing is still the bedrock, but national services are available wherever they are needed, whether in the Highlands or the islands.

The review of public-counter provision is a matter for Police Scotland, which has focused its review on front-counter provision, not on stations. The closure of counters that are not widely used aims to help deliver a more consistent and professional service to the public and to enable more officers to be deployed where the public tell us that they want them, which is in our communities. The report of the independent police commission chaired by Lord Stevens, which was published on 25 November, recognises the benefit of our reform. It states: “The Commission recommends that the social purpose of the police should be enshrined in law ... This has recently been achieved ... in Scotland. We believe that the national statement of purpose for Police Scotland has much to commend it as a model for enacting a legislative purpose for the police in England and Wales.” I commend that report, which was commissioned by the Labour Party.

The police have been doing that. Assistant Chief Constable Mawson commented today that the counter consultation had received contributions from 83 members of the public—out of a population of 5.3 million.

The use of stop and search is an operational matter for Police Scotland. Since the organisation’s formation in April 2013, there has been approximately one stop and search per police officer per week, which amounts to 12,089 police officers carrying out 454,737 stop and searches. Stop and search is effective not only in taking knives or other weapons off the street before they are used to commit violent crimes but in recovering drugs or alcohol, which can reduce antisocial behaviour and its blight in our communities.

Yes. Mr Stewart makes a good point; after all, this is a matter of balance. Having discussed the stop and search issue with the chief constable, I can confirm that—as Kevin Stewart said—there are no targets for numbers of searches. Helpfully, however, there are percentage targets for positive searches. I have been reassured that stop and search is an intelligence-led tactic that is used appropriately by Police Scotland to keep people and communities safe, but the Scottish Police Authority and the Scottish Government will, of course, continue to monitor its use. I also point out that since this Government came to office, crimes of handling offensive weapons have fallen by 60 per cent. That is in no small way down to a visible police presence, tough laws and strict enforcement by our police officers.

Policing in Scotland is performing excellently. The latest crime statistics show that crime is at a 39-year low, 1,000 more police officers are on our streets now compared with 2007 and confidence and satisfaction in the police are high. The Scottish Government shares with Police Scotland the top priority of keeping people safe across all communities in Scotland. Operational policing is a matter for Police Scotland and it will continue to be delivered from local stations. The impact is on the provision of front counter services, which are rarely used. The review of pubic counter provision aims to help deliver a more consistent, professional service to the public and enable more officers to be deployed in our communities where and when they are needed the most.

Let us address the factual situation regarding Giffnock police station. The public counter is currently open 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The proposal is for it to be open from 7 am until midnight, seven days a week, so it will close between midnight and 7 am. That is after a Police Scotland review showed that, over a nine-day period, there was a total of 162 visits to the public counter by members of the public in Giffnock, which is an average of approximately 18 people per day. Data analysis throughout the day highlights that public demand is minimal after midnight, when 999, 101 and access to a police officer are available. Mr Macintosh should look at the factual evidence and recognise that the proposal is reasonable and will maintain the visible police presence that delivers an outstanding service to our communities in Giffnock and elsewhere.

That is a matter for Police Scotland, but I have just come from an international policing conference, at which the chief constable spoke and mentioned matters such as diary cars, which provide a convenient option that allows members of the public to arrange an appointment with officers at their own home at a time of their suiting and of convenience to the police. It ties in with the use of social media, telephone and other aspects. There are issues as to whether diary cars are practical in some rural areas, because of the size of communities, but in many areas they will provide an option that will be greatly appreciated by members of the public, and an improvement and enhancement to the current excellent service.

The civil service pension schemes are a reserved matter and the responsibility of the United Kingdom Cabinet Office. All new Scottish Prison Service staff receive a pension starter pack that advises on the available options, including pension entitlement and contributions, and, as part of their initial training new recruit prison officers attend a session on pensions at the SPS training college. All SPS staff who are members of a civil service pension scheme are advised on an annual basis of their pension entitlements with an explanation of how those are calculated and, in addition, are advised through internal staff notices of any pension changes made by the UK Government.

I understand the member’s concerns and think it appropriate that he has raised them. I am aware of the Prison Officers Association’s anger and frustration at the implementation of the UK coalition Government’s proposal for prison officers at Barlinnie, Cornton Vale, Polmont or wherever to be required to work until they are 68. Frankly, I find the proposal ridiculous. As I have said, pensions are reserved, but the chief executive of the SPS, Colin McConnell, has confirmed that SPS staff receive information about their pension from MyCSP Ltd, a private sector company that administers civil service pension schemes on behalf of the Cabinet Office. Staff in the SPS human resources department have sufficient pensions knowledge to provide pensions awareness sessions to new recruits and assist existing staff with pension inquiries through liaison with MyCSP. In addition to the pensions sessions for new recruit prison officers that are already being delivered, the SPS is committed to providing additional awareness-raising sessions ahead of the introduction in 2015 of the new civil service pension scheme. Work to design an SPS approach is at a very early stage. I am happy to discuss the matter further with the member and can also assure him that the SPS is happy to discuss it with his constituent, with him or indeed with the POA. Sadly, the most harmful of these matters are being forced on us and the SPS because of the coalition Government’s proposals.

Recorded crime in Dumfries and Galloway is at a 34-year low, having fallen 44 per cent since 2006-07, thanks to the support of the 1,000 extra officers in our communities that have been provided by the Government. The number of sexual offences has fallen from 150 in 2011-12 to 133 in 2012-13, which is a decrease of 11 per cent. Provisional management figures for Dumfries and Galloway show an increase in the number of violent crimes, including two homicides, in the six-month period from April to September 2012-13. However, to put those figures into context, there was a total of 62 recorded homicides in Scotland in 2012-13, which is the lowest number since 1976, the first year for which comparable homicide records are available. Every homicide in Scotland is a tragedy. The Scottish Government continues to listen to and work with Police Scotland and other partners including the no knives, better lives campaign, the medics against violence project, the mentors in violence prevention project and local communities in its efforts to tackle crime and violence. Ultimately, we want to make Scotland a safer place in which to live and work.

I wish that the member had gone—as some of her colleagues did—to the international policing conference that was held earlier today, at which the chief constable was adamant about and full of praise for the support and efforts of his members. Crime is at a 39-year low and we have the lowest recorded homicide statistics since 1976. We have seen a halving of youth crime and a reduction of 60 per cent in knife-handling offences since 2006-07. Nevertheless, there are difficulties, and every murder is a tragedy. It is unacceptable that there have been two murders in Dumfries and Galloway, and Police Scotland is acting. However, all members of the Parliament have an obligation and duty to support the outstanding public service that is Police Scotland, not to talk it down when its record is impeccable and unimpeachable.

Will the member enlighten us as to the Labour answer to those two directives? What number of police officers does he think that there should be in Scotland? From which budget should the £40 million be deducted?

Will the member take an intervention?

I wonder what Mr Pearson’s comment is on Labour’s shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper, who has said: “They”— that is, the UK Government— “need to change course and accept Labour’s argument and the expert evidence that a 12% reduction in police spending would be manageable”. Does Mr Pearson support a 12 per cent reduction in police spending?

I welcome the opportunity to respond to Graeme Pearson’s motion on behalf of the Scottish Government. It may be helpful if I start with the context, which will bring some balance to what we have heard so far. Policing in Scotland is performing excellently, notwithstanding what Mr Pearson suggests. Crime is at a 39-year low, violent crime is down by almost half since 2006-07 and homicides are at their lowest since records began. The risk of being a victim of crime is falling, and confidence and satisfaction in the police are high, as figures that were published yesterday demonstrate.

Across the board, statistics and evidence show that policing in Scotland is doing remarkably well, and the onus is on the chamber to support rather than denigrate the police. The situation in Scotland is in stark contrast to the situation in England and Wales. We have more than 1,000 more police officers than we had in 2007. The backdrop to the debate is strong policing that is valued and trusted by communities throughout Scotland, not the negative picture that is painted by Graeme Pearson’s motion. Furthermore, the establishment of the single service will safeguard and sustain what we hold dear about our police service. Money is tight. We all know that—even Yvette Cooper. However, it is the UK Government that is cutting budgets, not the Scottish Government.

I will give way in a moment. Westminster is cutting our budget by 11 per cent in real terms over five years, so we must cut our cloth accordingly and ensure that every penny is invested wisely. Yvette Cooper wants a 12 per cent cut. Perhaps Mr Pearson can tell us what Labour in Scotland wants.

We know where the cuts are coming from—Westminster. They started under Darling, they are continuing under the coalition and they would be maintained under Yvette Cooper. The single service will remove the duplication that was built into the previous structures, in which there were eight police forces as well as the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and the Scottish Police Services Authority. We no longer need directors for each corporate function or eight chief constables. The new structure allows more resources to be focused where they can have the greatest impact, supporting outcomes and, above all, keeping people safe. Local policing is the bedrock, which is why there is now a local commander for each division in Scotland who works with communities, councils and other partners to shape and deliver policing. There is a local policing plan for every council ward, every local authority has a named contact on the Scottish Police Authority board and more councillors than ever before have the opportunity to have their say on policing in their areas.

As I can say is that what I think people want is a solution to the problem. “If you are the victim of a crime you don’t really care where the officers come from so long as something is being done.” I agree. That comment was made by Graeme Pearson MSP in the Daily Record on 22 August 2010. Local matters are being enhanced by access to national—

I responded with what I thought were your quite credible and appropriate remarks from three years ago, Mr Pearson. [Interruption.]

As I say, we now have access to national and regional expertise, helicopters and a specialist crime division. We know that we face unprecedented budget challenges, but the work that Police Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority are undertaking seeks to deliver the savings that this Parliament agreed and ensure the most effective and efficient use of resources. The review of public counters at police stations, which has generated a lot of interest, is being progressed by Police Scotland in discussion with the SPA. I emphasise that that review is about public counters, not stations. Front counters that are not used will close; some will retain their current opening hours; others will open for longer; and some will provide an improved service by relocating. For example, the counter in my constituency will move into the Edinburgh east hub, which is a much more sensible location. Budgets are tight. The police are using the 101 non-emergency number and social media. Social media is not a matter to be denigrated; many on the Opposition benches use it themselves to communicate with their constituents, so why should they criticise the police for using it? Proposals are under way, and we must support our police in that work. I do not accept the premise of Graeme Pearson’s motion. Policing continues to perform excellently, and has the confidence and trust of communities and partners. It should not be denigrated by politicians. It bears repeating: “Crime is at a 39-year low, violent crime is down by almost half since 2006-07 and homicides are at their lowest since records began.”

We have 1,000 additional officers—[Laughter.]

—unlike the collapse in officer numbers faced south of the border. The record of our Scottish police service is quite outstanding; it ill behoves politicians to denigrate those who have done an outstanding job. This Government will not implement the Winsor package and we will not privatise policing. We will support local policing in our communities and we will ensure that expertise is available to every community and that Police Scotland can perform continually the outstanding service that it provides day in, day out. Others may denigrate the police—some of them should know better, given their service, and should not join in that catcalling. We should recognise the outstanding police service that we have in Scotland. I reject Graeme Pearson’s motion and move my alternative. I move amendment S4M-08172, to leave out from “believes” to end and insert: “recognises that recorded crime is at a 39-year low, with homicides the lowest since records began, crimes of handling offensive weapons down by 60% and violent crime down by almost a half since 2007; welcomes the 1,000 additional officers that the Scottish Government has delivered since 2007; acknowledges the significant progress made by Police Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority to ensure that policing in Scotland continues to perform excellently, despite UK Government budget cuts; recognises that local policing remains the bedrock of the new service, supported by the ability to share expertise and equipment as required, and fully supports Police Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority in their work to ensure the most efficient and effective use of resources.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member saying that no counter should close or have its hours varied—even counters that have had only one or no visitations within a four-week period? Is that the position of the Conservative Party?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it appropriate for a member to state that Craigmillar police station is closing when it is not? As I have stated, the counter is relocating to the Edinburgh east hub. Is it not appropriate for the member to be accurate in what she states in the chamber?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member taken an intervention?

I will refer to the substantive motion from the Labour Party and to the SNP amendment in my name, but a subtext from the Opposition parties has run through the debate, and I will refer to that, too. The motion refers to counter closures. Christine Grahame gave the clear position on what the police want to be done and why that is common sense. Colin Keir confirmed that we have heard a lot of manufactured outrage in the chamber. Indeed, we have heard a lot of cant and something that is, if not hypocrisy, not far off it, given what is happening south of the border. The real facts are as stated by Christine Grahame. I found Kezia Dugdale’s speech rather bizarre. Perhaps, on her travels, she interacted with the inspectors in Portobello, Craigmillar and Howdenhall.

Perhaps Kezia Dugdale would like to intervene to tell me the names of the inspectors at those stations.

Kezia Dugdale might do herself a favour if she interacted with Inspectors Hardie, Clyde and Bowie—that might do her some good and she might learn what is happening on the ground. We have an outstanding police service in east Edinburgh, which we should not traduce. Kezia Dugdale knows as well as I do that officers in that area have dealt with the discharge of semi-automatic weapons. Backfilling has been raised, as has the 101 number, which Sandra White dealt with eloquently. One reason why the 101 number was introduced was because of the difficulties that people had in being able to access a number when they were not in their home locality. If someone was from Grampian and they were in Glasgow, what number did they call? If they were in Lothian and Borders and were visiting Dumfries and Galloway, what was the local number?

Perhaps Siobhan McMahon would like to tell me what the number was, prior to 101, that people dialled in Lothian and Borders.

First, I will just advise the member that the number for Lothian and Borders—[Interruption.]

The number was 311 31 31. Equally, there are incidents that the control room quite correctly says must go to a police station—such as, understandably, incidents of a sexual nature or assaults. Such incidents would have to be dealt with by the police station—those are the facts that are dealt with, without the manufactured outrage. There is a subtext here, so let us realise that and refer to it. We know that we have a better together campaign in the chamber, as indeed we have outwith it, in which we have unity between the coalition partners of the Tory Government and its Liberal Democrat allies along with their Labour colleagues.

Not at the moment. We know that their better together campaign is about working together—[Interruption.]

We are seeing a traducing of the police service south of the border. In some ways, the police have to answer and account for any omissions or commissions, but let me say that I have a high regard for the police service south of the border. What is shameful is that matters that have affected the police service south of the border should result in a traducing of the police service north of the border. People should have more support for a police service that has served us outstandingly. It has a considerable record and should not face being challenged when we have a 39-year low in recorded crime, when we have the lowest number of homicides since records began and when we have a 60 per cent drop in violent crime and in knife carrying since we came into office.

There are two factors there. Perhaps Mr Pearson would like to comment about whether we are in fact taking power back here. Mr Pentland said that the Scottish Government should take back ownership of Scottish policing. I thought that we had decided in this chamber that that would not be the position that any justice secretary would ever have, whether that would be me or my successors. If Labour is changing its policy, it should tell us. I have to say that I think that that would be a wrong step. It would not be appropriate and we will not be heading in that direction. If I am wrong, Labour should perhaps tell us.

Equally, we have to say that we have an outstanding police service. Let us be clear: whatever the substantive motion has been, the subtext has been to trash the outgoing and on-going service of the Scottish police force. What we have to remember, as we face a better together campaign, is that Labour is now considering its position on universal services. It is considering whether matters that we viewed as sacrosanct should be jettisoned: whether tuition fees should be reimposed; whether bus passes should be removed; and whether free personal care should be taken away. That is shameful enough on its own, but when those who went through higher education pull up their drawbridge and seek to take away that opportunity from those following, they should hang their heads in shame. Equally, I have to put it on record that those who served with honour and credit—as Mr Pearson did—ill-serve themselves to trash and traduce the record of their successors, who serve the Scottish police force and their communities magnificently well. [Interruption.]

Redundancies are required because of duplication. Elaine Murray criticises the numbers that are being considered by the SPA. How many civilian posts does she think should go?

HM Prison Grampian will be Scotland’s first community-facing prison and it will accommodate men, women and young people from the north-east of Scotland. It will provide offenders with the ability to maintain close links with families and communities, which is intended to help them to desist from offending and to better reintegrate with their communities in the north-east and elsewhere on release. The north-east community will benefit by an additional 40 jobs, which will bring commensurate economic benefit to the local community. There will also be an improvement to the visual image of the area, an increase in local work placements where there is a need for them, an overall reduction in travel time to courts and reduced carbon usage.

Absolutely; I agree with that. There was outstanding expertise at that unit. This morning, I was at the Prison Officers Association conference in Peebles, at which the unit was being commemorated and officers from Peterhead prison were present. Their expertise will be used and shared across the prison estate, and I say on the record that we should all express our gratitude to those officers at Peterhead prison for the outstanding expertise that they built up. I assure the member that those skills will now be shared across the prison estate.

We have a prison replacement programme under way. HMP Inverclyde will replace HMP Greenock and there will be a new prison in the Highlands to replace HMP Inverness. A replacement will also be necessary for HMP Barlinnie. It is our view that we have enough capacity currently, and the Scottish Prison Service accepts that view. When I was speaking at the Prison Officers Association conference, I said that I recognise that new prisons are built not simply for the benefit of inmates who have to be rehabilitated and reformed but for the safety and comfort of the people who have to work with them. On that basis, we have a prison building programme that will proceed.

Under the terms of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, any individual or body may make representations concerning the granting of a public entertainment licence. Representations made by individual bodies, such as Police Scotland, are operational matters that the Scottish Government would not intervene in.

There are two issues. First, these are operational matters on which we would not seek to intervene, but obviously there is a Justice Sub-committee on Policing here, to which Ms MacDonald is able to make representations. On condoms and other aspects, let us be quite clear. Police Scotland has said that its recommendation was not just misinterpreted but misrepresented by the press and that it was not proposing to ban condoms. Police Scotland issued the following important statement: “At no point do the recommendations make reference to the banning of condoms. Police Scotland absolutely supports proper measures to protect sexual health.” More generally, the Scottish Government is in favour of a harm reduction approach to sexual health. Evidence suggests that banning items such as condoms can have a detrimental effect on public health. Ms MacDonald is right that if a position was taken to ban condoms, it would be contrary to the Government’s intention on public health, but that is not Police Scotland’s position. Equally, it is most certainly Police Scotland’s position that where matters of criminality come to its attention, it is important that it should act. On that basis, the Government fully supports Police Scotland.

These matters are fundamentally for the City of Edinburgh Council, which will have to consider them as it has before. Police Scotland is operationally independent, but I thought it important that we put on record that it was not just misinterpreted but misrepresented. I have no doubt that both Ms White and I can make representations individually to the City of Edinburgh Council.

I am delighted to say that when I was out last week seeing the work of the excellent cashback school of rugby at Wallace high school in Stirling, I had the great pleasure of announcing a further £24 million investment, which will be used to expand this Government’s hugely successful cashback for communities programme for a further three years. That latest commitment to invest in our young people and their communities heralds a landmark £74 million of criminals’ money seized and put back into communities across Scotland since 2008.

There is a variety of projects. Indeed, before I went to the Prison Officers Association conference at Peebles, I was at an event for the Scottish Professional Football League music box programme, at which we had the first contribution in this country from the Fender Music Foundation. One of its guitars will go to the Partick Thistle community trust music box at Firhill; no doubt, many of Ms White’s constituents will be able to enjoy that. Projects in the Glasgow area have received more than £4.5 million of cashback investment, which has benefited more than 122,000 young people. There is a variety of projects in Glasgow Kelvin and Glasgow’s west end, including the Boys Brigade, Partick boxing club, schools of rugby, Scottish Sports Futures, YouthLink Scotland and basketballscotland, and the Scottish Football Association runs two cashback-funded programmes at Partick Thistle. There is a variety of projects, as well as small grants, and I am sure that the area is much better for that.

The scheme is on-going and will be built on. I can say that the Scottish Rugby Union—I am grateful to Clare Adamson for hosting a reception for the SRU—was very grateful for the cashback contribution, as were the SPFL and the SFA. I know that Mr McNeil does not like to put a dampener on matters, so he should realise that many communities and young people are benefiting. They include the youngsters who are getting the opportunity to meet stars from various bands who have given their time and the youngsters who are benefiting from the first Fender guitars to be given outwith the North American continent. That is a testament to the outstanding work and success of the cashback for communities scheme.

I am happy to try to do so. I have seen some outstanding work with cashback for communities in Dumfries itself and in Dumfriesshire, such as at Annan Athletic Football Club. I am more than happy to try to catch up with those matters. It was a pleasure to be at the Easter Road stadium, and it would be a delight to be able to attend at Dumfries in the future.

The use and conduct of undercover police officers is covered by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000. The decision to authorise undercover police officers is an operational matter for the Police Service of Scotland. Patrick Harvie may be interested to learn that the Scottish Government will shortly publish a draft order that will include enhancements to the regime for Police Service of Scotland authorisations for the use of undercover officers. That will put on a statutory footing the recommendations made in an independent report by Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary for England and Wales. The report followed on from the extensive media coverage of a Metropolitan Police officer’s long-term undercover deployment.

I give an assurance that, when we recognise good practice, we will adopt it here. That is why the recommendations in the report by HMIC for England and Wales will be put on a statutory footing in Scotland. The things that occurred south of the border raised legitimate concerns and worries and, indeed, were the precursors to the investigation by HMIC for England and Wales. I am not aware of such things ever having happened in Scotland. We always keep up to date and, when good practice is demonstrated—whether south of the border or elsewhere—we take it on board in Scotland. All my experience with undercover officers is that they are remarkably brave. I have seen investigations into Yardie gangs, in which officers came up from south of the border and put themselves in some difficulty and danger to address matters in Edinburgh. I have met officers in the south-west of Scotland who were involved in infiltration into Irish Republican Army-related gangs. We owe those officers a great deal of gratitude. Their work is hard and difficult and they are remarkably brave, but I assure Patrick Harvie that we monitor such matters and will ensure that there will be no tarnishing of their outstanding service.

The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill proposes the removal of the general requirement for corroboration in criminal cases. It will still be necessary to prove cases beyond reasonable doubt, and corroborative supporting evidence will still be sought and used. The bill is still being considered by Parliament. A final decision on commencement will be taken in close consultation with key justice stakeholders, although current planning is for the provision to be commenced in 2015.

We are building on the report by the Lord Justice Clerk, Lord Carloway. We carried out a further investigation into safeguards. We are conscious that his is a fulsome investigation into evidence and procedure in Scotland. No other criminal justice system in western Europe or the Commonwealth operates a general requirement for corroboration. Justice is not being done. The requirement is archaic, as the Lord Justice Clerk has said, and it is time to ensure that we deliver on his significant reforms to improve justice and make Scotland a safer place.

We are happy to take on board safeguards and we have taken on board and agreed to safeguards that judges of the High Court of Justiciary suggested. If Ms Mitchell wishes to make further suggestions, we will be happy to look at them.

Kenny MacAskill has identified an error in his contribution and provided the following correction. At col 23764, paragraph 2— Original text— We have a prison replacement programme under way. HMP Inverclyde will replace HMP Greenock and there will be a new prison in the Highlands to replace HMP Inverness. Corrected text— We have a prison replacement programme under way. HMP Inverclyde will replace HMP and YOI Cornton Vale and there will be a new prison in the Highlands to replace HMP Inverness.

The Scottish Government has consistently made it clear that local policing lies at the heart of reform. That is evidenced through our aims for reform—to protect local services and strengthen their connection with communities—and the statutory purpose and strategic priorities that we have set for Police Scotland. Through reform, we have protected front-line services, including the 1,000 extra police officers who have helped to cut crime to a 39-year low.

I do not recognise the scenario that Ms Boyack has mentioned. From speaking to the deputy leader of the City of Edinburgh Council, I understand that Steve House is coming through to meet him and the council leader to allay any fears that there may be about local policing. I am happy to leave that to Councillor Burns and Councillor Cardownie. The proposals from Police Scotland are, let us remember, an operational matter; equally, they are the subject of an on-going consultation, so they can be referred to. As Ms Boyack will be aware, the opening hours at some stations—Dalkeith, for example—are being extended, although I do not think that she deliberately sought to exclude that. In the main, the proposals relate to stations of limited use. The priority has to be police on the beat. I simply remind Ms Boyack that there is a difference between what our Administration has done and what her Administration failed to be re-elected on. In 2006-07, the Government that she supported had 16,234 police officers and there were 120 homicide victims. In 2012-13, this Government has provided more than 17,000 police officers and the number of homicide victims is down to 62. There has been a marked difference across a whole range of crimes, including a 60 per cent drop in the handling of offensive weapons since we came into government.

The member makes a fair point about the importance of such matters, which are operational. I respect that, although I have discussed such matters with the chief constable. The issue has also been raised with me by the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents and the Scottish Police Federation. It seems to me that we should listen to what has been said by the chief constable, who I understand from those who attended the Scottish Police Authority meeting yesterday has indicated that discretion remains the bedrock of matters and is available to officers. I suggest that Ms Grahame should seek to raise the matter not simply through the Justice Committee but through the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing, which plays an important part—I again give credit to Graeme Pearson for this—in ensuring that there is parliamentary scrutiny of such matters in discussions with the senior police team.

The public are being consulted—Assistant Chief Constable Mawson has been out making that clear—and I have no doubt that Ms Mitchell and many others will seek to respond to the consultation. However, it is important that we ensure that police officers are utilised out on the beat, which is where the communities want them, rather than manning stations that perhaps serve a very limited purpose and waiting for people to come in. Had we followed the line that has been taken south of the border, where there has been an 8.72 per cent drop in the number of police officers, the number of police officers in Scotland would have fallen below 15,000. This Government, unlike the coalition Government south of the border, believes that front-line policing is important. That is why we remain committed to the additional police presence in our communities, even if at times there will not be a service available in the station.

The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 governs the responsibilities of, and protections given to, ex-offenders in terms of advising people of their previous criminal activity. The legislation has been on the statute book for almost 40 years. Much has changed over the past 40 years and I believe that it is right to consider whether the legislation is still fit for purpose for modern-day Scotland. The rules governing how a person’s previous criminal activity is disclosed, by individual ex-offenders themselves and through information held on central records, need to succeed in achieving the right balance between, on the one hand, protecting the public from those whose offending behaviour makes them a potential future risk, and, on the other hand, enabling offenders who want the chance of gainful employment or education to put their previous offending behaviour behind them and to make a positive contribution to Scottish society. The rules also need to be easy to understand for all those who are affected by them, including ex-offenders, employers and others. The Scottish Government therefore published a discussion paper in late August seeking views on this important area to test whether the legislation still meets those aims. Before the 1974 act was brought in, no protection was given to ex-offenders. That meant that someone who had committed a criminal offence, however minor and however long ago, had a responsibility to tell people about their old offending. The view taken by the then United Kingdom Government and by subsequent UK Governments and Scottish Governments was that giving no protection whatsoever to ex-offenders was not a proportionate approach to enabling and encouraging individuals to move on from their offending behaviour. Instead, the view was taken that a balance needs to be struck between allowing an ex-offender to move on and ensuring that the wider rights of society are protected in terms of public safety. That is why the 1974 act was developed. At its heart, the 1974 act has a very simple concept: where someone has previously committed some criminal activity and has not re-offended, they should be given the opportunity of a clean slate as part of living their everyday lives. Therefore, the 1974 act introduced the concept in law of a “rehabilitated person”. Under the terms of the 1974 act, where a person has been convicted of a criminal offence and has been sentenced to prison for less than two and a half years, they can be regarded as rehabilitated after a specified period as laid out in the act, provided that they receive no further convictions. A person can also become rehabilitated if they receive an alternative to prosecution, such as a fiscal warning or fiscal fine. The specified period during which a person becomes rehabilitated is different depending on the disposal received. For example, the rehabilitation period for a court imposed fine is five years, and the rehabilitation period for a fiscal fine is three months. After the specified period, the original conviction or alternative to prosecution is considered to be spent. The general rule is that, once a conviction or alternative to prosecution is spent, a person does not have to reveal it and cannot be prejudiced by it. That means that if a rehabilitated person is asked on a job application form or at a job interview about their previous criminal activity, they do not have to reveal it or admit its existence. Moreover, an employer cannot refuse to employ and cannot dismiss someone because of previous criminal activity that is spent. There are of course some exceptions to the general rules, given the wide range of sensitive work roles that exist within our communities, where public safety is and has to be paramount. Those exceptions and exclusions operate so that an ex-offender will have to reveal their previous criminal activity even if they would normally be deemed to be a rehabilitated person. Secondary legislation under the 1974 act provides that, for example, a person must reveal spent convictions when they apply for licences under the Private Security Industry Act 2001, as must a person who wants to become a taxi driver. In addition, the normal rules about rehabilitated persons do not apply to work in parts of the financial sector, childcare, care services and the health professions. Those exceptions operate alongside the very specific protection of vulnerable groups legislation that the Parliament passed back in 2007. In bringing forward the debate, I want to be clear with everybody that there is absolutely no intention to weaken in any way the necessary protections that are in place for vulnerable groups. So why should we have the debate? In our discussion paper, we highlighted that more than one in three of the adult male population in Scotland and almost one in 10 of the adult female population in Scotland are likely to have at least one criminal conviction. The legislation can and does affect many people in our society. Having a past in which there has been criminal activity can have an on-going, real-life impact on a person’s ability to gain employment, secure an apprenticeship, attend university or college, volunteer, or even get insurance or open a bank account. Evidence shows that employment, education and engaging in normal aspects of life are the factors that can most assist people to avoid reoffending and therefore reduce the harm to wider society. Earlier this year, the Parliament’s Justice Committee reported on the importance of purposeful activity for offenders in prison to help them in their rehabilitation. Purposeful activity is also vital for ex-offenders in communities. In many instances, the same factors that apply in the prison estate apply outwith it. The factors of access to employment, education and engaging in normal aspects of life, which can be taken away and be no longer open, will have an effect not only on the rehabilitation of those who are required to do a prison sentence, but on the opportunities, if any, that will be available to many who have committed an offence and have perhaps shown remorse and that they are rehabilitated and wish to get on with their life.

The member makes a fair point. Whether we are talking about new legislation or existing legislation, a lot of this has been open to misunderstanding. For example, some employers think that it is mandatory not to employ ex-offenders, in contrast with what is said in the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, which was, I think supported across the parliamentary chambers. The purpose of the 1974 act is simply to ensure that information is available. As well as any legislative change that we embark on, we have to change attitudes to ensure that those who are charged with selecting volunteers or, indeed, candidates for employment, realise that this is about awareness and information. In terms of protecting vulnerable groups, there are mandatory exceptions that must be dealt with; in relation to other matters, it is for those people to decide whether they think that the individual is rehabilitated—notwithstanding any disclosures—and is capable of doing whatever work it is they seek to do, as opposed to taking a view that there is a red line and that they cannot even consider that individual, no matter the nature of the work. Views expressed over many years suggest that the regime established by the 1974 act is complicated and therefore the evidence is that it is poorly understood. As a result, it is not properly applied in practice, and that can be one of the main barriers to ex-offenders gaining employment. During informal discussions with stakeholders, it has been suggested that the current rehabilitation periods are not appropriate and do not reflect the point at which re-offending tails off following previous criminal activity, and that they are out of date and do not reflect sentencing practice in Scotland. Few have suggested that the fundamental principles of the legislation—helping offenders put their past behind them while protecting the public—are not still as relevant today as they were in the 1970s. There is, however, no single view on how best the 1974 act should be reformed and in particular how rehabilitation periods might be revised. The Scottish Government does not hold a fixed view about how the regime might be modernised and reformed. Our discussion paper is designed to stimulate debate. For example, we want to hear views about whether five years is the correct rehabilitation period for someone who receives a court imposed fine. There is an argument that when someone is fined, the court has taken the view that they do not need to be imprisoned for the purpose of protecting the public. In that case, what is the correct period for disclosure of their court imposed fine? Is it right that someone who receives a sentence of above 30 months in prison will never become a rehabilitated person? Under the current regime a person in their early 20s who commits a serious enough offence to receive a three-year prison sentence and who serves their sentence will have to tell people about that offence for the rest of their life, regardless of their subsequent behaviour. The responses to our discussion paper will help to provide us with evidence and views so that we can find Scottish solutions to the various issues. Along with considering the views expressed in response to the discussion paper and the views expressed in today’s debate, we also plan to hold a series of stakeholder events across the country over the next few weeks so that we can obtain views specifically from ex-offenders and employers. Those are the two groups most affected by the legislation and we want to hear what they have to say. The legislation has a role to play in protecting our children and the most vulnerable in our society. It also has a role to play in helping to reduce re-offending by assisting those ex-offenders who want to move away from their previous criminal activity, lead purposeful lives and contribute to wider Scottish society and the Scottish economy. It is important that we try to develop reforms that are built on a broad consensus of stakeholders, employers, individuals such as ex-offenders and the parties in the chamber on what type of reform is required. The issues are too important and affect too many people. We must work together to find the right solutions. We have recently announced a 14-year low in re-conviction rates. That was good news. Although a range of activities and approaches affect re-offending, the way in which the 1974 act operates also has a part to play. Any reforms must deliver the correct balance between reducing re-offending, keeping our communities safe, increasing public confidence, strengthening community resilience and achieving sustainable economic growth. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the time is right to consider whether the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 needs to be modernised and reformed; notes that the legislation has a dual role of protecting the public and helping to reduce reoffending; agrees that helping ex-offenders move away from their previous offending behaviour in order to lead purposeful lives can help contribute to wider society in Scotland; notes that any reform must deliver the correct balance between public safety and rehabilitation, and agrees that it is important to develop policy, through a broad consensus, on how to reform and modernise the rules governing how a person’s previous criminal activity is disclosed after a sentence has been served.

It has been a remarkably wide-ranging, consensual and good-humoured debate. It is important to put on record that being consensual is no bad thing. People who visit or watch this institution sometimes think that consensus never arises when we all know that it is more often the norm than First Minister’s question time would suggest. On such an issue, it is fundamental that we have consensus, and it is to the credit of all members that we have achieved one. When we drill down into the detail, it might not be that way—there might be issues on which there is disagreement. However, I think that we all agree that it is time for a change. The 1974 act was brought in for the right reasons. It was the right thing to do then, but the society in which we live has moved on. The act has been amended and we require to catch up. In many ways, the world is much more complicated than it was back in 1974. Other jurisdictions provide international comparators, so there is not simply the comparator of the jurisdiction south of the border. We heard from Willie Coffey on that. I put on the record my gratitude and thanks to all members for the manner in which the debate has been conducted. We will see how we can take forward what members have said. On the point that Sandra White raised, we have no timescales as such. We are going out to consultation and would rather take the time to get the legislation right. We want to maintain the consensus that we have in the chamber today, and we want to try to get consensus on the issues outwith the chamber. We want to see whether we can achieve a balance between the views of those who represent the interests of former offenders and who try to rehabilitate them and the views of those who look after the interests of employers or other agencies who take on board the challenge of employing former offenders. As I said, no timescale has been set, but we will be happy to discuss the matter with various groups and engage with them on that.

Absolutely. We will take that on board. We have already been in discussion with stakeholders such as Victim Support Scotland, People Experiencing Trauma and Loss and other agencies. In my experience, Victim Support Scotland is very conscious of the issue. As Graeme Pearson and other members said, if we wish to stop reoffending, which is what many victims wish to see rather than simply people being punished for what happened to them, we must try to break the cycle of offending. Although a great deal of the debate has centred on those who have been sentenced to periods of imprisonment, it is important to remember that they are but a small minority. There is an important debate to be had on that issue, notwithstanding the lack of media scrutiny, because, as many members—culminating in Dr Murray—pointed out, one in three adult males and one in 10 adult females have a conviction and could be subject to the legislation. However, we should also bear it in mind that although 33 per cent of adult males are likely to have a conviction, only 2 per cent of adult males will have been jailed. That said, it is appropriate that the statistic was raised—Mr Pearson and others were right to raise it—because the offenders concerned are more likely to have committed a serious offence, to have a propensity for further offending and to pose the greatest risk of harm to the public. We must therefore address the issue. Many members used anecdotal evidence in their speeches, and I will do so, too, in pointing out that there must be an element of fairness in sentencing. I remember that when I practised as a defence agent, there were many instances in Edinburgh of behaviour that was dealt with by a police warning; at the most, in a more rural court, matters would be dealt with differently, with an alternative to prosecution. Local sheriffs and JPs should have the right to find some behaviour entirely unacceptable and impose a sentence for it. It was certainly my experience that behaviour that would get a warning from a police officer in the high streets or night club zones of Edinburgh or Glasgow would be dealt with quite robustly in a more rural situation and would probably result in a fine. It is perfectly understandable that a sheriff will state that they are not prepared to tolerate certain behaviour in their area, but that situation creates an element of postcode justice that can have long-lasting consequences. For example, someone who shouted and swore while going down a high street in a place such as Jedburgh might have to answer for that for a very long time, but if they did the same thing in the Cowgate in Edinburgh, they would get a warning that night and that would be the end of it. Edinburgh members might know the apocryphal tale about the police in Edinburgh at present: how they police the Cowgate is different from how they police George Street, which is different from how they police Lothian Road. I see Margaret Mitchell nodding. I do not know—she has probably been out with the Edinburgh police. There are areas in Edinburgh where someone might be told, “Your behaviour is inappropriate, sir. You better mind and behave yourself, or go home right now.” However, in other areas, someone might find themselves detained for the same behaviour. That can have consequences when, for example, they seek to go to college, obtain employment or volunteer because their children are involved in an activity. We must consider all such aspects. There are three matters that we are therefore seeking to address. The first is to have clear and understandable legislation, which is very important. The law has become complicated. I assure members that I have read the notes assiduously, but having done so, I would find it hard to narrate the precise details and would have to get the benefit of my officials’ advice. If that is how things are for me in my situation, how are they for an employer? I think that Jackson Carlaw and many other members asked that question. Roddy Campbell gave some very interesting statistics about people’s willingness to employ ex-offenders and what happens in practice. Maureen Watt mentioned employers who have a blanket ban against them, and Jackson Carlaw made the fair point that employers who are prepared to take them on should be given greater support, and we should pay greater tribute to them. Gerard Eadie at C R Smith, for example, has always been willing to take on ex-offenders, even though he has told me that sometimes that trust has not been repaid. The same applies to Mactaggart and Mickel and many more. As with those who employ people with disabilities, many who employ ex-offenders recognise that they get employees who are prepared to be diligent and who pay back the trust that they have been shown. However, it is important for everyone that, wherever possible, the law should be understandable and easily accessible, and it is clear that that is not the case in this instance—not because anybody set out to make it that way, but because of the changes in society. The second aspect has to be public protection. That is why there is no intention to change provisions that relate to the protection of vulnerable groups. Bob Doris asked about jobs. Some of that is very complicated. For example, Graeme Pearson and I recently talked about Gartcosh. There are jobs from which people would not normally be precluded in any way, but people will want to know who is employed on the crime campus at Gartcosh in construction, or even catering. Sometimes it is not simply a matter of the occupation; it is a matter of where the occupation is. We live in a changing world, and there are jobs that we have probably not even considered or which do not currently exist but which will exist in five or 10 years. We need to have an element of flexibility.

I think that we do reasonably well compared to other countries. We can always do better, but in many ways, comparisons are difficult because many jurisdictions do not have the same statistics or analysis that we have. I think that we are in a better position than them and that sometimes we perhaps beat ourselves up unduly. We record statistics better than elsewhere. As many members have mentioned, there are three key criteria in the rehabilitation of offenders: whether they have a home to go to; whether they have somebody—perhaps family or a friend—to support them; and whether they have something meaningful to sustain them, preferably employment, but if not that, some other activity. Whether a person is in or out of prison, those three criteria indicate the likely propensity to stay straight.

I will be happy to come, if my diary obliges. I will take that on board. The third and final aspect is to look at how we deal with the rehabilitation of offenders. There are complications relating to disclosure, and we require other agencies to look at those to ensure that we get a balance. [Interruption.]

In summary, we are seeking to ensure that we take on board the views of the Parliament and discuss matters with a wide range of stakeholders—Willie Coffey was quite correct to mention Victim Support Scotland, which is pivotal—to ensure that we can get an appropriate legislative framework. That framework may be the same as that south of the border, or it may not. Clearly, changes have been made south of the border. John Finnie made the important point that people should ultimately look at some element of compatibility not only across the United Kingdom but across Europe. Equally, we want to ensure that we get what is right for us and fits. We need clear and updated legislation, and we always need to ensure that public protection is at the heart of things. Many of us were elected at the time of Bichard and all the problems that arose then, and we know that we can never afford to take our eye off the ball. Public protection must always be paramount, even if that results in some difficulties for individuals. For example, I have dealt with a constituent’s case, which related to fostering and which involved an offence that took place some 40 years previously. I fully understand the social work department’s position: it was regrettable for him, but necessary for public protection. We must strike a balance between providing opportunities for people to be rehabilitated and taking on board the need for public protection. We must give opportunities to people who show remorse and want to pay back, through community service hours, a fine or a custodial sentence, and who want to improve themselves and contribute in a meaningful, purposeful way, as members of our community, whether they do so by volunteering or in the workforce.

The member will be aware that Lord Carloway said that, in his extensive research, he could find no other jurisdiction in western Europe or indeed the Commonwealth that had corroboration. Is he wrong, or are all those other jurisdictions wrong?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to respond to the motion on the proposal to abolish the general requirement for corroboration in criminal cases. That proposal is a long overdue step in ensuring that victims have access to justice. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill seeks to modernise and improve efficiency in our system and put Scotland at the forefront of human rights protections for suspects while ensuring that victims are not denied justice by outdated rules of evidence. It is important to acknowledge that we are all working towards the same goal. We want Scotland to have a modern and effective criminal justice system that is fit for purpose in our modern age and which properly balances the rights of individuals and the duties of the state. That is why I asked the Lord President to nominate an expert to undertake an independent review of criminal law and practice in the immediate aftermath of Cadder and the subsequent emergency legislation. Lord Carloway rigorously reviewed the key elements of our system. He spent a year consulting and deliberating, and he focused his recommendations on how we could best combine the thorough investigation and prosecution of crime with rigorous and far-sighted human rights protections. The Government then conducted a general consultation on his report and a second consultation on possible additional safeguards following abolition of the requirement. The provision in the bill to increase the jury majority for a conviction to two thirds is a direct result of consultation. I have also agreed in principle with the Scottish Law Commission to review the not proven verdict, and I remain open to deliberating on whether further safeguards are needed as the bill progresses.

Yes, I would have concerns if it was simply the testimony of one witness, but the Lord Advocate has given clear guidance that that will not be the test. That will simply not happen. There will have to be additional evidence, which is why Lord Carloway made it clear that it is not a matter of quantity but of quality of evidence. That is the position.

Not at the moment. I remain in complete agreement with the damning conclusion that Lord Carloway reached. He said: “the requirement of corroboration should be entirely abolished for all categories of crime. It is an archaic rule that has no place in a modern legal system”.

We are not simply accepting the views solely of Lord Carloway. Views have been contributed by Police Scotland, the Crown, Victim Support Scotland, Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland. These matters are debated and discussed by us as a national Parliament. One profession does not have the right of veto or the prerogative of deciding what should happen with regard to law reform. That is a matter for a democratically elected chamber.

Not at the moment. The law on corroboration has been debated for the past three years, and at no point has anyone identified another system operating a general rule for corroboration. Indeed, we can positively rule out all the most directly comparable jurisdictions in that regard, particularly common law systems and those of all 47 signatories of the European convention on human rights. The requirement for corroboration is regularly invoked as guarding against miscarriages of justice, but Lord Carloway could find no evidence to suggest that it does anything of the sort. Instead, he found evidence in the other direction—specifically, that it prevents our courts from hearing cases that in other jurisdictions would be tried. I remind members of Kevin Stewart’s intervention in relation to particular cases, 95 of which—that is, 67 per cent—would have had a reasonable prospect of conviction without the corroboration test. To put it simply, the requirement for corroboration has failed Scotland; it was formulated in a different age before the introduction of DNA or closed-circuit television, for example—times have changed. Lord Carloway was asked to undertake a root-and-branch review. His review was logical and thorough, and it found that, from first suspicion to final appeal, corroboration in our legal system is a barrier to justice being obtained for the victims of crimes committed in private or when no one else was there. Abolition is not and can never be a panacea for resolving the well-known problems in addressing sexual crime.

Sorry, but I am running short of time. At the very least, the abolition of the requirement for corroboration will allow crimes committed in private, where the complainant has suffered in silence or behind closed doors, to be brought to court. That can only be a step forward. I stress that the bill seeks to remove the general requirement for corroboration but not the concept of corroboration. Police and prosecutors will continue to seek the best evidence available and corroborative evidence will remain important. I welcome the recent publication by the Crown of its new prosecutorial test to be used following abolition of the requirement for corroboration. The test is two-pronged: first, an evidential test looking at the quantity and quality of the evidence, including an assessment of admissibility, credibility and reliability; and, secondly, a public interest test that is rigorous and which will no doubt be considered by the Justice Committee. Removing the requirement for corroboration will mean that cases will be assessed on the overall quality of evidence. The burden of proof will remain because each case will be required to meet the high standard of being proven beyond reasonable doubt. The jury majority will be raised to a two-thirds majority for conviction, a position that is supported by the senators of the College of Justice. As I said earlier, I am open to hearing further suggestions on additional safeguards. Having identified this barrier for vulnerable victims in accessing justice, we must now act and abolish the requirement for corroboration. In a modern society, it is simply not acceptable for victims to be left to suffer in silence and for justice not to be delivered. I remain open to constructive debate on how best to achieve this reform and on any additional safeguards. I will clearly look with interest at the work of the Justice Committee on the bill. I move amendment S4M-07791.3, to leave out from “the overwhelming opposition” to end and insert: “that the proposal is based on the thorough and independent review of Scots criminal law and practice undertaken by Lord Carloway, the Lord Justice Clerk; accepts Lord Carloway’s conclusion that the general requirement for corroborated evidence in criminal cases is an archaic rule that has no place in a modern legal system; notes the support of Police Scotland, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, Rape Crisis Scotland, Victim Support Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid; welcomes the consideration of additional safeguards suggested by the Senators of the College of Justice in their response to the Scottish Government’s consultation; notes that the Scottish Government is open to considering additional safeguards necessary to ensure fairness of proceedings as the Parliament deems fit; respects the process of parliamentary scrutiny of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, on which the Justice Committee has begun evidence-taking, and looks forward to completion of that scrutiny process in the normal way.”

First, let me give Graeme Pearson and those on the Labour benches an absolute assurance. Today’s debate does not follow the normal procedure, as it has been initiated by the Conservatives. Normally, we would have the stage 1 debate after the bill has gone through the committee stage. Ironically, we had the benefit of the Lord Justice Clerk giving evidence yesterday, but the committee members have still to hear from the Lord Advocate, the police and victims groups, so all the evidence will be brought out—I can give Graeme Pearson that assurance. I also reaffirm my position that we are happy to look at any safeguards that may be forthcoming. I was rather staggered by John Lamont’s comment that there was no need for the change. Did he not sit through all the consequences of Cadder, including the emergency legislation that the Parliament was required to pass? The situation changed because of Cadder—the system cannot stay the same. That applies not only to major cases but to sexual offences matters, where previously some justice was done. There would have been corroboration in terms of the sexual content if the witness said, “I did have sexual relations with her,” thus providing corroboration. Following Cadder, as we all know, on the advice of their lawyer people now make no comment, so there is no corroboration and justice will not be done. That applies not only to cases at the very top level of magnitude but at a lower level. I was also gobsmacked to hear from the Tories that we should improve corroboration. That was put to the Lord Justice Clerk, and I think that it is fair to say that he was rather gobsmacked. It would also be fair to say that the Lord Justice Clerk has been considering the issue since 2010—

By all means.

I do not see how corroboration can be improved. Despite there being several consultations since 2010, I note that the Tories appear to have inputted not one iota—or, indeed, jot—into those. Doubtless they have just been saving that up and we will hear about it in due course. John Pentland gave a very thoughtful speech. Sometimes, it will be essential to require corroboration, in relation to the issue of forensic science, for example, which can be very difficult—I was dealing with papers last night on that issue. I think that members will find that the Crown Office will give assurances that, regarding issues that have caused great angst in the debate because they involve not a science but an art, there will be a requirement to have additional evidence from another source. As Sandra White correctly pointed out, we are talking about the removal of the general requirement. That will stop the inanities, which Mr Pearson will know of, whereby two forensic scientists are required not to speak to what the autopsy revealed but to confirm, “That is the label,” or, “That is the blood sample that was taken by the nurse.” That goes right through the justice system. It may be that the Tories are saying, “If we can tinker with it, we can accept that,” but I do not know where they will set the tariff when that becomes the fundamental matter—I will be interested to see that. The Tories also seemed to suggest that we could get rid of the test for some offences but not for others. I will be interested to see how that would work in a situation in which someone is charged with rape but the victim dies six months later. Given his extensive experience with the police, Mr Pearson may very well have experienced such cases, where corroboration was deemed not to have been required but was required subsequently. Those who oppose Lord Carloway’s recommendation need to think that through. Equally, we need to recognise the new prosecutorial test, which will be an evidential and quantitative test: is there sufficient evidence that the accused was the perpetrator? Following a qualitative assessment, is the available evidence admissible, credible and reliable? Is there a reasonable prospect of conviction? Even thereafter, the Crown expects there to be a public interest test: is there a public interest in prosecuting the case? Those safeguards will be laid out. I have no doubt that, when the committee hears from the chief constable and the Lord Advocate, they will be able to allay Mr Pentland’s understandable concerns—I think that he is right on that—and confirm that those will be dealt with. It is quite clear from the Crown that we are not talking about a situation in which one witness says that something happened and there is no other evidence at all. That is not the position. What we are talking about is justice. This is not a moot point. In a trial for serious assault or rape—or, indeed, a trial that involves less stressful matters that still cause great angst to the individual who was the recipient—the requirement for corroboration is not a moot point to the individual involved. It is not simply a debate between our learned friends on a point of order or motion, m’ Lord, that the requirement should be removed; it matters to the people involved that justice is delivered.

Absolutely, and that is why we went out to consultation and why we making changes in relation to the verdict, with the support of the judiciary. We are happy to look at other proposals that come from Mr Pearson, Dr Murray or any other member of the Parliament. The issue is not a moot point—it is about access to justice. Each and every elected member in this Parliament will have had people come to their surgeries who did not get justice. We have had to wipe away the tears, give our sympathy and empathise with them. We have had to say, “There was no corroboration so there could be no prosecution—justice was not delivered.” There comes a time, when scientific evidence moves on and when no other country instigates such a rule, that we have to deliver justice to the victims. I stand fully beside Victim Support Scotland, Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and all those others who say that the time has come to get rid of this archaic method.

Will the member take an intervention?

The Scottish Court Service commitment was to establish a videolink in the vicinity of the town where a sheriff court would be closing. The SCS is introducing that in phased stages and plans are well advanced for those closing in November 2013, with potential sites identified and evaluation work under way.

Mr Gray will be aware that Haddington court is not due to close until January 2015. Clearly, for the courts that are closing before then, work is on-going. Matters change and times change, as Mr Gray will remember. I have been checking and I note that all out-of-hours emergency child protection orders for Lothian and Borders, including cases in the jurisdiction of Haddington sheriff court, are actually dealt with in Edinburgh sheriff court. That arrangement has worked well since 1999. I know that at that stage Mr Gray was not the elected representative for East Lothian, but I recall that he served as a justice secretary for the then Scottish Executive, so he would have been aware of the arrangement that I have described. Therefore, it seems to me that Mr Gray is being rather hypocritical. When steps were taken to protect children when he was in office he made no criticism, but when steps are taken to progress justice overall, as we face tightening budgets from south of the border and the Scottish Court Service protects the integrity of the system, Mr Gray is critical.

Absolutely. I have every confidence in the Scottish Court Service taking forward those plans and working with stakeholders. The SCS intends to address the needs of vulnerable witnesses as a priority and will build on the platform of this provision to examine opportunities to extend the use of video technology within the terms of current and future legislation and to apply it to other types of procedure and hearings, including family hearings. I can give Mr Campbell the commitment that the matter is being taken forward for the particular community in which he lives. However, it is also the case that the Scottish Court Service, in conjunction with the judiciary, is seeking to extend video technology as much as possible in order to make justice better and simpler and to provide protection, especially for vulnerable witnesses.

That is an interesting thought. It would not be a matter for my domain, because ultimately it is one for the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service. However, Mr Scott’s suggestion is an appropriate one, and courts have always had the ability to be mobile. For example, as a defence agent, I have in the past taken evidence in people’s houses and attended at people’s hospital beds when sheriffs took evidence there. Therefore, such mobility is available when there is a clear need for it because individuals are unable to attend court, as Mr Scott will have seen even on television when locus visits are carried out. We already have, I think, a system that allows the flexibility to ensure that certain matters can be dealt with. However, I am happy to feed Mr Scott’s suggestion back to the Lord President when I meet him later this week. I am sure that he will take it on board, because he understands the requirement for people to have access to justice.

The work on technology is on-going. As I mentioned to Mr Campbell, it relates not simply to the courts that are due for closure, but to the making justice work programme across the judicial sector in Scotland. These matters are not an either/or; they are not mutually contradictory. I understand that the Scottish Court Service has already had bilateral discussions with Scottish Borders Council and that a remit for a feasibility study has been agreed between the Court Service, the council and justice organisations to assess the most efficient, effective and economically advantageous method of future provision of an integrated justice service for the Borders. The feasibility study group has met and is taking forward wider engagement with Victim Support Scotland, Scottish Women’s Aid and other such organisations.

Police Scotland is committed to partnership working on road safety issues. It has established the trunk roads unit, supported by 14 divisional road traffic units, to ensure that there is national co-ordination of local delivery of roads policing. Within Mr Macdonald’s area, it is for Chief Superintendent Mark McLaren, as the local commander, to work with local partners to shape and deliver road safety engagement. I understand that there has been direct engagement with pupils to support safety on the roads at Markethill primary school in Inverurie and at Fochabers school, and the police are working with Moray Housing Partnership in response to road safety concerns. In addition, Police Scotland is engaged in the safe drive, stay alive campaign, the A947 study group and the be a better biker courses, and it runs a number of car-seat clinics at a variety of locations across the area to provide better advice and guidance to parents.

I do not think that it would be appropriate for me to comment for the police. If Mr Macdonald has a particular question, he will no doubt put it to Mr Murray, who is head of the road policing unit. However, it is appropriate to point out that road safety is taken very seriously not just by the police but by the Government. In addition, section 39 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 places a statutory duty on local authorities to promote road safety, undertake studies of road accidents and take steps to both reduce and prevent accidents. As a former transport minister, Mr Macdonald will be aware of that, and doubtless he will have taken it on board as a former justice spokesman. Under the 1988 act, primary responsibility lies with the local authority but, as I mentioned, the police are doing everything that they can to work with others because everybody has a responsibility to keep people safe on the roads. The statutory responsibility for education rests with the local authority, and the police have statutory duties as part of the powers of the office of constable. I am sure that, together, they will help to make Scotland’s roads safer still.

Having spoken to Steve House, I think that people should listen to what he says and not necessarily what he is reported or alleged to have said. The position here goes back to the point that I made to Mr Macdonald. There is an issue. We face problems in a variety of areas. It is not the case that there are problems only in rural areas, but there are particular problems in rural areas of Aberdeenshire, Fife and the south-west of Scotland with young men, in particular, losing their lives. We have seen tragedies, and we have to educate those in schools and who go on the roads to avoid further needless deaths. That is a responsibility for each and every one of us. The police have looked at this matter, and it is quite clear that the statutory duty rests with the local authorities—I know that from experience here in the city of Edinburgh, having been with the local authority, the education department and teachers and having been present when local police officers have come in. The issue is how we work together. Each has a particular role to play; we can and must make Scotland’s roads safer but we need to work together on the issue. Equally, there are certain issues with regard to taking action on the roads over which only the police, through the office of constable, have powers and there are other issues under the Road Traffic Act 1988 for which, as transport ministers and justice ministers know, responsibility rests with the local authority.

Following the success of the assault injury surveillance model in Lanarkshire, the Scottish Government has recognised that the programme could be very valuable to both NHS Scotland and Police Scotland. We are working with a range of partners under the building safer communities programme to reduce harm to communities and to roll the programme out. In short, a project is under way that includes a national assault injury surveillance programme.

I am grateful to Mr Maxwell for raising the issue and acknowledge his long-standing commitment to it. Although there have been problems with data sharing, they are being overcome and, in partnership with the violence reduction unit, we are now seeking to roll the project out nationally. I am grateful for the Lanarkshire pilot and Mr Maxwell’s support and endeavour in driving the issue forward. I assure him that we are seeking to build on that commitment.

I meet the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service regularly. The last formal meeting was on 26 March, when I was given an update on SCS plans.

I read Mr McNeil’s press release prior to his question and can only indicate the following response: 89 per cent of the value of sheriff court fines imposed between 1 April 2009 and 31 March 2012 has been paid or is on track to be paid. This Government, through the Court Service is delivering. Changes have been made to improve the system that we inherited from our predecessors—for example, by allowing earnings to be arrested and people’s caravans, cars and so on to be taken—and fine enforcement officers are delivering. Much more could be done on, for example, court closures and enforcement if the Court Service had access to funds and was not facing cuts from the coalition Government south of the border, and I find it surprising that Mr McNeil prefers a system in which many of these fines, amounting to millions of pounds, routinely go to the Treasury in London instead of being available for justice here in Scotland. Perhaps the member should consider that.

I am aware of weekend reports of a dog attack on an eight-year-old girl in Dundee. The local constituency MSP, Shona Robison, has already raised the matter with me and I appreciate the concerns that have been raised. I am sure that the Parliament’s sympathies go to the girl and her family as she recovers from her ordeal. There is obviously an on-going police investigation. More generally, we are clear that owning a dog brings certain responsibilities, and irresponsible dog owners who allow their dogs to be out of control should be subject to appropriate controls and sanctions. That is why, in 2010, the Parliament extended the criminal law so that a dog could not be dangerously out of control in either a public or a private place. The extension to include private places means that an owner must be responsible for their dog at all times and in all places. The Parliament also gave local authorities new powers to require the microchipping of out-of-control dogs through the creation of the dog control notice regime for use by officers who are authorised by local authorities. More recently, I attended the Justice Committee last week to seek its approval for increased penalties to be available to our courts when they deal with cases involving dangerously out-of-control dogs.

No. What we seek to do is to build on the 2010 act. Indeed, those south of the border are currently seeking to do that. I pay tribute to Christine Grahame, who was instrumental in bringing the act in. We realise that changes have to be made because of court decisions down south, and that is being addressed. As I said, I appeared at the Justice Committee to support the legislative consent motion so that we can ensure that the actions and character of the owner are taken into account as well as dealing with matters relating to guide dogs and assistance dogs, where additional measures are clearly required. We have a good basis in the 2010 act, and that is recognised by those south of the border who now seek to replicate it, but we have to be ever vigilant. With regard to the particular matters relating to Dundee and Angus, it is for local authorities to decide to whom to issue a dog control notice. Having been involved in the debate when the bill went through the Parliament, I am conscious that it is a question of deed, not breed and that the overwhelming majority of dog owners are responsible. It is the minority that are irresponsible who have to be targeted and dealt with.

The member was not in the Parliament in 2010, but the whole purpose of the dog control notice is so that a council can decide whether to insist on microchipping, muzzling or a variety of other measures. This is a matter on which we have to encourage local authorities. If Ms Marra is unhappy with the attitudes and actions of the local authorities, she should raise the matter with them. I believe that we have a sound basis in law that we are seeking to build on, and indeed it is an approach that is being followed south of the border.

The purpose of my appearing at the Justice Committee was to move support for the LCM to ensure that, with the changes that are being made south of the border, which replicate our 2010 act, matters that are not currently provided for in Scotland—particularly the point that Dennis Robertson made about assistance dogs—will be covered. It is entirely unacceptable that these dogs should be subject to attacks. We have to ensure that the legislation provides for that, and I assure the member that we have sought to include the matter. The timescale is now, to some extent, subject to matters south of the border, but I will be happy to keep him advised as matters progress.

I am always happy to take members’ comments on board. We have been working closely across the Government—my colleague Paul Wheelhouse responded to last week’s debate. I think that we can say that it is a minority of dog owners who allow their dogs to behave in the manner that has been described. The maxim in the 2010 act was deed, not breed. I am sad to say that sometimes the issue is not the animal but the owner. To some extent, that is a matter not for legislation with regard to animals but for action against individuals. I am more than happy to engage with Ms Milne on the matter.

We seek to work with local authority partners, given that they must deal on the front line with many of the matters that we are considering. I meet the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities regularly, and when I next do so I will be more than happy to take on board the positions of Ms Marra and Ms Grahame and point out to Harry McGuigan and others who deal with community safety that there is some dissatisfaction in the Parliament—although not necessarily among Government ministers. I am also more than happy to take on board the views of Ms Grahame and Ms Milne on how we further publicise the 2010 act. We are talking about a small minority, but there have been incidents, as Ms Marra said, which are tragic and can have fatal consequences. It is therefore appropriate that everyone, at every level, should do everything that they can do. I think that we have a sufficient legislative base. That base is being built on, and we need to ensure that the theory behind the legislation is implemented in practice.

I met the chief constable on Monday, when we both spoke at the Alcohol Focus Scotland national licensing conference in Glasgow. However, the last formal meeting was on 22 August, when we discussed a number of issues relating to the policing of Scotland.

I do not have that information. As Mr Martin will know from previous discussions, the number varies on a weekly if not daily basis. However, these matters are monitored by the police. I will ensure that full and detailed information is sent to Mr Martin.

The assessment of court capacity was made by the Scottish Court Service, which is now an independent body corporate under the leadership of the Lord President. The SCS consulted on a range of proposals to use its estate more efficiently. Proposals to close courts required the approval of ministers and were considered by the Justice Committee. The sheriff courts that have been scheduled for closure account for only 5 per cent of the overall business in sheriff courts, and the Scottish Court Service is satisfied that the business can be readily accommodated in the receiving courts for all those courts that are being closed. The SCS has assured me that it has done a thorough review of business trends. The service and the Lord President are confident that the court closure programme will provide a court structure that is fit for the 21st century and which supports the reforms that are being done now and those that are planned for the future.

Those matters have been fully factored in by the Scottish Court Service. When the Lord President appeared before the Justice Committee, he made that clear in his answers. On the transfer of business from Stonehaven to Aberdeen, it might be useful if I reminded Mr Johnstone of the business at Stonehaven. In 2011-12, there were four jury trials; 11 civil ordinary actions in which a debate on legal matters proceeded or evidence was heard; and two summary cause or small claims proofs. There is capacity at Aberdeen, and the Scottish Court Service has considered its approach on that basis and in the face of the unprecedented budget cuts that are being forced on the Scottish Government and which impact on the Scottish Court Service. Efficiency is required and action must be taken, and the Scottish Court Service is satisfied that, notwithstanding the financial constraints, Aberdeen and Forfar will be able to cope.

No.

I assure Margo MacDonald that the Scottish Court Service discusses such matters with Police Scotland. Trials are scheduled, and the officers’ availability is factored in, so matters are being dealt with in that respect. I am certainly not aware of any concerns about the morale of officers in Lothian and Borders. I meet officers on a regular basis—not only the local inspectors but any officers whom I happen to bump into—and I will raise the issue with the Scottish Police Federation, with which I am meeting tomorrow. It seems to me that morale in Police Scotland so far is remarkably high.

That is an operational matter for the chief constable of Police Scotland, who has confirmed that he is committed to improving road safety and reducing road casualties. It is one of the force’s top five priorities, and more emphasis than ever before is being placed on pursuing that aim throughout Scotland.

The transport minister and I discuss those matters regularly, and we recently met the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents. I am aware of the concern among Edinburgh’s cycling community. In my capacity as justice secretary, I met people who had recently lost a loved one in a high-profile incident in the city, and another constituent who had lost a relative in an incident that happened outwith Edinburgh. I am aware of the huge grief and trauma that is caused. I know that my colleague Keith Brown views the issue as significant, and he and I—together or individually—will doubtless discuss it with the chief constable and with Superintendent Murray, who is in charge of the road policing unit, which has primary responsibility for the matter. I assure Kezia Dugdale that the Government and the police acknowledge the tragedies that have happened. Work must be undertaken, and it is already on-going.

It would be inappropriate for me to give advice on sentencing until the sentencing council is up and running. The decision is entirely for the court to take. As Sarah Boyack will be aware, there is an on-going case—which is sub judice—in which an appeal was heard by the Crown because it was felt that a sentence was unduly lenient. I fully support the Crown and endorse its actions in that regard, and the court will deliberate and make a decision in that case shortly.

The issue is an operational matter for the chief constable of the Police Service of Scotland. The Government is committed to protecting and supporting front-line services: 1,000 more officers have been recruited, recorded crime is at a 39-year low, and crimes of handling an offensive weapon are at a 27-year low and have been reduced by 60 per cent since 2006-07. The new 101 telephone number is operational for the reporting of non-emergency incidents and, of course, 999 remains available for serious incidents and emergencies. Contact can also be made through email, social media and call points.

Our priority is maintaining the 1,000 additional officers and continuing the outstanding record of a 39-year low in recorded crime. I think that Mr Smith forgets that the review is looking at the level of public service that occurs at police offices, and not necessarily at closure of police stations. However, that will be a matter for Mr House to consider and will ultimately be a matter for the Scottish Police Authority. In the interim, the Government will continue to provide support to ensure that we have that visible police presence in our communities, thereby making Scotland safer than ever before.

I recognise that Mr Pentland has not been a member of the Justice Committee and is not sighted on justice matters, but those are now matters for the chief constable, who is ultimately held to account by the Scottish Police Authority. If Mr Pentland or the Labour Party wish to change that constitutional structure, Parliament could doubtless review it, but I have no rights or powers over such matters, at present. I believe that Parliament made the right decision in that regard, and I stand by that. Mr Pentland may care to raise the issue with the Scottish Police Authority.

Recent events and emergencies, ranging from the London Olympics to abnormally severe weather, have shown that the Scottish Government’s arrangements for dealing with emergencies remain sound. However, we continue to keep them under constant review and to refine them when lessons are identified, either during exercises or during real emergencies.

Civil emergencies cover a broad spectrum. The Government does not maintain a central list of companies that are based in Scotland and involved in research into the development and manufacture of armaments, and neither do the enterprise agencies. It is clear that the Government—and the Scottish National Party, as Mr Finnie knows—has a view on the sale of armaments. However, some of the issues can become quite complex. Certain technologies are developed through the military that have civilian and police benefits. That does not apply only to the internet. For example, the automatic number plate recognition system started out as a military development, but is now used to a great extent by the police and has been very well received by them. Such things are a matter of balance. There are political issues involving areas of conflict in which we would not support armament sales, but it is equally clear that certain developments by the military such as the internet and the ANPR system bring significant benefits for society and for civilian policing.

I have no doubt that my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will be happy to do that. The Scottish Government activated the Bellwin scheme following the severe snow storms in March. The claim that Dumfries and Galloway Council submitted was considered fully but deemed to be ineligible as it fell within the 0.2 per cent threshold that local authorities maintain in their annual budgets to deal with unforeseen emergencies. I appreciate that the extreme weather had a financial impact in the area, and additional support is being provided. For example, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and Environment announced last week that more than £730,000 in fallen stock payments has now reached the bank accounts of more than 4,000 farmers throughout Scotland. More than half of those funds have gone to farmers in south-west Scotland. We are happy to consider further assistance through existing available funding streams if an application meets the criteria.

The Scottish Government is committed to helping to create a fairer and safer Scotland for all our people. We will continue our distinctive and highly effective approach to justice, which is focused on doing the right thing for the people of Scotland and putting their interests and, as members have mentioned, values first. That approach has for example led to our policy of ensuring that we have 1,000 extra police officers keeping our communities safe—a matter that was again confirmed today. That policy is bearing fruit and the results are clear. As the First Minister mentioned, recorded crime is at a 39-year low. Further, knife crime is down by 60 per cent since we took office in 2007 and violent crime is down by one fifth in the past year alone and by nearly half since we came to office. All that is in a climate in which Westminster budget cuts continue to create massive financial challenges across the justice sector, as is the case in every sector. However, we are focused on continuing to make Scotland’s communities safer, which is why we have today announced the end of automatic early release for dangerous prisoners. Automatic early release was introduced by the then UK Conservative Government in 1993. It remained unaltered throughout the period of devolved Labour and Liberal Democrat coalition Government, and this SNP Administration will end it. We are taking action to make Scotland safer.

We are making it clear that the measure will apply to dangerous prisoners who would cause harm, which obviously includes those who perpetrate violent offences. Clearly, the period is 10 years, which would encapsulate offences such as culpable homicide and other serious matters. As a matter of interest, given some of the points that Mr Brown made earlier, I do not know whether he knows that 10 years is the period that was introduced south of the border under the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012. Chris Grayling has effected that and set that date. We are targeting serious, dangerous offenders who would cause harm in our communities. It is essential that we ensure that we have the power to keep them in for the period that is necessary for their sentences and allow them to be released only if the body that is charged with looking after the interests of the public—namely, the Parole Board for Scotland—is satisfied.

As the First Minister kindly helped me out by saying, the proposal also relates to those who commit a sexual offence because we realise the consequences of such offences. For them, the tariff is set at four years. Given that Mr Brown and his colleagues have been calling for the abolition of automatic early release, I hope that they will now welcome the action that the Government is taking. We will address automatic early release for dangerous offenders, such as violent offenders who are sentenced to 10 years or more and sexual offenders who are sentenced to four years or more in prison. The Parole Board for Scotland will be empowered to consider risks to the public for those prisoners. If a prisoner poses an unacceptable risk to the public, that prisoner will stay in prison and serve their entire sentence. We will introduce amendments to our Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. If they are approved by Parliament—I hope they will be approved unanimously—that will provide the protection that the public seek and to which they are entitled. Parliament is already considering important reforms through the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, including corroborated evidence no longer routinely being required. The Lord Justice Clerk has said that quality, not quantity, of evidence is necessary. We are clear that strong cases—cases that could be taken forward under other countries’ systems—should not be denied a hearing under our system because of the requirement for corroboration.

We have taken on board the understandable concerns that some people have, which is why we are increasing the majority that is necessary for a guilty verdict and why we are taking on board views that we received when we asked for safeguards for the recommendations given by our most senior judges. However, the reform is also about providing a voice for those who have suffered in silence—often vulnerable men, women and children who have experienced abuse behind closed doors, where there are no eyewitnesses. In addition to the existing bills, three new justice bills will be introduced in the year ahead. That builds upon what we are already doing in the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, as Ms Grahame will know. Our courts reform bill will take forward the recommendations of Scotland’s most senior judge, Lord Gill, who was appointed by my predecessors to make recommendations to help to improve the public’s access to justice and to provide a court system fit for the 21st century. The damages bill and licensing bill will also improve matters in those areas and provide necessary changes. We will also have a conclusion of contracts bill, which will be a candidate for the new parliamentary procedures. Those bills will make Scotland safer and stronger. We have delivered record police numbers and a 39-year low in recorded crime. We are now ending what the public have regarded as an injustice for far too long: automatic early release.

The Scottish Government’s policy is that convicted prisoners should not be able to vote while they are in prison. As the member is aware, that is the approach that has been taken in the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill for the referendum on independence. The franchise for elections is currently reserved.

No. We have made it quite clear that elections are currently reserved to the United Kingdom, and we seek to vary that. We recognise the Scoppola judgment in May 2012. Equally, we are aware that the Supreme Court is currently hearing two cases on whether European Union law gives convicted prisoners the right to vote in local, national and, indeed, European Parliament elections. We await the outcome with interest. Any future independent Parliament would require to comply with ECHR in terms of legislation and its interpretation. That will be a matter for a future Scottish Parliament.

Licensing is a local matter. It is for local licensing authorities to look at the facts of individual applications and make decisions in light of local priorities and circumstances. The Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 makes it clear that any conditions attached to a licence shall be reasonable.

It is right that local licensing authorities should protect their communities by ensuring that funfairs are operated safely and cause minimal nuisance. It is correct that such matters should be set and dealt with locally, but the approach should be proportionate and there should not be measures that are perhaps unnecessary. It might be best for the member to speak initially to the clerk of the relevant council committee and perhaps the local divisional commander because, from the briefing that I have, it appears that there might be room for discussion on what is necessary. Ultimately, such matters should be dealt with locally, although there should be an element of proportionality and, indeed, common sense.

The new single police service provides an opportunity to adopt a national strategic approach while recognising local circumstances. At the heart of that is a focus on keeping people safe and meeting the priorities of local communities. That commitment is shaped and delivered through engagement with partners and local people and is subject to scrutiny by local representatives to ensure that Police Scotland adopts the right approach to address the priority issues in each local community. The police have always taken enforcement action, working with partners in local authorities and other agencies, against those who are involved in criminality. Recent actions do not reflect a change in emphasis or approach; they demonstrate a cohesive response to eradicating criminality and protecting communities across Scotland.

I think that everyone, certainly in the east of Scotland, is aware that there have been fewer deaths in relation to prostitution. It would be inappropriate for me to comment on particular recent matters, especially matters that are sub judice and have been dealt with. Suffice it to say that when the police obtain intelligence of criminality, whether that relates to trafficking, sexual exploitation, drugs, money laundering or other matters, it is important that the intelligence is acted on. Having met Assistant Chief Constable Malcolm Graham and Chief Superintendent Ruth Gilfillan, who is in charge of the trafficking unit, I can give the member an assurance that local matters will continue to prevail. There will be matters in relation to which the police quite correctly and understandably act on intelligence.

I welcome that—it is why the committee was established and it is quite appropriate.

I am grateful for the opportunity to open the stage 1 debate on the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill and I thank the Justice Committee and the Health and Sport Committee for their efforts in scrutinising the justice and health elements of the bill at stage 1 and for preparing their comprehensive stage 1 reports. I also record my thanks to the groups and individuals who provided evidence to the committees during stage 1, as well as those who have engaged directly with us during the bill’s development and the parliamentary process to date. The bill’s clear aim is to put the needs of victims and witnesses at the centre of the criminal justice system. It includes proposals that ensure that justice agencies set out clear standards of service for victims and witnesses; that give victims and witnesses a right to access information about their case; that improve the identification of vulnerable witnesses and the support available to them; that introduce a victim surcharge and restitution orders to make offenders contribute to the cost of providing vital support to the victims of crime; and that make various other improvements to the justice system. The bill also contains proposals to establish a national confidential forum that will give adults who were placed in care as children the opportunity to recount their experiences in a confidential and non-judgmental setting to an independent panel. Those proposals sit separately from the justice-related proposals, and I will turn to that part of the bill in due course. The bill’s proposals have not been developed in isolation. In addition to the formal consultation exercise, we have in developing the bill engaged extensively with victim support groups and individual victims. Only this morning, I visited Victim Support Scotland’s national support centre in Hamilton and heard from volunteers and indeed victims about their experiences of interacting with the justice system and the improvements that would have made the process a little easier for them. It is important to note that the bill cannot be seen in isolation. It is integral to our wider making justice work programme, which brings together a wide range of reforms to the structure and processes of the courts, access to justice and tribunals and administrative justice. That programme has been and is being developed with partners across the justice system, including the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, the Scottish Court Service, the Scottish Legal Aid Board and the Police Service of Scotland, and represents the most significant set of reforms to our courts for more than a century. One of the programme’s central objectives is to improve the experience of victims and witnesses, and the bill is a key component of that. I warmly welcome the support of both the Justice Committee and the Health and Sport Committee for the general principles of the bill and their recommendation to the Parliament that they be approved. We recognise that the need for witnesses and victims to be cared for and their care to be improved is a matter that is shared across the political divide. I turn, first, to the Justice Committee’s report. It is clear that although the committee is generally supportive, concerns have been raised in certain areas and requests have been made for further clarification. I will address a few of those issues briefly now and will be interested to hear members’ views during the debate. The use of the word “victim” in the bill has raised concerns that the presumption of innocence of the accused may be compromised; it was pointed out that the term “complainer” is used in other legislation. The report recommended that the term “victim” be defined in the bill. I have made it clear from the start that ensuring that the rights of the accused are not compromised is absolutely critical, and I welcome the committee’s scrutiny of the bill from that important perspective. However, I do not believe that the bill poses any risks to the presumption of innocence. While there is no overarching definition of the term “victim”, the bill provides clarity where necessary in the context of individual sections—for example, by making it clear that the individuals referred to may be victims or alleged victims. I look forward to members’ comments today and, although I am not persuaded that an overarching definition is required, I am happy to consider whether any further clarity may be necessary. If members have such views, I will be happy to meet them for discussion. Another area of concern that was raised by the committee is the proposed right to object to special measures for vulnerable witnesses. The intention behind those provisions was not to complicate proceedings or to undermine the support that is available to vulnerable witnesses, but rather to ensure compatibility with the European convention on human rights, as we are required to do, and to give the court the flexibility and discretion to consider any legitimate concerns that are raised by any party to the proceedings. While we do not expect objections to be lodged or granted very often, there is clearly a possibility that there may be legitimate concerns about the particular special measure to be used. Therefore, we consider that there should be a way of raising objections with the court. I certainly understand the concerns around how the proposals may operate in practice.

We would not have laws in this country that were not compatible with the ECHR, because of the nature of how this Parliament is established. I can assure Mr Chisholm of that. Equally, we wish to ensure that those who may seek to challenge this legislation in respect of the rights of an individual who may be facing a charge are able to be dealt with. We are looking to establish a way to take account of the right of the accused, which may be used very rarely but which would give their agents the opportunity to raise the matter with the court, for the judiciary ultimately to preside. That would not take away from what is clearly intended—and, indeed, delivered—in the bill: that we ensure that vulnerable victims and witnesses have the right to express themselves. I think that I can satisfy the member that no matters will be made worse in terms of children’s hearings. Equally, we will provide an opportunity to build upon the good work that will be done to help vulnerable witnesses, balancing that with a very few cases in which there may be a legitimate right at least to put an objection, ultimately to be considered by the judiciary. As I advised the committee, I will give further consideration to the issue, and I can confirm that my officials have begun discussions with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service.

I do not believe so. I met Scottish Women’s Aid just recently and I believe that, overall, the bill will provide what such agencies clearly desire. However, to ensure compliance—to ensure that we provide a safety net—the issue needs to be dealt with appropriately in a balanced way, which is why we have started discussions. I assure Ms Marra that the discussions will not simply be with the Crown—they will also be with agencies such as Scottish Women’s Aid, to ensure that we reach the right balance. On the proposals in the bill to put a duty on justice organisations to set out standards of service for victims and witnesses, the committee suggested that the standards should be set out in statutory guidance to be approved by the Parliament, along with details of a reporting mechanism. Although it would be possible to set out each individual set of standards in that way, I have been very clear that they must be organisation specific and I am concerned that such an approach would slow down the establishment of the standards. I am satisfied that the organisations will work together—with input from victim support organisations—to create robust sets of standards, without the need for further parliamentary scrutiny. However, as I noted to the committee, I am willing to consider further whether there should be a more formal reporting mechanism to monitor how the standards are working in practice. We will discuss that with our justice partners. I was pleased to note the committee’s view that a compelling case has not been made with regard to the establishment of a victims’ commissioner. I share that view, along with several victim support organisations, including Victim Support Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid. Given the excellent work that is being done by our victim support organisations in Scotland, I continue to believe that the establishment of such a post would simply be a duplication of effort and an extra layer of bureaucracy, and that our limited resources would be better used in directly helping victims of crime. On the provision in the bill for the establishment and operation of the national confidential forum, again I thank the Health and Sport Committee for its careful and thoughtful scrutiny during stage 1. I also thank the witnesses who provided evidence, in particular former residents of childcare institutions who have shown great fortitude in coming forward to share their views. We have listened with great care and attention to those views, which will help to ensure that the national confidential forum makes a real difference to the lives of people who were placed in institutional care as children by helping to improve their health and wellbeing and contributing to the improvement of provision and support to looked-after children. I am delighted that there is widespread support for the establishment of the forum. I am also heartened by the recognition of the value of acknowledgement to people who were placed in institutional care as children, in particular survivors of abuse and neglect. Those survivors have been asking for their experiences to be heard and acknowledged for many years and we are responding. In 2010, we established the time to be heard pilot forum for people who were placed in Quarriers village as children. The pilot forum, which operated for only a matter of months, was attended by nearly 100 former residents of Quarriers. The independent evaluation of the experience showed clearly that it was of positive value and benefit to the people who took part and that they felt heard and believed. It is our intention, with the bill, to extend that opportunity to all the people who were placed in institutional care as children in Scotland. The experience of time to be heard clearly demonstrates that acknowledgement is of value and that it is most certainly not a second-class option. The experience also shows that the benefits to people of acknowledgement are not contingent on access to justice remedies. For some people, justice remedies hold little appeal, but safe, supported, confidential acknowledgement does. It was the Scottish Government that approached the Scottish Human Rights Commission in 2009 to develop a human rights framework to inform the development of what has become the national confidential forum. That approach, in turn, led to the interaction process, which was mentioned by several stakeholders who gave evidence. The Scottish Government is participating in the interaction process with an open mind. However, we do not intend to wait for remedies that may arise from the interaction process to take forward the establishment of the national confidential forum.

People should not be denied the opportunity of acknowledgement—they should not be denied that benefit.

I am sorry; I have been asked to wind up. I welcome the wide support to date for both the justice and health elements of the bill. We are happy to discuss and debate the bill, as would be expected, at stage 1 and that option is open to Ms Marra outwith the chamber or at a future date. I thank the Presiding Officer for her indulgence, and I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill.

Will the member give way?

We are firmly committed to tackling the problem of scamming, which often targets the most vulnerable members of our society. Everyone has the right to feel safe in their community and it is unacceptable for people to feel intimidated on their own doorstep or in their own home, as is invariably the case with such crime. The Scottish Government and the Scottish business resilience centre are working on a project that is chaired by Chief Inspector Ronnie Megaughin of Police Scotland. The project will engage with all 32 local authorities across Scotland to ensure consistency of practice, maximum protection for adults who are at risk of financial harm and greater collaborative efforts by all key stakeholders in the public and private sectors. The project will build on the wealth of good work that is under way across Scotland. We all need to work together to prevent scams and to protect the vulnerable.

I welcome the initiative. I am aware—not just as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice but as a constituency member—of the harm and trauma that are caused, especially to the vulnerable, by the often sophisticated scams that are carried out. We fully support the excellent work that Angus Council is doing. It is important that we take on board the important role that trading standards officers and local authorities perform. We are working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on the issue, and I hope that the Angus approach will be integrated. I have been involved in activity on the issue, and I pay tribute to outgoing Assistant Chief Constable Angela Wilson, who raised matters to do with sophisticated scams that we, as an Administration, took on board. We did so in conjunction with Police Scotland and some financial institutions, which, along with trading standards officers and local authorities, have an important role to play. We are talking about sophisticated and deeply hurtful crimes that are perpetrated on the vulnerable. We all have a duty to protect those people, so I am grateful to the member for raising the issue and to his council colleagues for their actions.

Police Scotland is a key partner in all 32 community planning partnerships. Local policing is the bedrock of the new service, and the chief constable has a statutory duty to participate in community planning. That function is delegated to local commanders who, working closely with local partners, are responsible for developing and delivering local policing plans, which contribute directly to the local outcomes that are identified through community planning.

Yet again, we have a tale of two jurisdictions. As with police numbers, which are rising here while they are plummeting south of the border, such matters are dealt with differently. I can give the member an assurance that the values and the ethos to which she refers are not, have not been and will not be in the future the values or the ethos of Police Scotland. I say that on the basis of meetings that I have had with the chief constable earlier this week and a meeting that I had this morning with the police investigations and review commissioner. That view will no doubt be echoed when I meet George Graham, Her Majesty’s inspector of constabulary, and Calum Steele, the general secretary of the Scottish Police Federation. That is not how we treat rough sleepers or those who are homeless in Scotland, whether as a Government or as a police service.

The recommendations in the Scottish Court Service consultation, “Shaping Scotland’s Court Services”, were drawn up in the light of the principles for provision of access to justice that were agreed among the Lord President, the Lord Justice Clerk and the sheriffs principal, which included the principle that the Scottish Court Service should ensure that most people will be able travel to their local court by public transport so as to arrive at the start of the case in which they are concerned and be able to return home by public transport on the same day. That local court should, as a minimum, be able to hear and determine summary criminal cases and lower-value or more straightforward civil matters. The recommendations on future court structures adhere to that principle, and local access to justice in rural areas will thus be safeguarded.

Those were my words in 2002, but the world moves on. I must look at the volume of business at Peebles sheriff court in 2012, when the average number of trials per week was 0.1. In 2012, there were just seven trials at summary level in which evidence was led, and five proofs in which evidence was led. There comes a time when, as we have seen south of the border—we have quotes about this from United Kingdom Government ministers who share the same party affiliation as Mr Hume—things have to be done. I have no doubt that he will make similar complaints about the closure of courts in Alnwick, Cockermouth and Penrith that his party is inflicting south of the border, where courts are being closed to a much greater extent than we are requiring to do here. Our closures are coming about because of the financial cuts that his colleagues down in London have imposed.

Rod Campbell is an outstanding constituency MSP. He has met me and, correctly, put forward the position as he sees it on behalf of his constituents. Equally, I have to take on board the view and position that have been put forward by the Lord President, who is our most senior judge, and his staff, led by the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service. In many instances, people require to go back to their area having been dealt with in a court that is in a different CJA area. That happens routinely—members in Ms Baker’s party will confirm the situation in Glasgow, where people come in from Rutherglen and other places. It is perfectly possible to deal with such situations, not simply through the good offices of the Scottish Court Service but through local authorities and the Association of Directors of Social Work, who are charged with dealing with those aspects.

I am happy to say that tomorrow I will meet Deputy Chief Constable Rose Fitzpatrick, who is in charge of local policing in Scotland. I will be happy to raise that matter with her and get back to Mary Scanlon on it. I do not have the particular briefing to hand but, as I said, I will be happy to ensure that I feed back to Mary Scanlon on the matter.

Absolutely. As well as selective memories, people have myopia when they refuse to look at what is being done south of the border.

The context of the Scottish Court Service’s consultation “Shaping Scotland’s Court Services” is that the network of courts that we have inherited reflects more the social and economic needs of the Victorian age. Many court houses date from those times and the facilities do not always fully meet the standards that are expected of a modern court. Moreover, the Scottish Court Service is not immune to the financial constraints that the Westminster Government has imposed, and it is required to meet challenges as we move to providing a modern system within a reduced budget. Against the backdrop of unprecedented cuts to the Scottish budget from Westminster, the Scottish Court Service is seeking to save £4.5 million from its revenue budget and £6.4 million from its capital budget in the period 2011-12 to 2014-15. I fully understand and sympathise with the challenges that the Lord President is facing. They have been forced on us because we are not in charge of our own financial destiny.

The matter is fundamentally one for the Scottish Court Service. The Parliament unanimously passed the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008 and the Lord President is in charge of the Scottish Court Service, which is separate from Government. However, I see no reason for such a meeting. As I mentioned yesterday at the Justice Committee, I do not believe that the headline figure that was put forward in the forensic report deals with matters appropriately. In Edinburgh, costs will remain the same and will not increase. I have full confidence in the position that has been taken by the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service.

That matter is given the highest regard, not simply by the Government and the Scottish Court Service but particularly by the Crown, which is responsible for the citation of Crown witnesses, and Police Scotland. It has been raised with me both in committee and privately by John Finnie. I am aware of the views and concerns of Ross-shire Women’s Aid. It is right and understandable for it to raise such matters. However, as with the position put forward by the Scottish Court Service, we can give an assurance that the Scottish police and indeed the Crown will take all such matters into account. Such circumstances and challenges are faced everywhere in Scotland, not always simply in rural areas but quite often in the peripheral housing schemes that exist in urban Scotland. They are treated most seriously, and victims and witnesses will be protected and provided for by the Crown and by Police Scotland.

Since the Scottish Court Service took over responsibility in 2008, the overall collection of fines and penalties has improved considerably and is now at consistently high levels. In some cases, people who are finding it difficult to pay their fine can agree an alternative repayment plan with the fines enforcement officers. For people who decide not to pay, enhanced tracing facilities are making it easier to track them down and apply the full range of enforcement actions, including deducting benefits, freezing bank accounts, arresting wages and seizing cars. Sheriff officers are also helping to target persistent defaulters who ignore payment demands. Ultimately, fine defaulters can be brought before the courts to explain why they have not paid and to receive an order of the court.

I am not able to give precise details, but we were communicating with Mr Duncan Smith and his predecessors for some time. I welcome the fact that the information and powers are now available, and these matters will be worked through by the DWP and the Scottish Court Service. Much of the work involves enabling the SCS to obtain access to certain information in order to find out where people are and to access their employment data and national insurance details to find out where they are working. Previously, the SCS was unable to access that information easily. I am happy to brief Alex Johnstone—or to get a briefing for him from the SCS chief executive—on where we are right now. There is work in progress, and Mr Johnstone is right to give Iain Duncan Smith credit as we are grateful for his work with us. We are at the start of a journey, but the SCS welcomes that.

I have a great deal of sympathy with and support for restorative justice, but it is not suitable for some vulnerable witnesses. It is best left to the police and the Crown to exercise their discretion. Neil Findlay makes a valid point, and where restorative justice is appropriate it can benefit both the perpetrator and the victim. However, we must ensure that we leave such matters to the authorities that are charged with that responsibility to discuss with the victim and the perpetrator.

Absolutely. I was gobsmacked yesterday to hear the Labour justice spokesman say that the difficulties and financial challenges that the Scottish Court Service is facing as a result of the cuts, which were ultimately caused by the actions of the coalition Government in Westminster, could all be dealt with through better enforcement of the payment of fines. If only that were the case. The overwhelming majority of fines income in fact goes directly to the Treasury that is imposing those self-same cuts. As with other aspects, people should take a long hard look at the facts and consider whether they have their information right.

That is an operational matter and no discussions have taken place with the chief constable. However, I am aware that Police Scotland is undertaking work to ensure that the contact, command and control division is as effective as possible in looking to provide the best service to communities.

I will be happy to do that when I meet senior officers tomorrow. I can give the member the assurance that I discussed the matter with Unison earlier this week, when Gerry Crawley and other staff representatives came to see me. I am aware of the concerns, but there need to be changes to ensure that we get the appropriate protection for our communities. I think that it is accepted by all that having 10 control rooms is no longer suitable or appropriate, but what the final number will be and where they will be located will be for Police Scotland and union representatives.

My understanding is that the police have participated greatly in those because they see the benefits to the community and many of them live in the communities in which they serve. I think that the member will find that Police Scotland will make no changes there. The police are there to serve and not to operate as a business. That is a matter that we have always made clear in Scotland.

The Scottish Government strongly opposes illegal rendition flights. No representations have been received by the Scottish Government regarding such flights. However, as I said back in 2007, if anyone has any evidence of lawbreaking of this sort, they should come forward with it and help justice to be done. I reiterate that today.

The Scottish Government takes these matters seriously and would not condone any such action in any shape or form. Mr Finnie’s letter has not yet been received by the Crown, but the Crown has made clear how strongly it would view the matter and has asked that any information be made available to it. The police and the Crown can act only if that information is passed on, and that is what we have always sought to do as a Government. When Mr Harvie asked me about rendition on 27 June 2007, I said that we treated the allegations very seriously and that we had stated our opposition to rendition flights, but I made it clear that civil aviation is a reserved matter and is, therefore, the responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. Nevertheless, I stated that criminal matters are the responsibility not simply of the Scottish Government but of law enforcement, in particular the Crown and the police. We asked for information to be provided. Amnesty International met me and I passed on the documentation that it had at that stage to the then Lord Advocate, Dame Elish Angiolini, who fully investigated the matter. However, no proceedings could be taken. I have no doubt that the present Lord Advocate, Frank Mulholland, will give exactly the same assurance in response to the letter that is coming his way from Mr Finnie. We do not support or condone the practice and we would not allow it. However, unless the information is there for our police and prosecutors, there are difficulties with what they can do. Until there is a change in the constitution, civil aviation remains a matter for the United Kingdom Government.

I refute any suggestion that the Scottish police would not and do not take action. If the information were available to them, they certainly would act. In this situation, the information that has been provided is historical and could not have been available to them at the time. If people have information, it should be provided and will be investigated, as it was to the credit of the former Lord Advocate, Dame Elish Angiolini. We do not view the issue simply as a matter of law enforcement. It is for that reason that I met Amnesty International, engaged with it and gave it the assurance that the issue would be fully considered. It is not for the Government to bring prosecutions but, as a Government, we gave the information to the Lord Advocate that was given to us by Amnesty International. Subsequent to that, I have had discussions regarding the issue with a variety of organisations including—because of a personal friendship with Clive Stafford Smith—Reprieve UK. If the information is there and is provided, we will pass it on. I give the assurance that Police Scotland and the Crown will not hesitate to take the appropriate action, but they must have the information to be able to act.

Again, that is a matter for the law officers and the police. I will be happy to pass that on to the Lord Advocate, who awaits Mr Finnie’s letter. He will, no doubt, consider these matters given the reference suggested. The matters that were correctly raised with me by Mr Harvie happened not on the watch of the current coalition Government but when there was a Labour Government in the UK. Going back to the information that was provided to me by Clive Stafford Smith, I think that Jack Straw has a lot to answer for with regard to the complicity in rendition that I understand has been involved in the UK’s alliance with the United States.

I meet the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service regularly. The last formal meeting was on 26 March, when I was given an update on SCS plans. I also met Eric McQueen informally at a courts reform bill event for stakeholders on 30 April.

Yes, I discussed the issue at the recent informal meeting, following the DWP’s indication that it would allow the Scottish Court Service access to information. I have welcomed the DWP decision, as it will allow the Scottish Court Service easier access to details not simply on benefits but—perhaps more importantly—on the national insurance numbers of those who default while they are in employment. That will make it easier for the SCS to discover where those people are, trace them and take the appropriate action, which the SCS welcomes. I do not wish to be grudging about the delay in progress, and I thank the DWP for its decision, which will improve the situation. I assure Duncan McNeil that Mr McQueen and those who work under him, and the fines enforcement officers, will take the appropriate steps to move things on. The imposition of fines on those who have already had imposed on them a penalty that they have not paid is a matter to which judicial independence applies. However, such a factor would be, should be and almost certainly is taken into account by the presiding sheriff.

First, I put on record my thanks and gratitude to Brigadier Monro for his service. He has been an outstanding inspector of prisons, and I would like that to be formally recorded. Obviously, the building of a new justice centre is a matter for the Scottish Court Service to progress. It has a long-term vision for Scotland that includes justice centres, and the areas that have so far been identified for such centres include the Borders, Fife, Lanarkshire and Highland. There is merit in what Dave Thompson suggests—as Brigadier Monro has highlighted—with regard to ensuring that prisons and courts are at least proximate, if not co-located. I am sure that the matter regarding Dingwall that the constituency MSP has raised is of interest to the Scottish Court Service and to the Scottish Prison Service.

The equality impact assessment will be dealt with. The Scottish Court Service is addressing matters, taking into account a variety of factors such as the impact on court users and on those who work there, the cost of transport to alternative venues and the availability of transport. All those issues have been factored in and are mentioned in the documentation that the Scottish Court Service has provided. The Scottish Court Service, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and Victim Support Scotland will ensure that those who have difficulties with or worries or fears about accessing a court are able to access a court, whether such concerns relate to a current court or a future location for a court to which they may have to travel.

I know that the mood in the chamber is more sombre than usual, given events and the debate that has just taken place, but I am grateful that members have agreed to participate in this debate; their comments and thoughts will be important. I am pleased to open the debate on redesigning the community justice system in Scotland. Reoffending is an important issue that affects everyone: it creates victims, damages communities and wastes potential. Audit Scotland has estimated the total social and economic cost of reoffending at approximately £3 billion per annum. That is why it is imperative that the arrangements that are in place to plan, manage and deliver offender services in the community maximise the potential for delivery of positive outcomes for victims, communities and offenders. I commend the hard work of our partners in the statutory and third sectors—including in community justice, health, housing and education—in tackling reoffending over the past five years. I have seen at first hand the excellent work that is being done throughout the country. The new community payback order has been successfully implemented, with 10,228 orders commenced between April 2011 and March 2012. As a result, 934,502 hours of unpaid work or other activity have been undertaken in communities throughout Scotland. The whole-system approach for young people continues to be rolled out throughout Scotland, resulting in a decrease of 32 per cent in recorded crimes and offences committed by young people between 2008-09 and 2011-12. Most recently, we have invested £7.7 million in a national network of mentoring schemes, which are to be provided by partnerships between the third sector and the public sector and will target women offenders and prolific offenders who are at risk of committing more crimes. Reoffending rates are now at their lowest in more than a decade, and recorded crime is at a 37-year low. Although all that is progress in the right direction, a series of recent reports have highlighted shortcomings in community justice and have called—understandably—for urgent action. Those included Audit Scotland’s report, “An overview of Scotland’s criminal justice system”, which was published in September 2011, and the report by the Parliament’s Public Audit Committee, which took evidence on the findings of the Audit Scotland report. Both highlighted concerns about the lack of information on the range, capacity and effectiveness of offender services, as well as about the accountability arrangements for community justice authorities. Although there are many different bodies involved in reducing reoffending, CJAs, which were created by the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Act 2005, are the main bodies responsible for setting the direction and priorities on reducing reoffending in their geographical areas. CJAs are not directly accountable to Scottish ministers or to local authorities, although we monitor how they discharge their statutory functions. Criminal justice social work in local authorities continues to provide offender services including community payback orders and services for offenders leaving prison, as well as commissioning services from the third sector. That set-up has created a confusing picture. Indeed, the effectiveness of those arrangements was questioned in the report of the commission on women offenders—which was chaired by Dame Elish Angiolini—that was published in April 2012. It found that “there still exist inherent barriers in the structural and funding systems for criminal justice social work, and working practices which inhibit greatly the potential to reduce reoffending.” The report stated that CJAs “brought an extra layer of complexity, disproportionate in a jurisdiction of five million people”. It called for “radical reform” and the establishment of a national community justice service to plan, manage and deliver offender services in the community. Most recently, Audit Scotland’s report “Reducing reoffending in Scotland”, which was published in November last year, said on community justice authorities: “The way they were set up has significantly limited their effectiveness”. Audit Scotland called for “stronger leadership at national, regional and local level if reoffending is to be tackled effectively”. In summary, it is evident that the status quo is no longer tenable, which is why on 20 December last year we, as a Government, published a consultation paper that set out options for redesigning the community justice system. Before I get into the detail of the issues involved, I will set out our vision of a successful community justice system. We want a more efficient and effective system with strong and visible leadership at national and local levels, collaborative working across the public and third sectors, and robust accountability. Offender services should be built around people’s needs, based on evidence of what works and what offers best value for money. Local partnership, with the engagement and commitment of non-justice partners including housing, education and health is critical to success. Service users, their families and the wider community should be routinely involved in the planning, delivery and review of services in order to help to improve performance and outcomes. In addition, there should be a strong focus on prevention and early intervention. We are under no illusions that structural change alone will result in transformation of the community justice system; we also need a shift in culture. At the heart of any reforms should be the development and empowerment of practitioners, managers and leaders who work with offenders in the public and third sectors. Unlike the United Kingdom coalition Government, we have no plans to outsource to the private sector the management of offenders in the community. We value highly the professional contribution of our public sector criminal justice social workers and others who work in community justice. We want to use this opportunity to reform the existing arrangements to help to make best use of their skills, knowledge and expertise. Our vision of a reformed community justice system acknowledges the findings of the Christie commission and is consistent with our wider public service reform programme, including the integration of adult health and social care and the review of community planning partnerships. The consultation paper sets out three possible options for reform, which were developed with input from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Directors of Social Work and CJAs. I thank them for their assistance. Option A is an enhanced community justice authority model, in which changes would be made to CJA membership and functions, including widening of their membership to include an appointed member of the health board, and expansion of their statutory functions to include strategic commissioning of services. Option B is a local authority model, in which CJAs would be abolished and local authorities would assume responsibility for the strategic planning, design and delivery of offender services in the community.

Those matters will have to be discussed in detail. The funding formula that we use takes account of the additional pressure that many areas face as a result of social and economic conditions. The detail will have to be sorted out, but it is self-evident that areas that are under the greatest pressure have the greatest needs and will have to be given the most appropriate level of resource to deal with those needs. Option C is a single-service model. CJAs would be abolished and a new national, social work-led service for community justice would be established. The Angiolini commission recommended that approach. The new service would be separate from but would sit alongside the Scottish Prison Service. It would subsume the Risk Management Authority, which is a non-departmental public body. Therefore, option C would not create an additional public body. Any new arrangements will need to be achieved largely through reconfiguration of existing resources—currently £111 million per year. We will undertake detailed financial work on the cost of the different options through liaising with local authorities and CJAs. That work will inform a final decision on the way forward. We recognise that a wide range of professionals, organisations and individuals have an interest in how we take this forward. That is why, as well as publishing the consultation paper, we held 13 consultation events across Scotland to seek views on future arrangements. More than 550 people attended the events, including criminal justice social workers, people from the third sector, CJA officers and conveners, police, prison staff, health workers, addiction workers, local authority staff, housing officials, members of the public and ex-offenders. I have been working constructively with COSLA, ADSW and the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers. I have met third sector representatives to hear their views on weaknesses in the current system and possible solutions. All contributions have been immensely valuable and it is clear that the issue matters greatly to many people. I expect to make in late 2013 an announcement on the way forward. Subject to a suitable legislative vehicle and parliamentary approval, provisional implementation will take place from 2016. This debate provides an opportunity for members to contribute to the discussion. Although progress has been made on tackling reoffending, it is clear that significant areas for improvement remain. We need stronger leadership, clearer accountability arrangements and services that are based on evidence of what works. It is time to be ambitious and to put the needs of victims, communities and offenders and their families at the forefront of our minds, so that we reduce reoffending further and make a positive difference to the lives of the people of Scotland. I do not accept the Labour amendment, but I say to Labour members that it covers many matters that I think we accept, and we will be happy to hear their views and enter into discussions outwith the chamber. At the end of the day, this matter is not ideological or party driven; it is about making our communities safer. I am grateful for the opportunity to move the motion. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges that solid progress has been made in tackling reoffending and commends the work of local community justice practitioners in achieving this; notes the recent reports from Audit Scotland and the Commission on Women Offenders that highlight shortcomings in the community justice system; further notes the publication of the Scottish Government’s consultation document, Redesigning the Community Justice System, and looks forward to an analysis of the responses; agrees that the status quo is untenable, and recognises the importance of continuing to work constructively with COSLA, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and the Association of Directors of Social Work to put in place arrangements that support strong leadership and robust accountability and bring together the public and voluntary sectors to deliver better outcomes for victims, communities and offenders and their families.

Did the member not listen when we said quite clearly that the proposal—whether it is A, B or C—would not come into effect until the spring of 2016? Given that that is the case, CJAs will need to continue operating until then. To suggest that they are dead when we are only in the spring of 2013 is, frankly, fanciful.

On the specific matter of Cupar sheriff court, it may interest the member to know that, when I met David O’Neill of COSLA and I mentioned the proposed closures, he made the point that, as the leader not only of COSLA but of North Ayrshire Council, he has no court in his council area but people there cope quite well and do not miss having a sheriff court. Does Jenny Marra disagree with David O’Neill?

We are committed to maintaining 1,000 additional police officers in Scotland, with the figure of 17,436 officers as at 31 December 2012 surpassing the 1,000 extra officers pledge. That has helped to deliver a 37-year low in recorded crime: violent crime has decreased by 17 per cent in the past year to a 30-year low; the number of recorded crimes of carrying offensive weapons is at an 18-year low; and gun crime is at its lowest level for 34 years, having decreased by 21 per cent in 2011-12.

Stephen House has made his position quite clear: the financial challenges are significant for the police. After all, they come from the coalition Government south of the border imposing huge and swingeing cuts on the Scottish budget. Of course, Ms Dugdale and her colleagues prefer to campaign in the better together campaign with the Tories and Liberal Democrats than to preserve fundamental services such as police. I assure the member that Chief Constable House is confident that we will be able to maintain the police numbers pledge and that the police will continue to do the outstanding job that they have done throughout their existence, as I am certain they will.

Yes. I wrote to the Home Secretary on 11 March about the funding arrangements for the Liberal Democrats’ annual conference in Glasgow this September. This morning, I received a reply from Theresa May, who has declined to meet the full policing costs of the conference. The Police Service of Scotland should not face an additional funding pressure because a national party conference is taking place in Scotland. I do not propose to let the matter rest, and I will be taking it up with the UK Government. That is not how such matters are treated if the conference is in Bournemouth, Brighton or Blackpool, and I think that the council tax payers and citizens of Glasgow are entitled to parity.

Since 2007, the cashback programme has invested more than £50 million from the proceeds of crime throughout Scotland, which has benefited more than 600,000 young people. Young people from communities in Dumfries and Galloway have benefited from more than £1.1 million of that investment, which has provided a broad range of activities for young people as well as new and improved sporting facilities, including a new, state-of-the-art 3G pitch at Annan Athletic Football Club and Dumfries’s first 3G football and rugby pitch, at Dumfries high school, which I had the pleasure of opening last month.

It does show an upward trend, although sometimes the figures can be skewed by particularly large amounts that come in. In 2007-08, the amount was £5.6 million; in 2008-09, it was £6.3 million; in 2009-10, it was £5.5 million; in 2010-11 it was almost £26 million—although one particular matter added to that figure; in 2011-12, it was £10.5 million; and in 2012-13 it was £12.15 million. I pay particular tribute to the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service—the Solicitor General is present in the chamber—and to the Police Service of Scotland. It was a pleasure to attend a briefing from Police Scotland at St Leonards police office this morning, where more than £170,000 of cash was taken from eastern Edinburgh.

We have always taken the view that areas that are significantly impacted, whether by organised crime or by poverty and deprivation, should receive some additional funding. However, the Administration has never taken the view that some people have—not Mr Pearson, but perhaps some of his colleagues, who seem to suggest that some areas should be deliberately excluded. I have been more than happy to attend, for example, the opening of a 3G pitch in Brora. I was told that the crime rate there was one of the lowest in Scotland, but I pointed out what a perverse world we would be living in if a community where children do not misbehave should be precluded from obtaining funds to allow them to improve their life chances. We take such factors into account, and we provide an appropriate balance between those areas that are most affected and others, ensuring that every child in Scotland, no matter what their postcode, should be able to achieve their full potential.

The deployment of officers is a matter for the Police Service of Scotland. Chief Constable House is clear that backfilling will not routinely happen, and indeed it would be counterproductive. As Chief Constable House has repeatedly said, there is no strategy predicated on support staff roles being backfilled by police officers. He and I want as many officers as possible to be on the streets in operational roles.

First of all, let us deal with some of the hypocrisy that comes from Labour. [Interruption.]

Labour supports a single police service in Scotland. Indeed, despite the sedentary comments from Ms Marra, Labour actually supported a single service even before this Government came to that position. The consequence of having a single service has always been that we would not be able to continue having eight chief constables or the duplication in back-office matters that has gone on across not just eight but 10 police organisations. The Government has given a clear view that we are grateful for the service that has been given. We accept that not everybody can be provided with a job, whether as a chief constable or in back-room services such as human resources or anything else. However, we have made sure that there is a voluntary redundancy scheme and that there are no compulsory redundancies. It is about time that Labour recognised that its support for a single service has had consequences. It should be grateful that this Government, unlike the one that it campaigns for with the coalition south of the border, does not impose compulsory redundancies. On matters related to backfilling, maybe Mr Smith should go and meet Chief Constable House so that he can personally reassure him regarding his pledge, his commitment and what is happening on the ground.

The Government has indeed considered the local economy as well as access to justice in relation to the closure of Stonehaven and other sheriff courts. Ministers are aware that there may be a limited economic impact in the area around Stonehaven sheriff court following the relocation of the six Scottish Court Service staff who are currently employed there, the sheriffs themselves and those attending court. However, the proposals will not reduce the overall levels of activity in Scotland’s courts. As those will stay the same, the overall economic impact of the proposals at an all-Scotland level should be broadly neutral. In Stonehaven, the closure of the court will permit all or part of those premises to be put to other uses, which will provide the opportunity to offset, in part or completely, any local reduction in economic activity.

We took on board the FSB’s views, as we do all the time. Equally, as I said in my answer to Richard Baker’s initial question—which he seemed to ignore—there will be a broadly neutral impact across the country because business is being relocated, in this case to Aberdeen. The specific challenges facing Aberdeen were taken on board. However, the low volume of work coming from Stonehaven will not impact adversely on those arrangements. It may be of interest to Mr Baker that the volume that we are talking about comprises one summary criminal case, one ordinary action and two summary causes every day. That is perfectly capable of being accommodated in the larger sheriff court in Aberdeen.

The Scottish Government is currently undertaking a review of voluntary throughcare, as part of phase 2 of its reducing reoffending programme. The review will explore options for improving support for prisoners, in custody and on their release into the community. We know that if throughcare support is to be effective, services and release plans need to be in place beyond the prison gates. That is why, on 11 April, I announced funding of £7.7 million through the reducing reoffending change fund to support the delivery of mentoring support to offenders across Scotland, pre and post-release. Mentors will work with individuals and, if appropriate, their families to help them to make positive choices and to enable them to live their lives free from crime.

In an ideal world that would be the situation. That is what the Scottish Prison Service does. On the first day, there is usually an analysis of the prisoner’s needs and wants. That can vary from just checking them in to dealing with the accommodation that they have left and dealing with problems that they might face in terms of families and pets—the whole gamut—never mind assessing their needs around drugs, alcohol, mental health, dyslexia and a variety of other matters. The member is right to raise this issue. We as a Government are investing in throughcare and seeking to ensure that we have mentoring and we meet people at the gates. The member is right that, although the Scottish Prison Service cannot be responsible for what will ultimately happen outwith the prison, it has—and I think accepts—the responsibility for starting the assessment of people in its care and control. That is a matter that the chief executive of the SPS, Colin McConnell, will prioritise and I am sure that he would be happy to meet the member to discuss it with her.

The member raises an important issue. We know that mentoring is effective in helping offenders to make more positive choices. It is important that a variety of organisations and individuals be involved. Sometimes that will involve a professional prison officer but, equally, sometimes mentoring and support can be provided by ex-offenders. I met Tom Halpin, the chief executive of Sacro, which is developing and dealing with a mentoring service in the community that relates specifically to female offenders. It involves those who have been through the challenges—who have not just talked the talk but walked the walk—which we know is important. Mentoring comes in a variety of shapes and forms. As a Government, we are committed to it and we are investing in it. It is important that all parties be supported, whether through professional or peer support.

Can the member say what businesses were lost in the town of Linlithgow when the court in Linlithgow was closed and moved to Livingston?

It might surprise the member to know that I met both the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents and the Scottish Police Federation today. Chief Superintendent David O’Connor, the chair of the ASPS, is perfectly relaxed about and supportive of the closures. The police do not seem to take the position that is being taken by Mr Macdonald.

I welcome the opportunity to respond to Lewis Macdonald and the Labour motion. First, let us be clear about responsibilities. The Scottish Court Service is an independent body under the leadership of the Lord President, and it is the Scottish Court Service that consulted on a range of proposals to use its estate more efficiently. Some of the proposals are operational matters for the Lord President, including those relating to sheriff and jury centres and the location of the High Court. However, proposals to close courts need the approval of ministers and require to come before Parliament. That takes me on to consultation. As Parliament is aware, last Thursday I announced that I was accepting the recommendations that have been set out in the Scottish Court Service’s response to its consultation. There has been nothing secret about that process. The then Lord President confirmed to the Justice Committee in November 2011 that consideration was being given to the issue of future court structures. The Court Service wrote to inform stakeholders about that work in September and again in December 2011. Further stakeholder engagement took place before the Court Service launched a full consultation in September 2012. That ended in December 2012 and was independently analysed before the Court Service provided its final proposal on 9 April. I am aware that many members will want to make the case for the courts in their own constituencies—I expect no less. It is understandable that they wish to express their concerns—I appreciate that. However, it is worth noting the context in which options for future court structures are being looked at.

As Lewis Macdonald knows, I answered a topical question on an urgent matter from John Lamont, who was looking for my position. I indicated that I would be making the answer clear shortly, and I did that. I took a proportionate and responsible amount of time and dealt with the matter, balancing that with the need and desire of Mr Lamont, who seemed to be asking me to make a decision there and then on Tuesday. That would have been inappropriate, which is why the matter was dealt with later in the week. We are embarking on the most significant changes to the legal system in more than a century, following the recommendations of the review conducted by Lord Gill, the current Lord President, Lord Carloway, and sheriff principal Bowen, and the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. We also face unprecedented cuts in the funding that the Scottish Government receives from Westminster.

No, I do not believe so. Those matters have been factored in quite appropriately by the Scottish Court Service. If Ms Marra has concerns, I suggest that she raises them with the Lord President and Eric McQueen, the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service. As set out by the First Minister in the programme for government, in real terms the capital budget of the Scottish Government today is 30 per cent lower than it was in 2009. In addition, at the recent Labour Party conference, Mr Macdonald accused us of not putting our money where our mouth is because we are not helping witnesses. He listed a number of additional things that he would like to see, including an independent commissioner and case companions. He also told Victim Support Scotland last year that too often victims and witnesses find themselves in the same room as the accused. That just should not happen. What he does not say is that all that needs to be funded from the same declining budgets. Against that backdrop, everyone in the justice system is looking at ways to deliver a justice system that is fair and accessible, cost effective and efficient. Although the reforms will save money, they are not the only driver for change. Other measures include closing underused courts that can sit unused for long periods of time, and closing courts that are no longer fit for purpose. Indeed, many of those reasons are similar to those that the UK Government used when it announced, in 2010, the closure of 93 magistrates courts and 49 county courts across England and Wales. Looking at proposals for changes to court structures, we need to think not only about geography but about what we demand from our justice system in the 21st century.

The residents of Alnwick, Penrith and Whitehaven might not take the same view as Mr Fergusson regarding their geography and central location. Those are challenges that need to be faced, but I am acting on the best advice given to me by our most senior judge and by those who are charged with looking after the interests of the Scottish Court Service. To deal with Labour’s challenges and demands that we make no cuts to legal aid and court buildings, the only thing that we could cut would be the 1,000 extra police officers that this Government has delivered—and that we will not do. The Scottish Government set up the making justice work programme, which brings together all the key agencies and provides a strategic joined-up approach to reform. The programme focuses on creating an efficient and effective justice system that is fair and accessible and improves the experiences of users. Sheriff Principal Bowen’s “Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure” and Lord Gill’s “Report of the Scottish Civil Courts Review” set out the basis for a fundamental change in the way that business is conducted. Their reviews emphasise greater specialisation and a move away from a model in which all types of business are conducted at all court locations. In thinking about the future business of the courts, we must also recognise that recorded crime is at its lowest level since 1975 and is down 25 per cent since 2006-07. Indeed, the number of people convicted in our courts continues to fall—down 19 per cent from its peak in 2006-07. A similar situation applies in our civil courts, where the number of cases last year was 13 per cent lower than the year before. We can all see that the towns in which we live, the places where we work, the way in which we do business and the availability of transport have changed radically since Victorian times. The future that I see in Scotland is one in which justice is not simply based in the physical court building but delivered in a range of ways that are best suited to users of the system, whether they be victims, witnesses or those raising a civil action. Together, we need to think in new and innovative ways about the needs of justice in 21st century Scotland so that we take advantage of opportunities provided by new technology, whether that be by providing video links for conducting court proceedings or by allowing people to raise a civil action online or pay a fine by telephone rather than having to travel to do so. All those are features of work that is under way. Concerns have been raised that victims and witnesses will find it harder to travel if court locations are closed. The Scottish Court Service measured its proposals against the judicial “Principles for provision of Access to Justice”, which were developed in discussion with the Lord President, the Lord Justice Clerk and the sheriff principals. Specifically, the Court Service looked to ensure that most people would be able to travel to their local court by public transport so as to arrive at the start of the case in which they are concerned and be able to return home by public transport on the same day. Those concerns were not taken lightly, but they must also be balanced against the number of people affected. The courts proposed for closure account for only 5 per cent of the total court business. In the majority of cases, the business will be transferred to another court within 20 miles. In addition, it is worth noting that some people in small towns or rural areas may have better travel links to the major centres than to other small towns. I appreciate that there may be some concerns about the effect on local communities. I realise that a court can be regarded as an important element of the community. However, that needs to be balanced against the fact that many similar and larger communities function without a local court. Some of our older court buildings require extensive modernisation and repair to bring them up to the standards that victims, witnesses and jurors expect. In some cases, for example, there is simply not enough room to segregate victims and witnesses. The Scottish Court Service’s proposals will allow it to focus future investment across a smaller group of buildings to ensure that it continues to deliver a quality service. Through the making justice work programme, we are taking action to ensure that victims and witnesses are called to court when necessary and to increase the number of trials that go ahead. To conclude, we cannot deliver better access to justice by avoiding the need for change. It is right that we examine whether the structures that have served us since the 19th century best deliver the expectations of the public in the 21st century. In his foreword to the Scottish Court Service’s response to the consultation, Lord Gill states: “I am confident that the proposals in this Report will contribute significantly to the success of the forthcoming civil justice reforms.” I move amendment S4M-06306.2, to leave out from “regrets” to end and insert: “acknowledges that the recommendations of the Scottish Court Service need to be viewed against the backdrop of unprecedented cuts to the Scottish budget by the UK Government; notes the Scottish Court Service’s belief that the proposals will support a future court structure fit for the 21st century, and recognises that the Justice Committee will scrutinise the recommendations, including the proposals on closures, as part of due parliamentary process”.

Does the member not accept that the principal difficulty faced by fines enforcement officers is the inability to access welfare benefits, which are currently reserved to Westminster, and that the solution would be for us to have that power in Scotland so that we could address these matters as well as not having the iniquity of the bedroom tax foisted upon our poorest and most vulnerable?

The member appears to be implying that any closures would be dreadful and that no courts should close. In Duns, as was pointed out to Mr Lamont the last time we talked about this, the number of trials in which evidence was led in 2012 was 12 and the number of ordinary proofs that proceeded was zero. Is the member suggesting that 12 trials with a limited number of witnesses would cause huge inconvenience, given the likelihood that many of the trials will relate to matters that took place on the A1 and that those charged with offences will not come from Berwickshire?

Is the member not aware that the reason for the closure of the drug court in Fife was the position taken by the sheriff principal, who does not feel that the court system can operate in that way? That is his call alone—it has nothing to do with funding.

I am considering the proposals and recommendations in that report and will make an announcement shortly.

I think that local justice is important. The matter has been given deep consideration by the Scottish Court Service under the leadership of the Lord President, who is our most senior judge. However, we face tough financial times and significant cuts from the Westminster Government. I would have more sympathy for Mr Lamont were it not for the contrast between the position in Scotland and the position south of the border, where 93 magistrates courts and 49 county courts have closed and where the English Borders has seen the closure of the courts at Alnwick, Penrith and Whitehaven. Mr Lamont should read it from that that the Scottish Government and the Scottish Court Service are doing what they can in the face of an austerity budget that has been imposed on us by a London Government that happily closes courts in the English Borders and which has closed significantly more courts south of the border than the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service are considering doing north of the border.

The member makes an important point, because two consultations are under way, but let us remember that more than 94 per cent of all civil cases are already heard in the sheriff courts. Only a small minority of them are heard in our higher courts. Those matters have been fully factored into the Scottish Court Service’s consideration of the situation. Regardless of the position that Mr Lamont may take, cognisance must be taken of the financial pressures that court services north and south of the border face. However, account must also be taken of reducing pressures on the courts. Let us look at the example of Duns sheriff court, where last year the number of summary trials in which evidence was led was 12 and the number of ordinary proofs that proceeded was zero. There comes a time when the Scottish Court Service must not only live within the budget that has been imposed on it as a result of the cuts from Westminster, but take account of the volume of business. Frankly, there comes a time when the reduction in the volume of business is such that consolidation is necessary.

The member makes an important point. The Scottish Court Service and the Government are giving the matter appropriate and significant consideration. Under the making justice work programme, work is nearing completion in the north of Scotland that will result in the introduction of a new, secure, live-link videoconferencing network that will include six northern courts and four other locations. That work, which will be completed next month, will give criminal justice organisations the opportunity to use the technology for some cases. For the benefit of the member, I inform him that the six locations in question are Aberdeen, Elgin, Inverness, Kirkwall, Lerwick and Stornoway.

I have regular discussions with the Scottish Court Service, the Lord President and the chief executive. Those matters have been factored in. It is not simply the case that, as Mr Lamont said, some civil matters that are currently dealt with in the higher courts will go to the sheriff courts. Changes are taking place in where sheriff and jury trials should be conducted and, indeed, in where the High Court should hold trials. Those matters have been factored in and taken account of. We should have greater trust and faith in the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service.

Alison McInnes raises an important point. Clearly, that is a matter that must be factored in. It would be fair to say that the business conducted in Stonehaven is more than that conducted in Duns but, for the record, in 2012 it had 34 trials at summary level in which evidence was led, and four civil proofs. That is perhaps not a number that would be incapable of being soaked up in Aberdeen, where there is greater specialisation. I will reflect on those matters but, as I say, we face significant financial challenges. Those must be dealt with by the Scottish Court Service as they are being dealt with by its counterparts south of the border. Equally, we must recognise that, even though some business is being reallocated, less business is going through our courts. The Scottish Court Service must take that into account, given the complexity and specialisation of the legal world in which we find ourselves.

We appear to be in ascending order. I will give cognisance to Mr Gray’s position on Haddington, as I said I would with regard to John Lamont’s and Alison McInnes’s positions. For the record, in 2012 the number of summary trials on which evidence was led and the trial proceeded was 41. That is not even one trial a week. The number of civil ordinary proofs that proceeded was five, which is more than there are seasons, but only by one. I will take that into account, but we have a position in which many trials that would be scheduled for Haddington go to Edinburgh, including those related to sheriff and jury, and especially those relating to children. However, having heard Jenny Marra, it appears to me that Labour’s position is that no cuts can be made to the court or legal aid budgets and that the only cuts that we should make are those to the number of police officers. I will make it clear at the Scottish Police Federation conference tomorrow that we will not be cutting police officer numbers.

Yes. Those are matters that I will discuss with Cabinet colleagues. The First Minister, who normally stands here, and I grew up in Linlithgow. When I first started practising law—indeed, when I embarked on a legal career—the West Lothian county court was in Linlithgow. I must say that Linlithgow has gone from strength to strength, notwithstanding the quite understandable move to Livingston because that is where the business is—perhaps Mr Gray would take that point into account, given the overwhelming pressure on Haddington sheriff court from business that comes from Tranent, Musselburgh and Prestonpans, where it is easier and quicker in many instances to get to Edinburgh than to the old county town.

The day-to-day management and interaction with all the cashback projects takes place through our delivery team at Inspiring Scotland. However, I regularly meet individual cashback project partners up and down the country. Most recently, I met representatives of Screen Education Edinburgh, which is delivering the £25,000 Xpress yourself film-making project for young people. This afternoon, I will meet representatives of basketballscotland.

I think that the cashback scheme has been highly successful. That is why it is a pleasure to have met people who are involved in arts and drama, such as Screen Education Edinburgh, and in basketball, which is a minority sport that we seek to support—never mind the significant support that we give to the Scottish Football Association for grassroots football and indeed to the Scottish Rugby Union. I look forward to the opening of third generation pitches at Meadowbank and in Dumfries shortly, as a result of the cashback project.

Scottish ministers, the Lord Advocate, Scottish police and legal professionals as well as other devolved Administrations and justice agencies have all raised clear concerns about the UK coalition Government’s handling of the opt-out decision on vital European Union justice and police co-operation measures. UK ministers have indicated that they are minded to opt out of those measures, but have not indicated which measures they might opt back into or what alternative arrangements, if any, will be available to bring cross-border criminals to justice. We have highlighted to UK ministers specific examples of cases in Scotland where the European arrest warrant has ensured that people accused of serious crimes, including murder, who had fled abroad, were brought to justice swiftly and efficiently, and we oppose strongly any decision by UK ministers that puts those arrangements at risk.

I wrote to UK ministers in April, August and November last year to express our strong interest in the opt-out decision; in November I also raised concern about the lack of prior notification of the Home Secretary’s statement about the opt-out on 15 October. In January, I met Home Office minister James Brokenshire to further emphasise our concerns, and officials have requested sight of any analysis that UK officials have prepared about the opt-out’s impact. It is not possible to know what its practical and financial implications might be until UK ministers confirm which measures, if any, they might opt back into and what alternative bilateral arrangements they plan to put in place following an opt-out. I hope that the issue causes as much concern right across the parliamentary chamber as it is causing across the judiciary, those involved in prosecution, those involved in defence and others involved in law enforcement and the judicial system in Scotland.

Decisions on operational policing are clearly a matter for the chief constable, but we have complete faith in our police officers to take necessary and appropriate action to tackle those who break the law. There is a procedure in place, which was introduced by the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration in 2006, that requires an application for permission to march to be submitted to the local authority no later than 28 days before any event. That is intended to ensure that all reasonable steps are taken to protect the interests both of those who wish to march and of members of the public who might be caught up in an unplanned event. In relation to events in Glasgow on Saturday, no such application was received. Strathclyde Police would be happy to brief any elected member on recent events, which may give a more accurate picture of all the circumstances. Full video footage of the event cannot be released at the moment due to its role in criminal proceedings. Again, it will provide a fuller picture of all the circumstances surrounding Saturday’s events. That footage will also be available to elected members at the conclusion of proceedings.

Michael McMahon did the right thing by seeking to speak to a senior police officer in Strathclyde. If he still has concerns, he should raise them with Campbell Corrigan, the chief constable, and if he is not satisfied by that, he can raise them with the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland or, when it moves, the police investigations and review commissioner. We should be clear that the background of Saturday’s events related to public order and the circumstances that we sometimes face in Glasgow with unauthorised marches, whether by the Scottish Defence League or other groups that may be of a sectarian nature. Such marches are required to have the local authority’s view on them. The position that is taken in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006, which was introduced by a Liberal-Labour Administration, of which Mr McMahon was a supporter, is to ensure that local authorities, representing local people, are able to have their views on whether a demonstration would be appropriate or fair. None of the charges that were made on Saturday—which I read about in the paper and which Mr McMahon was doubtless advised of—relates to the 2012 act. They relate to other issues, whether misuse of drugs, breach of the peace, or other public order matters. In these circumstances we should allow Glasgow City Council to decide what demonstrations and marches should be allowed, so that the elected citizens of Glasgow can decide what is fair and appropriate, and what their communities should have to endure.

I repeat that the events on Saturday were not to do with the 2012 act, apart from the fact that some wished to demonstrate against it. They are entitled to do that, but they are required by the legislation that was introduced by the Labour-Liberal Administration to put in an application to Glasgow City Council—or any other council that is asked to host such a march—at least 28 days beforehand and let the council decide. If they do not do that, we have difficulties. An SDL demonstration was also anticipated on Saturday to commemorate the death of young Kriss Donald, which caused great grief to his family. It is perfectly appropriate that elected representatives in Glasgow or elsewhere should be able to decide whether a march is fit and appropriate. If it is fit and appropriate for members of the green brigade to march, they will be allowed to do so, but they will follow the directions and strictures laid down by Glasgow City Council and adhere to the rules and laws that will be enforced and implemented by the police and which, I remind Mr McMahon, were brought in by his party as part of the Liberal and Labour Administration in 2006. It was the right decision then and it is the right decision today. The local authority should be able to decide and the police should be able to monitor. Had the green brigade put in an application, I have no doubt that many of the councillors who have expressed views would have been able to support it and laid down conditions that would have been appropriate for it.

The overwhelming majority of football fans are law abiding and well behaved, and they enjoy the game, behave themselves and do not cause any inconvenience. A minority cause considerable difficulties, and John Mason makes a good point in drawing attention to them. However, I, like others in this chamber, attended a football match on Sunday that was well behaved and a credit to both sets of fans from different sides of the country, and that is how we want to see football enjoyed.

I have every confidence in the police. I recall that Rangers recently played in a game in Berwick that was broadcast live in which sectarian singing was clearly audible, and there were great complaints about that. I am delighted to say that it appears that the police have taken some action, as the 2012 act has extraterritoriality. That has been welcomed. It will be for the courts to decide, so I will not go into any matters further, as they are sub judice. However, we believe that the 2012 act is working well. Some 84 per cent of those who have been dealt with under it have been convicted, and Scottish sport and football are better for it.

The strategy is to work with football authorities, which we do, to prioritise public safety and address any threatening sectarian or other offensive behaviour at football matches. That is why we brought in the act and established the football co-ordination unit for Scotland. We work with football authorities to allow the game to be enjoyed. The game on Sunday was enjoyed by 45,000 people at Hampden, and that is what should happen at football matches. They should be enjoyed without people who are watching on television or who are in the ground or anywhere else having to put up with offensive and threatening sectarian behaviour.

I can only refer Mr Smith to the answers that I gave to Mr McMahon earlier. He took it upon himself to meet representatives of Strathclyde Police. I suggest that Mr Smith liaise with Strathclyde Police. If he is still dissatisfied after that, he has the right, through how matters are dealt with constitutionally and by statute, to raise the matter with the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland.

I regularly meet the Scottish Police Federation to discuss a range of issues, and I will be meeting it tomorrow. The federation has highlighted to me that, due to the Winsor review, officers in England and Wales will see a dramatic reduction in their salaries over their career when compared with their colleagues in Scotland. I have made it clear that the Winsor package of changes to officers’ terms and conditions will not be introduced in Scotland.

We have chosen to recognise that reform is the way to ensure that we maintain the police numbers that have delivered a 37-year low in recorded crime while not undermining or betraying the trust of those who serve as part of the wider police family. Police reform will protect police numbers and the terms and conditions of those who do a difficult and sometimes dangerous job.

The police service of Scotland is being built with local policing at its heart, and local delivery will be tailored to meet the needs of people in all parts of Scotland, including rural communities. There will be a policing plan for every local authority area and a community plan for all Scotland’s 353 multimember wards. The plans are based on widespread discussions with communities and their elected members, who will play a key role in shaping priorities and scrutinising delivery.

Obviously, the protection of the royal family is a matter for the Metropolitan Police Service. However, as the member says, Grampian Police provides additional security when the royal family is at Balmoral, as does Lothian and Borders Police when the royal family is in Edinburgh and Northern Constabulary when they visit the Castle of Mey. The single service offers an opportunity to ensure that forces do not have an undue burden. There have been instances when Grampian Police has felt significant pressure because of events at Balmoral. Equally, there will be efficiency savings in that various officers will be able to move around with the royal family rather than having to hand matters over to others. The royal family will continue to be well served and protected by the officers who will be part of the police service of Scotland. The single service will benefit not only the safety and security of the royal family, but the safety and security of the communities that surround them and that have provided those officers.

I certainly have no plans, but that is not the responsibility of a cabinet secretary for justice, whether me or my predecessors or successors. Such matters are for the Scottish police service, and Jenny Marra should engage with Steve House or Vic Emery on that. They will be here tomorrow, courtesy of the convener of the Justice Committee.

We are always seeking to engage with prisoners, and ensuring that they are engaged in purposeful activity is an appropriate way in which to seek their reform and rehabilitation. However, I support the view that Colin McConnell, the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, expressed when he gave evidence to the Justice Committee recently—during its inquiry into purposeful activity in Scottish prisons—that measuring activity by hours alone does not provide the most effective evidence of achievement. The Scottish Prison Service is already looking at gathering information in a way that shows how purposeful activity contributes to addressing the needs of individual offenders to improve their life chances and helping them to desist from further offending, whatever that purposeful activity may be—whether work or greater support regarding addictions or education.

All convicted prisoners attend a national induction programme and receive information on how to access education services and what courses and qualifications are available to them. A range of courses are available, such as literacy, numeracy, information technology, art, life skills and indeed money management, as well as access to the Open University. Those courses may lead to a number of national qualifications under the Scottish credit qualifications framework and other bodies. During the last academic year, which ended on 31 July 2012, prisoners obtained 4,081 Scottish Qualifications Authority qualifications and almost 1,300 other qualifications. The Prison Service does what it can to work with individuals. Obviously some of these issues require the individuals to show willing, but in my experience, those who show willing are provided with an opportunity to improve themselves.

The member raises a valid point. There are significant differences, as members know, within the prison estate. It is for the Prison Service, in particular for prison governors, to decide on what is appropriate. Clearly the needs and wants of a young offender at Polmont are different from the needs and wants of a female offender at Cornton Vale or of those offenders who are serving longer sentences. The member makes an appropriate point—there is clear divergence. We need to allow the chief executive to carry out his research and to look at what has and will come out of the welcome Justice Committee investigation to ensure that we look at examples of good practice and that good practice can be shared across the prison estate, irrespective of the category of prisoners that are being dealt with. Equally, we need to allow governors to tailor good practice to particular individuals who may face an issue that would be dealt with differently in a different institution.

We recognise that. The Prison Service faces challenges with individuals. One of the difficulties around purposeful activities is the requirement to ensure that we work out the needs and issues facing an individual. As the member will know, that is an argument that the Scottish Prison Service put forward against short sentences, because the time that it takes to work out someone’s individual problems and difficulties is significant and is frequently longer than the period that the individual may be incarcerated for.

Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Prisons inspection report on HMYOI Polmont referred to a number of positive aspects, such as the modern facilities and good conditions, no overcrowding, and the good relations between staff and young offenders. However, the report also identified a number of areas for improvement. The Scottish Prison Service has responded positively to those concerns and, although recognising the challenges, the chief executive has already made clear his intention to drive forward the action that is needed to respond to the report’s recommendations, in particular to fully engage young offenders in custody in order to maximise their potential for positive change. The SPS has already developed an action plan to support the SPS objective of encouraging and supporting young offenders to develop life skills, improve their education and learning and, in particular, develop skills that will improve their employment prospects, reflecting HMCIP’s recommendations.

I do. The member makes a valid point. It is a point that is being viewed seriously by Colin McConnell, the chief executive of the SPS, who is working with Bill Maxwell, the former senior chief inspector of education to see what can be done to tailor the education provision in those institutions. To its credit, the SPS does what it can, but it has to do more and Brigadier Munro has pointed that out. We are dealing with a variety of ages and a great difference in the educational challenges that are faced. That said, more can be done and I would be happy to keep the member apprised of progress on the matter, which is a priority for the SPS.

That work is on-going. It is being taken forward as part of the throughcare and service project in the second phase of the reducing reoffending project. We will have completed an initial audit by August 2013, which will establish how the directory is being used and by whom and what the directory tells us about the availability of services. I am happy to keep the member apprised of the situation. Work is on-going. We would prefer the date of the initial audit to be sooner, but the date of August 2013 at least shows that things are moving with some alacrity to ensure that people can refer to something that tells them what is available and who can get it, and, indeed, allows people to consider whether that resource should perhaps be spread elsewhere.

At the heart of our approach to sentencing policy is the commitment to maintain the independence of Scotland’s judiciary in reaching sentencing decisions relevant to each case. With that context, we are discussing with the Lord President arrangements for establishing, before the end of this parliamentary session, a Scottish sentencing council. Once it is established, the council may wish to consider issues relating to the quality and consistency of sentencing. Once someone receives a custodial sentence from our courts, the Scottish Prison Service works with that prisoner to address their individual risks and needs. That includes seeking to promote changes in the prisoner’s attitude, thinking and behaviour that gave rise to the offending in the first place, so as to reduce the chances of the offender committing further crimes in the future.

The member makes a fair point. As an Administration, we recognise that the biggest challenge is the revolving door whereby a small number of people repeatedly commit offences. That said, reconviction rates are at their lowest levels for 13 years, although we recognise that they remain too high. That is why we are working to introduce the reducing reoffending change fund, which will allocate £10 million between 2012 and 2015, to ensure that we can provide mentoring schemes that are designed to steer offenders away from crime and towards better, more productive lives. Some £1.5 million has already been allocated to schemes across the country to ensure that, for example, offenders are met at the prison gate on their release, can be helped to deal with their alcohol and drug addiction and, I hope, can be prepared for a return to gainful employment.

I welcome the opportunity to respond to Alison McInnes and the Liberal Democrat motion. I am sure that all members recognise that Scottish policing is performing excellently. Crime is at a 37-year low.

We operate on the same basis that was handed down to us by our predecessors. The statistics are there and the 37-year low is something that communities the length and breadth of Scotland welcome. The number of crimes involving handling an offensive weapon is now at its lowest in 18 years. Public confidence is high and rising, and the people of Scotland feel safer in their communities. That situation is supported by the more than 1,000 extra officers that we have delivered in communities since 2007. Reform and the new police service of Scotland will safeguard those hard-won gains and protect policing from Westminster cuts.

As I keep saying, those are operational matters for the chief constable. However, he has made it quite clear in evidence to the Parliament and elsewhere that it is his job to ensure that officers are doing what they are paid to do, preferably in their communities. We have yet to see evidence of backfilling from the chief constable or, indeed, from Her Majesty’s chief inspector of constabulary for Scotland. Let us contrast the situation here with that in England and Wales.

In a minute. Officer numbers in England and Wales are at their lowest for 11 years, the terms and conditions of those who serve are being attacked and morale is at rock bottom. In addition, around £100 million was wasted on elections for police commissioners, which was enough to pay for 3,000 officers. I will give way to Mr Rennie, if he wants to justify that.

The chief constable does not want fresh legislation. I have been speaking to the chief constable regularly and it is quite clear that he is not asking for fresh legislation; he is asking us to work towards 1 April, which is what he is putting his efforts towards. I commend him and, indeed, Vic Emery for that. I am glad to see that Mr Rennie did not seek to dispute any of the figures relating to the collapse of policing south of the border. This Government will not let any of that happen here. We are less than three weeks away from the new police service of Scotland going live. Strong progress has been made and the Scottish Police Authority and the police service are working closely together to ensure a smooth transition. The people of Scotland are understandably proud of community policing and value it, as does this Government. Local policing will remain at the heart of the new service. There is no so-called democratic deficit and there will be new local arrangements that will give more elected members than ever before the chance to have their say on policing in their area. A local commander for each area will work with the council and partners to shape policing in that area. For the first time ever, there will be a local policing plan for every council ward in Scotland. The SPA will, of course, also provide enhanced levels of scrutiny. Reform will also strengthen national policing. For the first time ever, all communities in Scotland will have access to specialist expertise and equipment whenever and wherever it is needed. We have already seen the fruits of that approach. Just last week, I helped to launch the new specialist crime division here in Edinburgh, which is co-ordinated nationally and delivered locally. It will lead the fight against crime, with more than 2,000 detectives and staff working closely together. We have also seen the launch of the new national trunk roads patrol unit and the 101 single non-emergency number. In addition, we published this morning the strategic policing priorities, which set the high-level outcomes that the SPA and the service will work together to deliver. The list of achievements ahead of day 1 goes on, underlining the remarkable progress that has been made since the Parliament approved the legislation last summer. None of that progress has been impeded by the discussions between the SPA and the police service on corporate functions. Our legislation, which was overwhelmingly approved by the Scottish Parliament after being scrutinised by four committees, clearly sets out the roles and responsibilities of the chair and the chief. The 2012 act is clear that the chief constable, although accountable to the SPA, has direction and control of the police service, including constables and police staff. High-level agreement on corporate functions was reached at the SPA board meeting on 18 January. There was further dialogue on the detail and staff designations were agreed at the SPA board meeting last Friday. I am sure that all members will join me in welcoming that agreement. The Government has been fully engaged on the issue from the outset. SPA chair Vic Emery and Chief Constable Stephen House, and the SPA and the police service of Scotland, continue to work closely together as we approach day 1. There will be no millennium moment at midnight on 1 April. The police will continue to provide the same excellent service across Scotland as they are providing today and have provided day in, day out. Strong progress continues to be made. I reject the Liberal Democrat motion and the Labour and Conservative amendments. We have an outstanding police service in Scotland. We require to reform, to ensure that we can deal with the huge cuts that are coming from Westminster and avoid the catastrophe that is playing out south of the border. I move amendment S4M-05899.3, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “welcomes the 1,000 extra officers that the Scottish Government has delivered in communities since 2007, leading to crime at a 37-year low; agrees that the new Police Service of Scotland will safeguard policing from UK Government cuts; notes that the national governance provided by the Scottish Police Authority will be complemented by new local arrangements, providing the opportunity for more locally elected members than ever before to have their say; further agrees that the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012, as overwhelmingly approved by the Parliament, clearly sets out the roles and responsibilities of the Scottish Police Authority and Police Service of Scotland; further welcomes the agreement reached on corporate functions and staff designations and the ongoing joint working to ensure a smooth transition to commencement on 1 April 2013, and recognises that good progress has been made already, including the establishment of the Specialist Crime Division and the new national Trunk Roads Patrol Unit.”

Yvette Cooper criticises the reduction in police officers south of the border and suggests that Labour would cut the number in England and Wales by only 10,000. How many police officers does Mr Macdonald suggest that Labour would cut in Scotland?

I hesitate to be too harsh on Alison McInnes, because I appreciate that she has just been rolled out today to fight the good fight for the Liberal Democrats. She has always been polite and supportive in committee. For the Liberal Democrats, the issue started in 2011, when Tavish Scott said that the most important issue in Scotland was the threat of a single police service. The outcome was that the Liberal Democrats lost 71 per cent of their seats, 51 per cent of their constituency vote and 54 per cent of their regional vote. Under Willie Rennie’s leadership, they continued to protest that the move to a single police force was the most significant issue, and they lost half their vote and half their councillors. That is the position that the Liberal Democrats have taken, and that is the judgment that has been cast upon them by the people of Scotland.

I am just coming on to that. People sometimes seem, in the chamber, to be living in a parallel universe. Mr Pearson made the point that the reduction in crime is a western phenomenon. I agree with him on that, but our 37-year low is significantly better than the position south of the border.

I will not, at the moment. In the opening and closing speeches, I have heard not one word of praise for the police. Mr Pearson gestured towards that in commenting on the police’s work—which is outstanding—but the rest was just, “Woe is us”, because Scotland is apparently in a dreadful position and the country is collapsing. However, we have a 37-year low in recorded crime, we have an 18-year low in the number of crimes involving the carrying of an offensive weapon and we have a record number of police, which Labour would not commit to—Mr Macdonald would not even give us the number to which Labour would reduce the police. That is why I say that there is a parallel universe.

There was not much in that interjection that I was not going to come on to deal with. As I said, we have an outstanding police service—even if the Opposition’s spokespeople are not prepared to praise it.

By all means, I will give way to Ms Goldie. She has been trying.

I will not hesitate, in that case, to comment on the position following plebgate or, indeed, to say that the Tories seem to want not just some police officers to be removed, but even more to be removed. We have an outstanding police service, which we need to maintain while dealing with the challenge of the huge cuts coming from the Tory-Liberal coalition south of the border. Irrespective of whether the UK Government is reducing officer numbers, whether it is implementing a greater reduction in back-office staff than here or whether it is attacking the terms and conditions of those who serve, we will not do so. We will ensure that reform improves and adds to the outstanding service that we have. For the first time, we will have a national police rape investigation unit, so that all of Scotland can deal with that challenge because the skills that we possess in various areas will be available in every area of Scotland. We will be able to deal with matters such as border patrol and border policing when we face difficulties, whether that is at Cairnryan—which must currently be dealt with by Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary, despite its size—or at Glasgow airport for other incidents. We will get improved service. At the same time, we will maintain and increase democratic accountability. I see Mr McArthur sitting on the Liberal Democrat benches; I recall meeting his Orkney Islands Council colleagues who indicated that, under the current system, they have two members on the board of Northern Constabulary. Under the single service, they will have a committee and it will be up to them whether to have a full committee of the council or a committee for those members. They will have greater accountability and scrutiny and they will have their own dedicated divisional commander, who will, at their request, be the current serving officer.

There is significantly greater accountability than was the case with two council members going once a month to Inverness to be entertained by the chief constable. Rod Campbell correctly said that the situation has been unedifying. Vic Emery and Stephen House would acknowledge that some of what has appeared in the newspapers has been unedifying. Let us be clear that the two of them are working hard with those who serve under them to ensure that, when the service goes live on 1 April, the current outstanding service will be maintained. They are individuals of the highest integrity—one is an outstanding police officer and the other has an outstanding record of service in business.

I do not have time. Both of them will put the police service in a better position. I look forward to their appearance tomorrow at the meeting that will be convened by the Justice Committee convener. That shows that, whatever tittle-tattle Opposition members might put forward, Vic Emery and Stephen House are working publicly to deliver an outstanding service. The Government stands up and supports the police service in Scotland, even if no other party in the chamber does.

Mr Rennie probably has not met Mr House recently. I have. It would be best for Mr Rennie to turn up at the meeting tomorrow with Mr House and Mr Emery and listen to what Mr House says. He is clear that he sees no requirement at present for any legislative change, and he is working towards making our police service outstanding.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention now?

The Scottish Court Service’s consultation paper sets out the principles on which access to justice shapes the proposals that are contained in the document. That is provided in appendix A and was set out by the judiciary. The Scottish Court Service is considering its consultation and will take account of those principles in shaping its final recommendations, including any proposals relating to Motherwell, Cumbernauld and Coatbridge justice of the peace courts. Ministers will do likewise in considering the proposals.

Yes. Clearly, the workload of the sheriff courts, if matters are to be transferred from any JP courts, is taken into account by the Scottish Court Service. We require to await its proposals and, when we have them, I will doubtless be able and willing to discuss matters directly with Margaret Mitchell. On her point about the proposals to be encapsulated in the Government’s proposed courts reform bill, they are also matters that could theoretically put pressure on sheriff courts but, again, they are taken into account. I assure the member that the point that she raises regarding pressures on courts are legitimate and it is appropriate that she raises them, but I also assure her that they are taken into account by both the Scottish Court Service and the Scottish Government with regard to the status of JP and sheriff courts, and indeed aspects related to the privative limit.

Again, these matters are taken into account by the Scottish Court Service. As part of its consultation review, it has been considering how access to alternative courts can be enabled, be it by bus, rail or other transport, and what the costs would be. Again, I can only say that the Court Service is looking at the matter. It is a factor that will be taken into account, and I have no doubt that both the Court Service and I will be happy to engage with the member.

The miners’ strike, which took place nearly 30 years ago, was a traumatic experience for the communities that were involved. Members will appreciate that it would not be appropriate for me or other Scottish ministers to offer a view on any individual case or set of criminal cases arising from the strike. For issues around arrest, an established system is in place to consider and investigate complaints against the police in Scotland. Any concerns about police conduct should be directed in the first instance to the chief constable of the relevant force. The independent Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland can also consider any case in which someone is dissatisfied with the response that they receive from the police about their complaint. Where someone has been convicted of a crime, the independent Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, which was established in 1999, provides a critical part of the checks and balances in our justice system. Where the commission considers it appropriate, it can refer an individual case back to court for a further appeal if it considers that a miscarriage of justice might have occurred and it is in the interests of justice for the case to be referred back. That can include historic cases where evidence is available.

The member is right to say that I had personal involvement, as I supported and represented both individuals and miners collectively. However, it would be inappropriate for me to comment on cases in which I appeared or represented people, or indeed to comment on any cases, as would be the situation for any other minister. The member is right to say that matters have been raised in jurisdictions other than Scotland that give considerable cause for concern, but the reason why a system was introduced in 1999 by the then Labour Government with regard to criminal case convictions was to avoid politicisation by ministers of whatever colour of those who are involved in policing and those who are in charge of the courts. I refer the member to the opportunity to approach the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland and the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, which was set up by a Labour Government in 1999. That is the appropriate approach to avoid ministerial involvement in matters that have to be fundamentally separated from the Executive.

The commission made 37 far-reaching recommendations, and we have made significant progress across a number of areas. HMP Cornton Vale will be replaced by new national facilities at HMP Edinburgh and HMP Inverclyde. Until those are ready, conditions at Cornton Vale will continue to be improved. A consultation is under way to consider the most effective structures for community justice services. We have created a £10 million reducing reoffending change fund to provide mentors for offenders, to help them to turn their lives around and live a life free from crime.

Absolutely. It is on that basis that I have had meetings with representatives of the health department. To be fair, many of those with significant mental health problems have problems that are difficult and awkward to diagnose—they tend to be borderline personality disorder or other such matters—and, equally, can be difficult to provide treatment for. That said, they have mental health issues that require to be addressed. That is why we are working with mental health agencies and colleagues in the health department. That is also why, under this Administration, the Scottish Prison Service has ensured that the national health service has taken over the provision of health treatment within prisons so that we can get a continuous link for those who need to be dealt with in prison and thereafter need to be reintegrated into our communities. The member raises an important and valid point that the Scottish Prison Service and I—and, indeed, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—are clearly aware of.

I had a meeting with COSLA yesterday, although that meeting was, to be fair, only tangential to the Angiolini report as it related more to the structure of criminal justice authorities. What I can say is that the Angiolini commission viewed the 218 centre as a template. We are conscious that it would be difficult to replicate that everywhere, but we recognise the significant benefits of ensuring that we have centres where health, criminal justice and education—and all other agencies that are required to play their part—can work together. I can happily give the member a further briefing, but matters are under way to ensure that we replicate the outstanding practice from the outstanding 218 centre.

The Scottish Government does not hold that information centrally and it is not possible to disaggregate specific crimes involving number plate cloning from the recorded crime data submitted by the police to the Scottish Government.

The member is right to raise the issue. Number plate theft is a serious matter that should be reported immediately to the appropriate authorities—the police and the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency—to minimise the risk of a person receiving fixed-penalty notices or being suspected of committing crimes. Motorists should be aware of the dangers that are associated with the crime and should take heed of advice that is readily available from many sources, including the police, the DVLA and insurance and motoring organisations. If any member of the public is aware of or suspicious about this particular crime—or indeed any type of crime—happening, they should contact the police or Crimestoppers. The police service of Scotland will doubtless look at the issue, as we now have a specialised dedicated road traffic unit providing for all of Scotland. Either the chief constable or I would be happy to discuss the matter further with the member.

NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which provides mortuary services for the two west of Scotland health boards—NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and NHS Lanarkshire—and for the procurator fiscal in its Southern general hospital mortuary facility in Glasgow has advised that there are currently no delays to those services, with the hospital post-mortems being carried out within three to four working days. All post-mortem examinations that are requested as a result of deaths reported to the procurator fiscal on Friday 22 February 2013 were scheduled for examination at the Southern general hospital on Thursday 28 February, which is within the three to four working days period. Since December 2012, almost all the post-mortem examinations that are instructed by the procurator fiscal in the west of Scotland are being undertaken at the newly established Southern general hospital mortuary facilities in Glasgow. That state-of-the-art, modern mortuary facility has replaced the services that were previously provided at the 80-year-old Glasgow city mortuary, which has now closed. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Services works with the national health service and the pathologists who conduct the post-mortem examinations at the Southern general mortuary facility, and all are committed to ensuring that the post-mortem process is conducted timeously.

I certainly agree that a sudden death is traumatic for the relatives and that we must look after the interests of those who are suffering. I understand that the matter has been raised previously in correspondence by Mr McNeil. That correspondence was passed to Mr John Green, the head of the Crown Office’s Scottish fatalities investigation unit, to consider. Mr Green telephoned Mr McNeil’s office on 1 February 2013. I understand that Mr McNeil was absent, but Mr Green spoke to one of Mr McNeil’s staff, appraised him of the situation and indicated that he would be happy to discuss anything further with Mr McNeil upon his return. So far, I understand that no follow-up contact has been received by Mr Green, but I suggest that Mr Green is still willing to engage with Mr McNeil and that, in order to try to achieve the outcome that Mr McNeil and I agree on, which is a reduction in the trauma for the victims, Mr McNeil should speak to Mr Green.

Under the constitutional arrangements, it is the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service that deals with this matter. [Interruption.]

That is perfectly appropriate, because it is challenged to look after the best interests of our communities. It does so in an impartial way, and that is how post-mortems are carried out. I suggest, therefore, that Mr McNeil should take up Mr Green’s offer to discuss the matter. The Government is happy to do what we can—my colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will deal with the particular medical matters—but post-mortems are a matter for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, and Mr McNeil would do well to speak to Mr Green, the head of the Crown Office’s Scottish fatalities investigation unit, who called him on 1 February.

The Scottish Government provides direction to the Scottish Police Authority on an on-going basis in a range of different ways. We have a strong working relationship with the SPA and we continue to support the authority on a daily basis. The Scottish Government also has a range of specific responsibilities, which include agreeing and putting in place an appropriate framework document, setting the SPA’s strategic priorities, approving its strategic police plan and setting its annual budget.

I have had no need to invoke the power of direction. I have been working closely with the SPA, as have my staff and the chief constable and his staff. I disagree with some of the comments that have been attributed to Iain Whyte, but I hold him in high regard. He served as the convener of the board of Lothian and Borders Police. Those matters will be sorted out between the police board and the authority. It is clear in the legislation that operational matters are for the chief constable. That is how it was, that is how it is and that is how it will remain.

On 21 February 2012, we announced that Tulliallan castle would be the interim headquarters of the police service of Scotland. The police service of Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority will consider the location of the permanent headquarters in due course, with the final decision subject to the agreement of the Scottish Government; they are currently focused on ensuring a smooth transition to the new single service on 1 April. Although the Scottish Government has regular dialogue with the single service and the SPA on a wide range of issues, there has been no specific discussion on determining the location of the headquarters of the police service of Scotland.

Absolutely. This is a police service for all Scotland and it will be focused on all parts of Scotland and not one part, whether that is west central Scotland or anywhere else. For that reason, the new police service has at its heart local policing and serving all communities. Local commanders have been announced for each area, who will work with communities, and local policing plans are being prepared for every one of Scotland’s 353 council wards, whether they are in the west or in rural, urban, island or mainland Scotland.

What is being built at Gartcosh is outstanding. I look forward to visiting it as it continues to grow apace. As I said, the siting of the permanent headquarters of the police service of Scotland will be a matter for the Scottish Police Authority and the service. It will be for them to decide whether it should be Gartcosh or somewhere else. It is fair to say that land is available, but we should welcome what is being contributed at present at the crime campus at Gartcosh and leave it to others to decide on the permanent headquarters in forthcoming years. I have no doubt that Vic Emery, the chair of the Scottish Police Authority, and Steve House, whom Elaine Smith will doubtless know, would be happy to chat because they are certainly delighted at the progress that is currently being made at Gartcosh.

It is not a decision for the Scottish Government. We deliberately decided that it would be appropriate that the first, temporary headquarters should be at Tulliallan castle. After all, that location has a history within the police service of Scotland. Every constable trains there and frequently goes back for additional training. I will leave it to the Scottish Police Authority and the chief to decide where the permanent headquarters should be. However, every one of us who has endured serving in this building and previous buildings is aware that the priority for the people of Scotland is to get the service—whether parliamentary or police—on the road and not to be obsessed with buildings.

The Scottish Court Service continues to give careful consideration to issues of access to justice. Its consultation paper lays out a series of principles on access to justice that have shaped the proposals that have been put forward. As the consultation paper sets out, island courts would remain in Lerwick, Kirkwall, Stornoway, Lochmaddy and Portree.

Absolutely. The member makes an important point—if there is to be any diminution in the number of courts, those are factors to consider. However, they are factors that have always been considered by the Court Service. I remember many years ago, as a practising defence agent, being involved in a trial in Lochmaddy where the scheduling of the cases depended on which ferry was coming from Eriskay or Barra—or indeed which plane was being taken by whom—at which time. Those factors have always been taken on board—in particular in island communities, but also in other communities where bus timetabling has been a factor. I assure the member that such factors and criteria will continue to be considered by the Court Service.

As the member knows, it is the Scottish Court Service that carried out the consultation, which is now closed. I have no doubt that the Lord President will be considering matters with the chief executive and others who are involved, and it will be for him to decide where he wishes to take that consultation. If the Lord President wishes to take it further, he will doubtless be in communication with me and I will notify the Parliament about that.

We currently have a record number of police officers in Scotland, which has contributed to safer and stronger communities, with recorded crime at a 37-year low. Following police reform, each local authority area will have a designated local police commander, who will work more closely than ever before with locally elected councillors and community planning partnerships to shape local services and prioritise local needs.

These are fundamentally matters for the chief constable, who is held to account by the Scottish Police Authority. I can say, however, that police officers can be on restricted duties for a variety of reasons, such as pregnancy. Given the increase in the number of female officers, that factor has to be taken into consideration. Equally, officers who have suffered injuries—[Interruption.] That might be a matter of some light-heartedness to Jenny Marra but, tragically, far too many officers suffer injuries in the course of their duties and have to be protected. These issues are discussed by management, unions, the Scottish Police Federation, the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents—which I mentioned earlier—and indeed the chief constable, who has ultimate responsibility.

At the Scottish Police Authority meeting on Friday 18 January, the SPA and the police service of Scotland reached agreement on the high-level design principles for eight key corporate services. Joint work between the SPA and the police service is now taking place to implement that agreement, and proposals for the remaining services are expected to be presented to the next SPA board meeting in February.

I know that the member is concerned about this issue and has been raising it for some time now. I should point out that the vast majority of support staff will see no immediate change to their place of work on 1 April and that decisions thereafter will be a matter for the Scottish Police Authority and the police service of Scotland. I believe that progress is being made in those discussions and that the chair and the other members of the SPA acknowledge that the whole of Scotland must be recognised—after all, we are talking about the police service of Scotland. If it is of any interest, I note that, as I said in response to an earlier question, I have just come from a meeting with the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents which, it would be fair to say, has a great deal of sympathy with the member’s point.

Labour members sometimes seem to forget that they supported the establishment of a single police service of Scotland; indeed, Jenny Marra seems to spend all her time criticising these moves. The police service and the SPA have to face hard challenges and take hard decisions, but the single service will bring great benefits, win savings and, most important, avoid the situation that is playing out south of the border, where almost as many officers as serve in Scotland will be lost and where the terms and conditions of those who serve are under attack. Even today, further proposals have been made that attack the terms and conditions of those who serve.

At the heart of our approach is the commitment to maintain the independence of Scotland’s judiciary in reaching sentencing decisions relevant to each case. Indeed, that independence is fundamental to guaranteeing fair trials. Alongside judicial independence, we will continue to keep sentencing policy under review and bring forward proposals to Parliament, as appropriate, to strengthen and clarify the legislative framework within which individual sentencing decisions are taken. We are also discussing with the Lord President arrangements for establishing, before the end of this Parliament, a Scottish sentencing council.

First, let me say that the member makes a vital point. Housebreaking is an extremely serious offence and is viewed that way by the police, the prosecution service and the judiciary. Housebreaking violates trust and can cause great trauma, as I know from speaking to those involved in Victim Support Scotland, the Procurator Fiscal Service and the police service, who are aware of the significant difficulties and knock-on effects that can last for many years. That is taken very seriously. Equally, we have to remember that sentencing is ultimately a matter for the judiciary. Having met the Lord President just on Friday past, I think that the judiciary take these matters on board. The steps being taken on judicial training are progressing: the new judicial studies complex up at Parliament house will be of great benefit in ensuring that we can provide information to sentencers so that they can understand the consequences and effects. As I say, that will be of benefit. I think that I can give the member an assurance that the sentencing council will deal with not so much the individual aspects but the whole nature and gamut of the effects that crime can have on individuals and entire communities, which I think is the valid point being made by the member.

We are working very closely with all the new local commanders as we support them and their partners to trial new local scrutiny and engagement arrangements before the new arrangements go live on 1 April. Both the local commander for Aberdeen city and the local commander for Aberdeenshire and Moray are regular attendees at our quarterly network events, and the two national advisers whom we fund through the Improvement Service visited the north-east pathfinders on 18 January.

As the member has correctly said, the police service of Scotland has made a commitment to introduce community engagement plans for all 353 multimember wards across Scotland. The community engagement plans will play a key role in informing policing plans at a local authority level. The national guidance that we published on 17 January emphasises the importance of ensuring that local people have a say in how policing is delivered locally. We will support local partners to ensure that the good practice that emerges from the on-going pathfinders is replicated throughout Scotland. I can assure the member that it is recognised that making our communities as safe as they can be is a matter not simply for the police and councillors; the police service will need to engage with all those others who have served on community planning partnerships. Only by working collectively will we ensure that our communities are as safe as they can be.

Tackling wildlife crime continues to be a priority for the Scottish Government. It will be a matter for the chief constable to decide how best to deploy the resources available to him to deliver police service of Scotland priorities, which will obviously include combating wildlife crime.

The member makes a fair point that the approach has been patchy. However, we should recognise that the single service offers an opportunity to level up the situation and to ensure that the good work that we know is taking place is replicated throughout the length and breadth of Scotland. Wildlife crime is a matter that troubles and is of concern not simply in rural areas but in urban areas. The establishment of the police service of Scotland offers an opportunity to ensure that every area of Scotland gets the best possible police service, especially with regard to wildlife crime.

Jenny Marra raises an important constitutional issue, and I appreciate her desire to ensure that the Parliament and Government remain the determinants of civil justice policy. However, the council will be predominantly an advisory body that will advise the Lord President on improvements to the civil justice system to assist him in the discharge of the statutory responsibilities that he already has. The council will also assist the Court of Session by preparing draft rules of court. The bill provides that the council “may” advise ministers, and I see no need to compel it to do so. Parliament and ministers can take the council’s advice into account if we so wish. As I stated during the stage 2 proceedings, when similar amendments by Jenny Marra were considered, nothing in the bill will affect the capacity of the executive, the legislature and the judiciary to continue to make those decisions that appropriately rest with them. I understand that the Lord President also made that clear when he appeared before the Justice Committee to discuss the bill. Therefore, I hope that the Parliament will be reassured that, upon the creation of the council, the Government will remain the body responsible—and responsible to Parliament—for the development of wider justice policy. Ms Marra has said previously that the bill should be beyond interpretation on that matter; I believe that it is and that it is appropriate that responsibility for the council rests with the Lord President, as is provided for in the bill. At stage 2, Margaret Mitchell moved an amendment with the purpose of clarifying that the bill will not require ministers to consult the council on policy matters. That amendment was withdrawn following my assurances that nothing in the bill will interfere with the powers of ministers or Parliament. I submit that Ms Marra’s amendments, which would require the council to advise ministers at their request, would in fact introduce an element of doubt by suggesting that the council must consider matters that properly sit with ministers or Parliament. With regard to Jenny Marra’s proposal to place a duty on the council “to consider how to make the civil justice system more accessible, fair and efficient”, the bill already provides that the council must have regard to the principle that “the civil justice system should be fair, accessible and efficient”. That guiding principle, I believe, goes further than the provision in Jenny Marra’s amendment 9. Therefore, I urge Jenny Marra to withdraw amendment 9 and not to move amendments 10 and 12.

Amendment 11 would place a duty on the council to consult. The bill currently gives the council flexibility in that regard. The council will have broad powers to consult on any issue within its remit. Consultation is not an unknown practice to the existing rules councils, but the new council, with new functions and powers, will operate in a more inclusive manner. I reassure members that the council will not operate as a closed shop. Indeed, I do not think that the bill, which opens up the current arrangements significantly, would allow that to happen. Therefore, it would be disproportionate and undesirable to require the council to consult prior to preparing every set of rules. In many cases, rules will introduce technical changes purely to give effect to primary or subordinate legalisation, the subject matter of which may already have been subject to extensive consultation and will already have been considered by the Parliament. Occasionally, rules may need to be changed urgently to correct some defect that has become apparent, perhaps by a judicial ruling. I know that many organisations, such as Citizens Advice Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid, wish to engage with the council to help it to deliver improvements to the Scottish civil justice system. Those are exactly the types of organisation that I expect will field candidates for membership of the council and with which the council will wish to engage. I assure the Parliament that there will be scope for all kinds of individuals and organisations to contribute to the council’s work through its committees, through consultation and, indeed, by carrying out research. The power to commission research was the subject of an amendment in the name of Jenny Marra at stage 2. That power will aid the council in its role of reviewing, and advising on improvements to, the civil justice system, and I was more than happy to support its inclusion in the bill. I expect, and the Lord President has indicated, that the council will depend heavily on its committees, where I imagine much of its day-to-day work will be carried out. It will consult more widely when it is appropriate to do so. As I stated when Jenny Marra’s stage 2 amendment came before the Justice Committee, the broad power to consult is sufficient and therefore I do not consider it necessary to place upon the council the inflexible statutory duty that is contained in amendment 11. I urge Jenny Marra to withdraw amendment 11.

I will first address Jenny Marra’s amendments on the categories and levels of membership, which would fundamentally alter the council’s membership by increasing the mandatory minimum membership from 14 to 18 and seek to provide that none of the Lord President’s discretionary appointments may be judges or practising solicitors and advocates. At stage 2, Jenny Marra said: “many organisations with legally trained personnel would bring both the necessary ... knowledge and insight ... to the council.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 13 November 2012; c 1997.] I agree, but her amendments would mean that a large number of very suitable candidates including lawyers working for voluntary organisations or consumer bodies or academics who also practise could not sit on the council. Although members of the profession, such individuals would not be able to sit on the body as its representatives. The issue was the subject of some discussion at stage 2 and having reflected on the matter, as I undertook to do, I remain of the view that the bill with its provision for flexible appointments strikes the right balance and will allow the council to take account of the range of interests in civil justice and technical expertise for its detailed work without creating an unduly large and unwieldy body. Civil justice issues are important to many different people and organisations across Scotland and I have been contacted by a range of groups, including the judiciary, the legal profession and the insurance industry, that wish to be better represented on the council. Indeed, I recall David McLetchie at stage 1 questioning whether there should be more solicitor members. I agree that benefits to court users and the public should be core to the council’s work, and I welcome and encourage lay input. The bill guarantees that representatives on the council will have “experience and knowledge of consumer affairs ... and ... awareness of the interests of litigants”; furthermore, the bill now allows for a lay deputy chair. The council will initially be responsible for implementing the many procedural changes that will be required to effect civil courts reform. It will later focus on reviewing and developing the civil justice system. Its membership must be able to reflect both roles. As a result, the bill provides for an appropriate balance of expertise on both court rules and policy issues. It also allows the council to evolve over time as it moves from its rule-drafting focus. If that evolution does not occur, ministers will be able, with Parliament’s approval, to amend the membership levels. It is simply not possible to give a seat on the council to all those who wish one. It would be unrealistic to do so and to expect the council to function effectively. However, I have discussed the fact that membership of the council is not the only means by which someone can have a voice in its activities. I take the view that the lack of consensus around the issue indicates the need for flexibility, and believe that that is achieved by allowing the Lord President the discretion that is provided for. The amendments would deprive the council of the flexibility and capability that are necessary for it to carry out its functions effectively. The subject matter of amendment 17 has been debated previously in relation to the council and other bodies. I remain of the view that equality of opportunity for women, men and other groups must be addressed, but I am not persuaded that quotas for specialist expert bodies are the right approach. At stage 1, both Alison McInnes and Malcolm Chisholm asked that I consider the issue of transparency in appointments. Having reflected at stage 2, I proposed to insert the principles that appointments are to be made fairly and are to be open to all eligible persons, and the Justice Committee agreed with that. I hope that that will go some way to addressing some of Ms Marra’s concerns. I urge Ms Marra to withdraw amendment 13 and not to move amendments 14 to 21.

Jenny Marra is correct that certain public bodies should hold proceedings publicly. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that the council must do so. The council, which is essentially advisory in nature, differs from bodies that are required to hold proceedings in public. As explained to the Justice Committee at stage 2, local police or fire boards, for example, have different purposes and functions from those of the proposed council. Where bodies are responsible for service delivery or the allocation of public funds, a right of access is appropriate. Although the council will consider important issues, it is not a final decision maker. That said, I have taken care to ensure that appropriate transparency and accountability apply to council proceedings. The council will lay annual reports and business plans before Parliament; if Parliament wishes to consider publicly any of the issues raised, it will. Court rules are already laid before Parliament and published, and Parliament’s consideration of rules is a matter of public record. Although the existing councils do not meet in public, they publish minutes of their proceedings online. The Lord President has assured me that he intends the new council to be more proactive in that regard. More important, freedom of information coverage will be extended to both the new council and the Criminal Court Rules Council. Subordinate legislation will soon be brought to Parliament in that regard and will provide for more robust arrangements, as the discretion in Ms Marra’s amendment will not apply. The issues with regard to practicality are not insignificant. Suitable arrangements, particularly for potentially costly accommodation, would need to be put in place. That said, the council may hold public meetings if it wishes to do so. Those who have called for greater accountability are, I imagine, exactly those people who might become council or committee members. I therefore hope that members will agree that the matter can be left to the council to decide. I urge Jenny Marra to withdraw her amendment.

Amendments 1 and 2 have the effect of raising from £68 to £82 the threshold for disposable income above which a contribution to criminal legal aid will be made. The amendments reflect the concern of members and the Law Society of Scotland that a threshold of £68 might compromise access to justice. I made it clear to the Justice Committee during stage 2 that I would be happy to reconsider the threshold; amendments 1 and 2 are the outcome of that consideration. The impact of the change is that we expect that 88 per cent of applicants will make no contribution to their criminal legal aid fee—that is an increase from 82 per cent under the original proposal. I intend to make the same change to thresholds for civil legal aid, to preserve the important principle that so far as is practicable there should be parity of treatment between civil and criminal legal aid. The bill, of course, is not about civil legal aid, so I intend to make the change using the existing powers in the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986. We are working with the Scottish Legal Aid Board and the Law Society to finalise the resultant adjustment to the calculation tables that appear in the current draft regulations. The intention is to ensure that people at the lower end of the disposable income scale benefit from the change, albeit marginally in some cases. The contributions of people in the middle of the scale will stay at about the same level; people at the top end will likely see a slight increase in their contributions. The change will benefit lawyers, who will see a reduction in the number of clients from whom they need to collect contributions, and a smaller contribution will be due from clients who have a lower disposable income. Amendment 24 would amend the planned arrangements for dealing with the income and expenditure of partners when assessing a person’s contribution. It would supplement provision in the 1986 act for how disposable income and disposable capital should be determined. Our detailed proposals for how disposable income and disposable capital should be determined were set out in the draft regulations that we provided to the Justice Committee before stage 2. The approach mirrors the approach that is used for advice and assistance in civil legal aid. The proper place for such detail is in regulations, which can be adapted and improved, in line with emerging needs. Of course, future changes to regulations are subject to the parliamentary process. The provisions in the current draft regulations allow for spousal or partner income to be considered as part of the contributions assessment; the provisions also allow for appropriate discounting of relevant income and the disregard of appropriate expenditure. Allowances are available for a spouse or partner and dependent children. In addition, there will be no consideration of spousal or partner income if any of the following apply: the spouse or partner has “a contrary interest” in the matter for which criminal legal aid is sought; the spouses or partners are “living separate and apart”; or it would be “inequitable or impractical” to consider spousal or partner income. In determining disposable capital, the draft regulations disregard such things as the value of the home, furniture and furnishings, which tend to be couples’ main capital assets. The draft regulations provide for a fair and equitable means of assessing what should be considered. The partner of a person who is charged with domestic abuse should not and will not have their resources taken into account in assessing a criminal legal aid contribution. There is a degree of flexibility and pragmatism in the draft regulations, which is not reflected in amendment 24. That reinforces the point that such matters are best dealt with in regulations, not primary legislation. I ask members to support amendments 1 and 2, in my name, and to oppose amendment 24. I move amendment 1.

I appreciate Ms Goldie’s points, but I do not believe that they are matters for the face of the bill. Historically, such matters have been dealt with by regulation. Amendment 1 agreed to. Section 20—Contributions for criminal legal aid Amendment 2 agreed to.

My amendments 3 to 8 relate to the collection and treatment of contributions. Amendments 3, 5 and 6 make technical adjustments in relation to appeals on behalf of deceased persons under the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. Provisions in section 21 of the bill would allow a contribution in those appeals to be assessed on the basis of the disposable income and capital of either the deceased person or the authorised person taking forward the appeal. Amendments 3, 5 and 6 clarify that it is for the Scottish Legal Aid Board to collect and determine the amount of contribution due in those cases separately from the system in place in sections 19 and 20 for determining contributions for other criminal proceedings. Appeals on behalf of deceased persons are very rare. It has always been the intention of the Scottish Government that the board would collect any such contributions. The board does not expressly state that, and the opportunity has been taken to put the board’s responsibility beyond doubt by lodging amendment 5. Amendment 6 is consequential on amendment 5, preventing collection in the appeals being undone by regulations. Amendments 4 and 8 clarify the ranking provisions in the bill and those already in the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 about the order in which solicitors get paid. Amendment 3 reflects that because contributions for appeals on the behalf of deceased persons are collected by the board, they do not fall into the ranking provisions. The amendments clarify that the ranking provisions apply only when the solicitor is responsible for collection. In those cases, the solicitor is paid the net fee from the Scottish legal aid fund; any contribution payable is not included. In cases where the board is responsible for collection, the fee payable is gross and the contribution payable is included. Amendment 7 delivers the agreement made with the board and the Law Society of Scotland that the board would be able to provide a collection service for solicitors. The amendment gives ministers the power to require the board to provide a collection service on behalf of solicitors, regulating how any contribution collected should be passed on and the charge for providing the service. Lewis Macdonald’s amendment 7A seems to seek to supplement my amendment 7 by adding that regulations should ensure that the board cannot charge a fee beyond the cost of recovery when providing a collection service for solicitors. I argue that the amendment is not necessary. The requirement that the charge should cover only reasonable recovery costs and the ability of ministers to regulate the board’s imposition of a charge are already contained in my amendment 7. It may be that amendment 7A seeks to allow recovery of the cost to the board as a whole rather than the cost in a given case. That kind of detail should be left for further discussion and agreement between the board and the profession. Further, the board must abide by the guidance set out in the “Scottish Public Finance Manual”, which sets out detailed guidance on the fees and charges to be applied by public bodies when providing services to other organisations or bodies. The mechanisms for public sponsorship ensure that the board must adhere to the “Scottish Public Finance Manual”. I therefore consider amendment 7A unnecessary and I urge Lewis Macdonald not to move it. I move amendment 3.

Malcolm Chisholm did not have the benefit of hearing the answers that I gave, in committee, to the convener of the Justice Committee when I was asked whether such matters would be considered in respect of civil matters. I said that they would and that SLAB would be discussing them with the profession. Given what amendment 7 says and the assurances that I have provided on what the “Scottish Public Finance Manual” states, I believe that amendment 7A is unnecessary. Amendment 3 agreed to. Amendment 4 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. Section 21—Contributions for appeals where appellant deceased Amendment 5 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. After section 21

The subject of refunding legal aid contributions in the event of acquittal was raised during evidence sessions, and the Justice Committee asked that the issue be given further consideration. In my response to the committee’s stage 1 report, I set out the complexities involved and the wider range of perspectives that I had considered. The committee considered two stage 2 amendments that sought to introduce refunding of legal aid contributions, and such amendments have been lodged for consideration again now. The subject was the subject of some discussion at committee but, in the end, neither amendment was supported; in fact, Graeme Pearson withdrew his amendment. The discussion at stage 2 reflected the complexity of the issue, which I suggest is not one for this bill—not least because any provisions that are made here today could not apply to any privately funded clients. That would lead to a differentiated and therefore fundamentally unfair criminal justice system. It should be stressed that the recovery of costs in defending criminal proceedings has never been a feature of the Scottish criminal justice system. In England and Wales, recovery-of-costs applications are made to the Crown, and can be made by legal-aided and privately funded accused persons. Recovery is of all defence costs and not just legal aid contributions. It cuts both ways—the Crown may recover costs from a convicted defendant. Here, there is no system of costs in first-instance Scottish criminal courts, either for those who are acquitted or for those who are convicted. To change that would be a huge and fundamental step that should not be taken without the fullest consideration of the potential impact. Prosecution is undertaken in the public interest, on the basis of the test that is outlined in the prosecution code, that there is “sufficient, admissible, evidence”, and that it is “in the public interest” to take action. That decision is made on the basis of information that the Crown receives from the police in the standard prosecution report and from witness statements. Sheriffs and justices of the peace do not see the information that the Crown receives from the police. That means that a case might appear on paper to be stronger than it does at an eventual trial. An acquittal or conclusion of proceedings without conviction does not equate to a finding that it was not in the public interest to raise proceedings. The burden of proof on the Crown to succeed in criminal proceedings is rightly a high one—it is to establish proof beyond reasonable doubt. It would not be appropriate for costs to be a factor in the decision making of the Crown, or for such a perception to be possible. Amendments 23 and 25 both seek to refund legal aid contributions, but seek to do so in different sets of circumstances. Amendment 23 would give the power for a court to order a refund or remission where a person has been acquitted, and where the court considers that to do so would be “in the interests of justice”. However, the amendment does not make clear the circumstances in which “the interests of justice” would merit the court using that discretion. Amendment 25 would place a duty on Scottish ministers to make regulations about arrangements for refunding or remitting a contribution that has been paid where proceedings do not conclude with a conviction. I wish to highlight a number of practical difficulties with amendments 23 and 25. First, where there was judicial discretion, as per amendment 23, it is unclear what would happen in cases where a court chose not to refund on acquittal. Would the person be able to appeal the decision? Would they feel that their acquittal was being publicly doubted? Secondly, where the refund could be made in any case where the accused was not convicted, as per amendment 25, there are many circumstances in which a case will conclude without a conviction. For example, a case may be deserted because of evidence coming to light during the trial. Where a case is dropped because a witness fails to attend, perhaps because they were intimidated or frightened by the prospect of giving evidence, the accused person would receive a refund. Are those the circumstances that amendment 25 envisages? In respect of both amendments 23 and 25, it is unclear who would have responsibility for the refund. There is no scope under the bill to consider privately funded clients, who would not receive a refund under either amendment. Those points were raised during the stage 2 discussion, but it seems that neither has been addressed today. Although I understand the concerns that have been expressed, I cannot support amendments 23 and 25. Even in their own terms, they raise many practical problems. They also risk making a fundamental change to the justice system in Scotland, with unclear consequences, and we surely cannot have a system where the many people who pay all their defence costs can have no expectation of reimbursement while those who pay only some of their costs are treated differently. I invite members not to support amendments 23 or 25.

Amendments 26 and 27 would place on a legislative basis review of the impact of the proposals in part 2. I have already made a firm commitment to the Justice Committee to review within three years the impact of the proposals in part 2 and to present the outcome of that review to Parliament. Further, the Scottish Legal Aid Board has a statutory duty to monitor the accessibility and availability of legal services; the impact of the bill will be kept under review as part of that duty. Also, the bill provides Scottish ministers with the ability to seek by regulations swift adjustment of the details of the new process. I expect that Scottish Government and SLAB officials will liaise on how part 2 is operating and the need for any adjustments. Although I understand the intention behind amendments 26 and 27, I do not agree that we need to legislate to achieve their aim. There is the risk that what we now consider to be the key areas of importance in the new process will not be areas of concern in the future. Amendment 26, which relates to regulations that will be made under proposed new section 33ZA of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986, would require the Scottish ministers to report on “collection rates of contributions” and “the income of solicitors”. A large proportion of that information would be available to the Scottish ministers only at the discretion of firms. Moreover, a great many factors affect solicitors’ income that are not attributable to the bill’s provisions. To tie down the timeframe would also present difficulties. Flexibility in the timing might be necessary, perhaps to include other developing issues, or because adjustments that are made through regulations need time to bed down. Moreover, in relation to provision in regulations about collections, it appears that amendment 26 would require reporting on two separate occasions for each set of regulations, which would be a rather onerous requirement. Amendment 27, which relates to part 2 as a whole, would require that a report be laid indefinitely every three years, which might prove to be disproportionate. As was mentioned during consideration of similar amendments at stage 2, the Justice Committee can at any time consider the implementation of enacted legislation and carry out post-legislative scrutiny. Taking that into account, along with my commitment to carrying out a review, I am not of the view that reporting need be enshrined in primary legislation, so I invite members to oppose amendments 26 and 27.

I am pleased to open the debate on the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill. I thank the Justice Committee for its careful scrutiny of the bill during its progress through the Parliament, and the Finance Committee and Subordinate Legislation Committee for their reports on the bill. I am also grateful to the many individuals and organisations that took the time to respond to the two consultations on the bill and all those who gave oral and written evidence to the Parliament. There is almost unanimous support for the creation of the Scottish civil justice council, but I will remind members why the new council and its functions are needed. The proposals are founded on the recommendation in Lord Gill’s wide-ranging review of the civil courts. Lord Gill concluded that far-reaching, structural and procedural reforms are necessary to ensure that Scotland’s civil justice system is fit for the 21st century. The council will first take forward the many procedural changes that are necessary for the implementation of Lord Gill’s reforms and play a pivotal role in revitalising and modernising our system. Following extensive engagements with stakeholders, I will shortly consult on a draft bill that will be based on the wider recommendations of the Scottish civil courts review. The creation of the Scottish civil justice council will mark the first legislative step on the path to reform. During the bill’s stages there has been constructive debate on the arrangements for the council, notably its membership and the extent of its role and function. On membership, one of the bill’s underlying principles has been to provide for flexibility, balance and—rightly—a degree of discretion to the Lord President. That will allow the council to concentrate on its first task: the technical rules revisions to support the much-needed civil court reforms. It will also allow the council to evolve over time to take on its policy functions. I firmly believe that the Lord President should be trusted to achieve the correct balance that is necessary for the council to be able to assist him to carry out his statutory responsibilities and fulfil its duties in the most effective manner. Of course, the Parliament’s scrutiny has helped to shape the proposals throughout the legislative process. Having listened carefully to the views of stakeholders and members of this Parliament, I introduced principles of openness and fairness to the appointment process. The importance of lay input to the council was discussed and the bill now provides that a layperson may be a deputy chair. Alison McInnes was keen to see that in the bill. The additional power to commission research, which Jenny Marra proposed, will assist the council in its function of reviewing and advising on improvements to the civil justice system. With the Scottish civil justice council we will for the first time have a body with oversight of the entire civil justice system. The level of interest that has been expressed during the bill’s passage indicates how important and relevant civil justice matters are for people, families and businesses across Scotland. The council is the prelude to further reform and it is a necessary precursor to the reform that Lord Gill proposes. I will now discuss part 2 of the bill. Contributions to criminal legal aid will allow us to continue to target legal aid to those who need it most by asking those who can afford it to pay towards the costs of their defence. To be clear, no one is being asked to pay the full cost of their defence; if they could do that, they would not be eligible for legal assistance. We are suggesting that when someone can afford to contribute to the cost they should be asked to do so. That principle was supported by not only this Parliament at stage 1, but the Law Society of Scotland and other key justice stakeholders. I have listened closely to views expressed throughout the bill’s passage to make sure that we continue to protect the most vulnerable in our society. I have built on initial proposals to exempt those on passported benefits and for a graduated approach to contribution rates. Disability living allowance and its successor, and war pensions, will now not be considered as income when eligibility for contribution is calculated. Imprisonment or being taken into custody can considerably change a person’s financial circumstances. Reassessment of eligibility when that happens will ensure that new circumstances can be taken into account. My proposal to raise the disposable income thresholds means that the estimated number of those who will be liable to pay contributions has now fallen by one third compared to the number under the original proposals. Those are all tangible improvements that demonstrate my commitment to ensuring that only those who can afford to pay a contribution will do so. They are also good examples of where we have addressed a range of issues that have been discussed with stakeholders. It is unlikely to have escaped anyone’s notice that some in the profession are unhappy with the proposals in part 2 of the bill. I appreciate that many firms think that collecting some of the contributions will be a burden that is placed on them at a difficult time. Although I accept that concern, I do not think that the expectation is unreasonable or unfair. Discussions with the profession throughout the process have sought to address its concerns, including about how to ensure that the responsibility for collection is shared equitably. From the introduction of the bill, we proposed that the Scottish Legal Aid Board should share the burden by collecting in solemn and appeals cases, and that, to assist firms’ cash flow, summary contributions will be treated as fees. In addition to responding to concerns about the disability living allowance and war pensions, regulations will provide that there will be no contributions payable towards criminal legal assistance at a police station. My proposal to raise the threshold from £68 to £82, which followed discussions with the profession after stage 2, will significantly reduce the number of accused from whom solicitors will have to collect. Further, where a case transfers from solemn to summary proceedings, the board will collect the contribution all the way through. Finally, I lodged an amendment to allow the board to provide a service to solicitors on payment of a fee to collect contributions on their behalf. All those proposals have been accepted by the Law Society of Scotland, which is the profession’s chosen representative body. Several other things that it has agreed to in principle will feature in draft regulations to come.

I am aware of those objections, but I deal with the Law Society of Scotland, which is the body that is required to regulate and the body with which we negotiate. As I said, a decision has been made, and I welcome the contributions by the individuals who were involved in the legal aid negotiating team, who worked constructively with us. Although I recognise that many in the profession have voiced their wish to have no responsibility for collection, practical steps are necessary. We must remember the many firms that already collect contributions from clients in criminal cases. Collection should not be a significant problem for them.

No, I cannot do that. That is a matter to be negotiated between the Law Society and the Scottish Legal Aid Board. I will leave it to them to deal with that. We are now dealing with a legal aid bill in Scotland for 2011-12 that was the second highest on record. It will not reduce without action. The projections for legal aid still exceed the budget that was set out in the Scottish Government’s 2011 spending review, and difficult decisions still need to be made. I have not approached the challenge by making changes to the scope of legal aid. Wholesale reductions in its scope would have a damaging impact on access to justice, other parts of the justice system and society as a whole. My key priority has been maintaining access to justice, as it has been for many other members. Reforms in England and Wales have been sweeping. The scope of civil legal aid is being reduced and legal aid is being removed altogether in some areas of family law, housing and clinical negligence. That is not a road that I am prepared to go down. I am protecting the scope of civil legal aid, which is vital in the current financial climate, while ensuring that the criminal legal aid system continues to be just and equitable. To conclude, the passing of the bill will deliver vital savings to ensure that legal aid can be targeted at those who need it most. It will also begin our journey towards much-needed civil justice reform. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill be passed.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member welcome the fact that the Government insisted on there being parity with civil legal aid, which was not being insisted on by the criminal bar?

Notwithstanding some of the comments made by the Opposition, I welcome the fact that we have got to this juncture. Of the two parts of the bill, the matters relating to the civil justice council have been welcomed, at least in some aspects, by most members in the chamber. We have been on this journey for some considerable time. Part 1 of the bill deals with some of Lord Gill’s many recommendations for reform. We last debated civil justice reform in 2009, following the publication of the report of Lord Gill’s review, which had been established by my predecessor. We have built upon that. To be able to carry out the more fundamental review that Lord Gill, like most of us in the chamber, felt is necessary to get Scotland’s civil law into a position where it is fit for the 21st century, we require to make changes. Before the fundamental changes in his reforms, which will also require primary legislation, we require to make other changes. Some changes have been dealt with on a non-legislative basis, but others are dealt with by the aspects of the bill dealing with the civil rules council. That matter was first raised by Lord Gill’s predecessor as Lord President, Lord Hamilton, who made it quite clear that he felt that it was necessary to make these changes if we are to be able to give effect to the more fundamental reforms proposed by the then Lord Justice Clerk, Lord Gill. Obviously, the membership of the Scottish civil justice council has been the subject of much interest and debate. The Lord President may require the wisdom of Solomon in deciding how to balance who should be included, but I believe that it is best to give him some element of flexibility. Not everyone can be, or needs to be, included around the table. I believe that the Lord President—and, indeed, anyone who holds that office—will ensure a fair representation that takes into account the balance of needs and wants. Numerous people who are not currently included in the council’s membership have sought a place on it. I have received representations from the Association of British Insurers, the Sheriffs Association and other legal and, indeed, non-legal bodies. If we were to accommodate everyone who wished to have a place on the council, it would probably be impossible for it to convene—if it convened in public, as some wished—even in the chamber in which we sit. We need to have some trust and faith in the Lord President, whose position is well regarded by everyone who has ever held that office, so we should give him the degree of flexibility necessary to deal with that. The next aspect of the bill is legal aid, on which we have seen some hypocrisy from those on the Opposition benches. They were prepared to support the principles of the bill at stage 1, but it seems that they are not prepared to support the bill today. Other parties condemn it outright yet sit in government south of the border, where the approach to the matter is significantly worse and harsher.

No; my ambition—it is not just my ambition, but my intention and that of the Government—is not to replicate the absolutely appalling situation with legal aid south of the border, where whole areas have been discarded. We have had crocodile tears around the chamber, but let us look at some of the matters on which no legal aid is available south of the border because of the cuts that have taken place—cuts started not under the current Tory coalition south of the border, but under a Labour Government under Jack Straw. They include asylum, clinical negligence, criminal injuries compensation, debt, employment, housing, immigration, family matters and welfare benefits—nobody is eligible to apply for legal aid on any of those matters, irrespective of their income. The Scottish Government is not prepared to consider such a scenario, which is why, when we face the second-highest legal aid bill on record, we want to ensure that we balance that bill, which we will do by requiring those who have the ability to make a contribution in criminal cases to do so.

I will continue to point out the situation south of the border, because we heard from Annabel Goldie how appalling she thinks the situation will be here. [Interruption.]

South of the border, in the magistrates court, it is an in-or-out system. Anyone with annual disposable income of more than £3,398—which is just more than £65 a week—fails the means test and does not get legal aid. In the Crown Court, anyone with annual disposable income of more than £3,398 is required to pay 90 per cent of that towards costs. [Interruption.]

Let us contrast that with the situation in Scotland, where 88 per cent of people who face a criminal charge, on applying for legal aid, will have it granted with no contribution. Only 12 per cent will be required to make a contribution. In Scotland, the contribution level commences at £3. People who are earning several hundred pounds and who have the ability to make a modest contribution will be required to do so. The Government faces challenges and there are significant claims on the Scottish Legal Aid Board, many of which come from those who are doing remarkably well from the amount of legal aid provision to their clients. Therefore, we must balance matters. That is why I am extremely grateful to the Legal Aid Board for having introduced proposals that will allow us to continue to provide legal aid for matters such as asylum, clinical negligence and all those other areas of civil concern. We have taken on board the concerns about disposable income and, in doing so, we have dealt with the concerns of the Law Society of Scotland. However, unlike Ms Marra, we are prepared to ensure that the provisions apply not only to those who face civil proceedings, but to those who face criminal allegations. We want to ensure parity between the person who is a victim of domestic violence and the person who is charged and alleged to be the perpetrator of domestic violence. Miss Goldie forgets that many people who face civil challenges also have the weight of the state facing them. People who have their children removed are in most cases dealt with under civil, not criminal, legal aid, as are people who face bankruptcy, insolvency or the loss of their house and all the matters that go with that.

It is about achieving the legal aid system that we want, when we have the second-highest bill on record and hundreds of millions of pounds going out. We know that the largest part of legal aid expenditure is on criminal legal aid, so if we are to provide the legal aid system that we want in Scotland—I believe that it should be one that covers clinical negligence, family matters and all the other things that have been rejected for legal aid south of the border—we must ensure that those who have the ability to pay do so. That is why I commend the bill to Parliament. I look forward to the Law Society of Scotland working constructively with the Legal Aid Board to deal with the matters that remain outstanding in the forthcoming months and years.

I met the then interim chief executive of the Scottish Court Service, Eric McQueen, on 14 November 2012. We discussed a number of current civil and criminal justice policy issues. I am due to meet the Lord President, who is chair of the SCS board, this Friday. The chief executive of the Scottish Court Service will also be present. Officials from the Scottish Government are, of course, in regular contact with officials of the Scottish Court Service on a range of issues.

I am aware of the member’s concerns, about which he has been in contact; doubtless, he contributed them to the SCS consultation, which has now closed. Clearly, the Lord President and the chief executive will consider the factor to which the member refers. Matters such as public transport arrangements and the number of people involved have been looked at. The Scottish Court Service will have to weigh up such factors before it is required to make its final decision.

Responsibility for the Procurator Fiscal Service lies with the Lord Advocate and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The service is entirely separate from my jurisdiction and, indeed, that of the Lord President, so I do not think that it would have been appropriate to raise that matter with him.

The figures that were released by Barnardo’s relate to children within its services who indicated that they had been trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation. The national referral mechanism collates United Kingdom data on suspected and confirmed cases of trafficking. The gathering of accurate, reliable data on this clandestine activity is complex and difficult. For that reason, we recently commissioned the University of Bedfordshire to research the scale and nature of child sexual exploitation in Scotland and how child trafficking relates to that.

We have indicated the restriction on Government time, but there is a willingness to bring in an aggravation offence for trafficking. That is being promoted by the Lord Advocate and will give law enforcement more powers to ensure that those who are involved in this evil trade are brought to account and brought to justice.

Following discussions with the chief constable, the chair and members, I requested that the Scottish Police Authority ensure that the chief constable has the support of police staff in human resources and finance, and that request was accepted by the SPA. Agreement was reached at the SPA board meeting on 18 January and joint work is now taking place to implement what was agreed. The chair and chief constable have both written to the Justice Committee to confirm that agreement has been reached and I look forward to continuing to work with them to ensure a smooth transition to the new service.

I have had numerous face-to-face and verbal discussions with Vic Emery and Stephen House over recent months, some of which were to do with this issue and some of which were to do with other police matters. I met Mr Emery on Wednesday. Following that discussion, the terms of the changes were signed off by the chief constable and the chair on Friday. This is fundamentally an issue for the Scottish Police Authority, to which the chief constable is accountable. I am more than happy to provide as much information as I can to Alison McInnes, but the discussions and the agreement here are not between me and the SPA or between me and the chief constable. This is an agreement that was signed off in a public meeting on 18 January and which both the chief constable and the chair have written to the Justice Committee to confirm. They are the people who made the decision; I welcome that and I pay tribute to them.

The chief constable accepted the proposal. He said that had the change not been made, he would have been registering his concerns. The chief constable, the chair and the rest of the board members are all content with the outcome of the decision of 18 January, and I hope that Alison McInnes will welcome that. I note that Alison McInnes signed up to the motion that was lodged by Graeme Pearson, which raised the issues and problems. They have been resolved by the decision taken by the chief constable and the chair on 18 January. The motion also says that the single police force should be “independent of the SPA”. The SPA is a distinct entity that has responsibility for such things as information technology and forensic science. For that reason it is necessary that the single police force and the SPA work together. We have seen that matters have been clarified to the chief constable’s satisfaction. On-going discussions will be required as the single police service of Scotland beds in, which, as we have seen, is happening daily. Indeed, even today, the 14 new divisional commanders were announced, whom I welcome and pay tribute to.

The Scottish Police Authority will be responsible. If, for example, those staff come from forensic science, the process will go through the SPA. If they come from operational policing, it will go through the chief constable. That is the decision that was sought by the chief constable. I note that, at the time I printed it off, Lewis Macdonald had not signed up to the motion that was lodged by his colleague Graeme Pearson, which calls for the changes that were announced on Friday and which recognises the distinct roles and differentiation between the SPA and the chief constable. We have the appropriate balance; there is no duplication, but we must have distinct HR and finance roles because some staff have to account to the chief constable and others have to account to the authority. The authority is, correctly, in charge of forensic science, to ensure that there is separation for the purposes of prosecution. It has also been agreed that the authority will be in charge of IT. That was a matter of agreement between the chair and the chief constable.

Absolutely. I welcome that and think that both the chief constable and the chair of the SPA welcome it. Whatever doomsayers in the Parliament suggest, significant work is on-going as we move towards a single force. The 14 divisional commanders have been announced today, and significant work is being done on the serious crime division, which will be made public. I was privy to a briefing on that yesterday. Significant work is also being done on matters such as road policing. All that work will make Scotland a better place and allow the police to make cost efficiencies and run things better in what is, after all, a small country. I am sure that the chief constable, the chair of the SPA, other staff and, indeed, police officers will welcome the opportunity to engage with the convener of the Justice Committee and its members to detail what is on-going because, whatever some may suggest, there are significant good-news stories happening.

Absolutely. It is clear that the specifics have to be dealt with by the Parliament, not the Government, but I give Mr Pearson an absolute assurance that I agree now, as I did then, that there has to be some democratic oversight. I hope that Parliament can resolve that matter and that we can deliver that as soon as possible.

Each local authority area will have a designated local police commander who will work more closely than ever before with locally elected councillors and community planning partnerships to shape local services and prioritise local needs. That includes a statutory requirement to prepare a local police plan for each local authority area. All 32 local authorities and the eight regional police services are involved in developing and trialling the new local engagement and scrutiny arrangements that will be introduced on day 1 of the new service. In collaboration with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Improvement Service, we have today published national guidance on good practice in the area.

The fundamental structure has been passed by the Parliament. As to how the local authority will interact with the police, that is a matter for the local commander. There will be an announcement shortly by the police service of Scotland about the local commander. That is an operational matter for the chief constable. The local commander will be the person who interacts with Dumfries and Galloway Council. I recall from previous discussions with the chief executive of the council that he saw great advantages in bringing matters together to ensure that the co-operation that exists in community planning partnerships continues. These matters are being worked through. The local commander will be appointed—that is a matter for the chief constable—and he or she will work closely with the local authority in whatever form the local area wishes in setting up its committee.

In the year to 31 December 2012, 32 charges of smoking in non-smoking premises have been reported to the procurator fiscal. Of the 29 cases in which action was taken, court proceedings were raised in six and a further 23 were dealt with by direct measures. One case of permitting smoking to take place in non-smoking premises was reported and no action was taken in that case. Such offences can also be dealt with by fixed penalties issued by the local authority enforcement officers.

We must get matters in context. The ban on smoking in public places has been a success and the evidence indicates a high level of compliance with the legislation. However, enforcement is fundamentally a matter for local authorities. We expect all local authorities to ensure that people comply with the legislation and to have suitable enforcement protocols in place to ensure that the effectiveness of the smoking ban is maintained. Why there is that discrepancy I am unable to advise, but I am happy to discuss the matter directly with Stewart Maxwell and, indeed, the Lord Advocate.

I do not have particular knowledge of that matter but I am happy to engage with Dr Simpson on it or, indeed, to write to him with the specific answer.

I met the then interim chief executive of the Scottish Court Service, Mr Eric McQueen, on Wednesday 14 November. I take this opportunity to congratulate Mr McQueen on his recent appointment as the permanent chief executive of the Scottish Court Service. We discussed a number of current civil and criminal justice policy issues.

The position has been and remains that sentences are decided by the imposing sheriff or judge. If Mr McNeil wishes to vary that, he can seek to change the current understanding of our constitution. We, as a Government, respect the right of sheriffs and judges to decide what the basis of a sentence should be. We accept that, once a sentence is imposed, it demeans and undermines the integrity of the system if the terms are not met. That is why the Government introduced fines enforcement officers. Things would be made easier if we were able to deduct payments directly from welfare benefits, but such matters are reserved to Westminster. So far, Mr McNeil prefers that Westminster deals with the question of welfare benefits, whether that involves an attack on child benefit or the ability to take money from those who have prejudiced and done damage in our communities. I hope that he will work with us on that so that we can ensure that, once a sentence—whether it is a fine or a period of imprisonment—is decided by those with the powers to do so in Scotland, it is obtempered, and that collection is made easier by dealing with the Department for Work and Pensions.

Obviously, that is a matter for the Scottish Court Service, which is currently reviewing the responses now that the consultation has closed. It is for the SCS to decide what proposals it wishes to take forward, but the Parliament will ultimately have the right to decide on any suggestions that the SCS makes. I am due to meet the Lord President very shortly, and Mr McQueen will doubtless discuss matters with the Lord President in his role as chair of the Scottish Court Service. I am happy to come back to the member on the proposals thereafter, but we can work on the basis that the Scottish Court Service is taking the opportunity to review the numerous responses to the consultation and to consider its position, and thereafter it will return to Parliament if that is what it wishes.

No, I do not. The Scottish Court Service has set out in its consultation document a significant basis for its thoughts and proposals. Having said that, it is a consultation, and the SCS is prepared to consider the responses. I do not know whether Claire Baker made a submission, but if she did, it will doubtless be reflected on by Mr McQueen and colleagues acting with him. The Scottish Court Service is acting fairly and appropriately. The points made by those in the bar or on Fife Council, or by Ms Baker or anyone else, will be reflected on, and it will be for the SCS to decide where to take matters next.

As with all questions regarding the operation of the Scottish Prison Service, I have asked Colin McConnell, the chief executive, to consider this question, and he has advised the following: “The Scottish Prison Service ... recognises the need for contact to be maintained between children and their carers or parents who serve custodial sentences. The SPS already makes substantial provision for prison visits in general and is currently developing its approach to improving contact with the children of those in custody. The chief executive recently directed prison governors not to utilise children’s visits as an earned privilege for good behaviour in prisons, but rather to maximise the opportunities to encourage and facilitate contact whenever possible but of course within the constraints of sensible prison operations.”

Those things are very difficult for the Scottish Prison Service, but it does what it can in difficult circumstances. For example, HMP Cornton Vale operates mother-and-child bonding visits seven days a week, morning and evening, and HMP Peterhead has late-night visiting and will soon introduce a new, extended family-and-child bonding visit session on a Saturday morning. Clearly, each prison has difficult matters and criteria to deal with, given the nature of the prison estate and facilities and the prisoners. In the circumstances, all I can do is remind Mary Fee that the chief executive is committed to doing the maximum and has made it clear to governors that the contact visits should not be used to try to deal with the individual prisoner but should be viewed from the child’s perspective. I ask Ms Fee to recognise the progress that the chief executive has made and the difficulties under which the Scottish Prison Service operates, which would only be made much worse were the policy of Mr McNeil, who asked a question earlier, ever to be implemented. Maybe Labour should get on script on prison matters.

I agree that visitor centres are important. We already have them at Edinburgh and Perth. Dedicated visitor facilities are also available at Barlinnie, Kilmarnock and Addiewell. In addition, visitor facilities will be dealt with as part of the new build at HMP Grampian and HMP Inverclyde. Some of the difficulties are due to the nature of the prison estate that has been inherited. As Alison McInnes will know, because I know that she has visited prisons, the facility at Barlinnie cannot be provided within the confines of the estate and is having to be provided in a church hall that is as proximate to the prison as can be. We should welcome the progress that the Scottish Prison Service has made. The Edinburgh and Perth outlets are the template that we seek to follow, and visitor centres will be dealt with in new builds, which is why Grampian and Inverclyde will have them built in. We are seeking to do what we can to ensure that, in facilities such as Barlinnie, where they have not been specifically built in, steps are taken.

Domestic abuse is completely unacceptable and has no place in a modern Scotland. We know that helping victims through this traumatic time requires support from the point that they make contact with the police, criminal justice, social work or the third sector. That network of support is available throughout the country. Additional advocacy support is provided in Glasgow where, unfortunately, there is a high density of cases. Where domestic abuse cases are brought before a specialist court, they will be heard before a dedicated sheriff. Prosecutors across the country have extensive guidance available to them to assist them in dealing effectively with domestic abuse cases.

We recognise that domestic abuse scars far too many communities—probably every community in Scotland. Statistically, the Northern Constabulary area has the second lowest number of cases, but there are still far too many. Each area operates a different approach depending on the number of domestic abuse cases that it deals with. In the Highlands and Islands, the density of cases is lower, although the number of cases is clearly far too high. Local partners have decided that, given the case volumes and the court capacity in the Highlands and Islands, those cases can be supported just as effectively in the mainstream summary and solemn courts. The matter is kept under constant review by all the appropriate partners, whether it is by the constabulary, the Scottish Court Service, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service or those acting in other agencies and capacities. I will happily reflect on the issue and discuss it with people. However, one of the most significant ways in which we can make progress is by following Lord Carloway’s recommendation on the abolition of corroboration, which will help to address not only rape but domestic abuse.

We are aware of the difficulties that are caused by remoteness in the north. Although we recognise that domestic abuse is not gender specific and there is domestic abuse by females against males, it is sadly still the case that such abuse is significantly dwarfed by the domestic abuse that is perpetrated by males against females. Both aspects are being addressed. Such matters are for the Scottish Court Service, but I assure Mary Scanlon—as I assured John Finnie—that they are viewed with the utmost seriousness by all the agencies. The remoteness factor and the difficulties in travelling that Mary Scanlon mentioned must be borne in mind with regard to what we can do in the appropriate courts. How we do things in Glasgow is different from how we do things in other areas, such as Edinburgh, but each area has specialist support and advice and is getting additional support from the Government to tackle domestic abuse, which is fundamentally unacceptable and wrong and must be addressed in modern Scotland.

As with all questions regarding the operation of the Scottish Prison Service, I have asked Colin McConnell, the chief executive, to consider the question. He has advised the following. When offenders ask for bonding visits, they are advised of the provisions that will be applied. The offender is asked to sign a form acknowledging that they understand the process. That is not a contract.

I can clarify exactly what Mr McConnell said to Mary Fee. I understand that the contract to which she refers relates to HM Prison Shotts. The use of the word “contract” is misleading. It is a colloquial expression that is used only in HMP Shotts, whereby visitors are asked to agree to abide by various criteria to allow them to participate in the scheme. I understand that Ms Fee wrote to Colin McConnell, the chief executive of SPS, about the issue in September. In his reply of 27 September 2012, he advised that it was entirely incorrect that parent and child visits or, indeed, any visits should be removed as a punishment, as advised in this case. It is quite clear—this is central to the revised guidance that will be given—that the rights of the child are paramount, as is recognition of prisoners’ rights to have a family life under the European convention on human rights. The criteria for accessing the scheme will be presumed inclusion, although regard will be paid to any child protection issues as part of the relationship policy. For the avoidance of doubt, the chief executive of SPS has recently reminded governors that removal of bonding visits should not be used as a punishment. In those circumstances, I hope that Ms Fee will accept that, given the assurance that Mr McConnell has given her, the reminder that he has sent to governors and my assurances on behalf of the chief executive.

The latest figures are encouraging, but too many offences in Scotland still involve a firearm, which is why we will be creating a licensing system for air weapons. I will continue to press the Home Office to devolve legislative powers on all firearms to the Scottish Parliament. Discussions will continue with the police and the gun lobby, as well as with other stakeholders, to ensure that we can make our communities safer.

I thank the member for asking that question. I established a Scottish firearms consultative panel in November 2011, and it has been examining the practicalities of licensing air weapons, which I consider to be the best way to combat their misuse. Addressing the firearms issue is a manifesto commitment of the Scottish National Party, which forms the Scottish Government. The matter has been raised with me personally by Andrew Morton and Sharon McMillan, who tragically lost their young son. We have given them a commitment that action will be taken to ensure that no more tragedies occur, and that we will address the other difficulties around the misuse of air weapons, whether those relate to children, animals or any other aspects. On that basis, I confirm to Mr Doris that a consultation on the proposals will be launched on Friday.

I do not think that the current firearms legislation is fit for purpose. In all the investigations that we have carried out with experts and the police, including the police south of the border, it has been recognised that the firearms legislation is difficult to understand. As I recall, there are around eight acts of Parliament that make up the legislation, together with some seven significant amendments, some of which appear to be mutually contradictory. There is a desire for an overarching review in order to consolidate the firearms legislation. We wish to undertake that. Action has so far not been taken by the Home Secretary. It is clear that many of the worst problems that we face in our communities come from weapons that are used illegally rather than by those who seek to use them more responsibly. We must deal with two matters. Law enforcement officers will deal with those who use firearms illegally and seek to perpetrate crimes, serious or otherwise. We have a significant problem in Scotland with air weapons, and we stood on a commitment to address that. I have commented on the matter and given assurances to the parents of young Andrew Morton, and we will seek to deliver on that commitment. There are clear differences between the abuse of firearms that occurs in our communities and some of the more significant crimes, but both those behaviours are unacceptable, and we, as a Government, will seek to take action. We can address only one particular aspect at present, and address it we will. I continue to urge the Home Secretary either to take action or to give us the powers to allow us to do so in order to ensure that we get comprehensive and credible legislation that is fit for the 21st century.

We have improved community sentences. Last year, we introduced the new community payback order, which gives our judiciary the option to impose a clearer, tougher, more flexible and more effective sentence than the community disposals that it replaced. That has been backed up with additional funding, which has given local authorities £4 million to support the unpaid work element of the CPO. We have implemented new targets for starting and completing unpaid work, and funded the fast-track pilot in Glasgow that resulted in more than 90 per cent of offenders in Glasgow starting unpaid work within 24 hours of being sentenced. We have also created a new law that gives communities a say in the type of unpaid work that they want offenders to do. Collectively, those measures demonstrate that we are committed to following an approach that has effective community sentences at its heart.

We certainly encourage that, and I have seen matters such as snow clearing for myself, whether in the west of Scotland, the east of Scotland or elsewhere. I am aware of the particular matter that Mr McMillan has raised, and we are perfectly comfortable that that is the type of work that can be carried out so long as there is no danger to the health and safety of all those involved, whether they are carrying out or supervising such sentences. However, we leave such matters to the local authorities, which are the bodies charged with dealing with the issue, although we have put in additional funding through proceeds of crime money and through providing additional day support. Perhaps Mr McMillan might care to speak to the local community payback teams to see what work can be carried out and to give those suggestions to them. Certainly in my experience, if communities in the east of Scotland or elsewhere make suggestions of work that they want done, the community payback teams are keen to ensure that, where possible, they carry out such work, whether that is clearing snow, addressing difficulties in graveyards or, as is sometimes the case, just litter picking. Community service orders are about making those who have damaged our community do some hard work to atone for their difficulties and make our communities better places.

They are not seen as a soft option. Enforcement has to come through the shrieval bench or whatever bench imposes such orders—normally they are imposed by the shrieval bench. It would be fair to say that breaches for minor matters may result in the court simply remitting the sentence back, although usually the court will make it quite clear the basis on which the sentence must be done. From discussions with the shrieval bench and with the Sheriffs Association, I know that individual offenders can sometimes cause great frustrations. That is why, as a Government, we are quite clear that a community payback order is not optional but obligatory. If such an order is imposed by the court, it is meant to be done; if it is not done, the court has the failsafe—and will have our full support wherever this is felt necessary—of simply remitting people to a custodial sentence. However, we believe that good work is being done, and we usually have the best results where there is close co-operation between the community payback team and the shrieval bench working together on successfully ensuring that people do their work and that our communities are improved.

As I indicated to Bob Doris, we will begin the consultation on Friday.

I welcomed all the contributions. Those who sat on the panel represented: the police; the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service; the British Association for Shooting and Conservation; the Scottish Target Shooting Federation; the Gun Trade Association; the British Shooting Sports Council; the Scottish Air Rifle and Pistol Association; the Gun Control Network; the Scottish community safety network; the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities; and the Scottish Government. I was grateful for all the input, much of which was from an expert basis. Clearly, there were sometimes disagreements around the table—

However, I thank each and every person who contributed for the efforts that they made.

Overall fine-collection rates are at their highest ever, and the Scottish Court Service is taking a robust approach to pursuing all outstanding fines. That gives a clear message to defaulters that there is no place to hide. Recent figures that were published by the Scottish Court Service show that 17,202 fiscal direct penalties have been discharged since 2009-10. The figures show that 6,694 penalties that were imposed in 2009-10 were discharged that year, with a further 5,756 and 4,752 discharged in the past two years. A discharge is often linked to an alternative punishment, such as a supervised attendance order. All decisions on discharges are taken by courts, in light of the facts and circumstances of the case.

The Scottish Court Service is taking the appropriate action. The report sets out the basis on which the calculations are made. As indicated, 78 per cent of fines that were imposed in 2009-10 have been paid or are on track to be paid. However, there is clearly more work to be done. We would welcome further powers on the issue. Perhaps Mr Macdonald wishes to join me in once again encouraging the United Kingdom Government to give us and the Scottish Court Service the ability to access matters through the Department for Work and Pensions, which would make collection of fines much easier. However, so far, the UK Government has refused to give us that power. If matters were either devolved here or dealt with by the UK Government, I am sure that what Mr Macdonald seeks would be much easier to achieve for the people who do an outstanding job in seeking to collect fines with the current limited powers.

The Scottish Court Service consultation document proposes that Ayr sheriff and justice of the peace court would continue to hear local civil, summary and sheriff and jury cases.

John Scott is right to raise the potential impact on Ayr sheriff court because, clearly, there will be no variation in its current work. However, Kirkcudbright sheriff court sits on a limited basis and the number of cases is restricted. There is the possibility that those cases might go to Dumfries or elsewhere. I can give the member the assurance that the Scottish Court Service has considered the issues, and that it does not wish to damage or jeopardise proceedings at Ayr. I encourage the member to speak with the Scottish Court Service if he has concerns about that. My understanding is that it has considered the issues and is certain that Ayr has sufficient capacity to cope. I am sure that the Court Service would be delighted to engage with the member.

The Scottish Government is committed to doing all that we can to support a continued reduction in crime across the whole of Scotland. It is extremely positive that recorded crime fell by 24 per cent in South Lanarkshire and by 21 per cent in North Lanarkshire between 2006-07 and 2011-12. We are succeeding in our efforts to cut knife crime—the number of crimes involving an offensive weapon decreased by 47 per cent in South Lanarkshire and 54 per cent in North Lanarkshire in the same period. That has contributed to an overall 25 per cent reduction in recorded crime across the whole of Scotland in the same period.

Absolutely. I pay tribute to those who are involved in the street project, which Christina McKelvie is right to say that I have visited. I saw the theatre work, but I have not yet seen the video, which I look forward to seeing. I am delighted about the on-going work in North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire, which are two of our 10 local authority areas where the no knives, better lives initiative is in place. The initiative has been supported by Government investment of £1.5 million since 2009. We are also working through the cashback for communities scheme, under which more than £1.6 million has been invested in this area since 2007. We must have tough laws, which are getting tougher, and we must have a visible police presence and enforcement, which we have, but we recognise that we must also educate and change a culture. Sometimes I think that matters are better dealt with by young people who are involved. Rather than being lectured to by politicians or police officers, they should have the opportunity to express themselves to their peers and friends. In that way, we will change the culture. Indeed, that is borne out by the statistics, which are showing great improvement. However, we are not complacent.

The latest police officer quarterly statistics, which were published on 4 December, show that there are 3,002 full-time-equivalent police officers in Lothian and Borders Police. That is an increase of 209 officers, or 7.5 per cent, since quarter 1 of 2007.

Yes, I can give that assurance. The member makes a fair point. That has always been a concern as we move towards a single police service in Scotland. The Scottish Government will continue to report on national police officer levels, and our legislation requires the police service of Scotland to make local authority-level information available. The Scottish Government is working closely with the national police reform team on future plans for data collection, analysis and the reporting of statistical information relating to the delivery of policing. Indeed, I know that discussions are on-going in Edinburgh between the council and the police to ensure that there is local engagement. I assure the member that the figures will be available at the local level. Indeed, work is on-going to ensure that, as we move to divisional commands and matters being dealt with at the local authority level, there is the engagement that he and many others want.

As I said yesterday in Labour’s debate on police reform, Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland has recently commented on that issue. Its understanding is that the only backfilling that is taking place anywhere in Scotland—the inspectorate covers the whole of Scotland—involves female officers who are approaching maternity leave and who cannot be expected, because of their condition, to provide front-line services, and male and female officers who are currently injured and incapacitated and are unable to carry out front-line duties. If Ms McInnes is aware of any other instances, she should feel free to bring them directly to me or to take them to the inspectorate of constabulary. She should remember the confirmation that Chief Constable Stephen House gave that he saw backfilling as providing no great saving at all and that it was not his intention. All the information so far is that backfilling is not happening.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I welcome the opportunity to respond to the Labour Party motion and Lewis Macdonald’s opening speech. This debate comes just a day after we announced record police numbers. There are now 17,454 officers working in our communities, an increase of 1,220 on the 2007 figure. They are supported by 6,955 police staff—an increase of 65 over the last quarter.

I get asked such questions regularly by Labour Party members—sometimes by Ms Marra and sometimes by others. I have given a snapshot that shows that at the present time we have more police officers than ever before. It also shows that, despite the predictions of doom and gloom by Ms Marra, the numbers of police staff have increased, not decreased.

What we have said—

I will move on then, Presiding Officer. We have made our position clear that officers and staff are performing excellently together. Crime is at a 37-year low, clear-up rates are at a 30-year high and public confidence is high. Indeed, figures published yesterday show an overall halving in the number of firearms offences since 2006-07. That is testament to the hard work and dedication of every single person working in policing in Scotland, day in, day out. As we all know, public finances are under greater pressure than ever before as a result of Westminster budget cuts. The vital front-line policing that we all depend on is under threat, but this Government will not let it be threatened. That is why, after extensive debate and consultation, we embarked on the most radical reform of policing in decades. Reform is the only way to safeguard our hard-won gains against Westminster cuts, and it presents a unique opportunity to do more, allowing us to make a virtue out of a necessity. Moving from 10 police organisations to one means that the service will be more efficient, eventually delivering £106 million of savings every year. We will no longer need support functions duplicated many times over, or the duplicated roles of chief constables and deputy chief constables. As duplication across the police service of Scotland is reduced, there will be fewer police support staff roles. We do not underestimate that challenge, but the Armageddon scenario set out by Labour is just not happening—indeed, staff numbers are up. I recognise and value the role of police staff, which will continue in the new single service. I have therefore made my position clear that there should be no compulsory redundancies for police support staff.

Those will be operational matters on which Ms MacDonald will no doubt engage with Mr House or one of his deputes. I have no doubt that they will be happy to engage on that and discuss it with her. In Steve House and Vic Emery, we have excellent leaders. Steve brings strong leadership, unrivalled experience and a reputation for successful delivery; and Vic brings extensive expertise from business and wider public sector governance. They are now supported by a strong board and four excellent deputy chief constables, with assistant chief constables expected to be appointed before Christmas. On governance, the 2012 act is clear: the chief constable has direction and control of the police service, and the SPA is responsible for holding him or her to account for the delivery of policing. The SPA and the chief constable are moving towards agreement—indeed, they are meeting again as we speak. In a letter to me yesterday, which I have lodged in the Scottish Parliament information centre—reference 54549—the chair confirmed that discussions have been “fruitful and progressive”. It is for the SPA and the chief constable to determine how best to fulfil their responsibilities, and it would be inappropriate for the Parliament or the Government to tell them how to do that. There is no simple formula that determines who should do what, but it has never been the case that the chief constable wanted to control everything or that the SPA wanted to control police functions. The dialogue is about how the SPA can fulfil its responsibility to hold the service to account effectively, while giving the chief constable a coherent and effective set of responsibilities to deliver policing. There is no remaining contention about what the legislation says about the respective roles. The chief constable and the SPA have reached agreement on the responsibility for all functions apart from human resources and finance, and they have agreed that the chief constable will be responsible for HR and finance delivery, so we are 95 per cent of the way there. The remaining point of discussion is on the reporting lines for the head of HR and finance. That will be the focus of today’s meeting. I and my officials have been taking a close interest in the issue, as members would expect. We have been involved in a number of informal discussions that involved the chief constable and the chair. I repeat that it is for the chief constable and the chair to determine how best to fulfil their responsibilities. At the Justice Committee, Her Majesty’s inspector of constabulary for Scotland, Andrew Laing, said: “what we are going through at the moment is healthy and necessary.” He went on to say: “we are getting closer to a well-balanced system”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 November 2012; c 2112-3.] I reject the Labour Party motion. Our amendment celebrates the success of policing in Scotland. I urge Mr Macdonald to have more faith in two men of outstanding calibre, who have been appointed, correctly, to positions that I think that they will cherish and in which they will deliver. I move amendment S4M-05087.2, to leave out from “the view” to end and insert: “that the Chief Constable has direction and control of the Police Service of Scotland and is responsible for its day to day administration; welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to providing 1,000 extra police officers in Scotland’s communities, with a total of 17,454 officers on 30 September 2012, an increase of 1,220 on the 2007 figure; welcomes the contribution provided by 6,955 police staff, an increase of 65 over the last quarter; notes that crime is at a 37-year low and public confidence is high; notes that the overall number of firearms offences in Scotland has more than halved since 2006-07, with a decrease of 21% in the number of firearms offences recorded between 2010-11 and 2011-12, and recognises that this is testament to the hard work of police officers and staff working in policing in Scotland.”

Does the member accept that it has been made quite clear that the issue is not who controls, because it has been accepted that the line of accountability is to the chief constable? Does he accept that the point in dispute is reporting lines, not control?

Does the member not accept Vic Emery’s position that the only substantive points of dispute between himself and the chief constable are the lines of responsibility with regard to HR and finance? Although he accepts that those are matters for the chief, he has pointed out that the issue is accountability to him. Does the member not accept that that is all that remains outstanding?

I note those mutual congratulations between Labour and the Tories, who continue their better together campaign. Tragically for them, the crime statistics here in Scotland keep getting better. Let me deal with the matter that we are debating. Is there an issue between the chief constable and the chair of the Scottish Police Authority? Yes. Does it relate to operational independence? Absolutely not. That point is not and has never been in dispute. That control rests with the chief constable, and the chair of the authority accepts that. As was pointed out at the Justice Committee, the position remains that the two are 95 per cent of the way towards agreement. I wish that they were 100 per cent of the way, but they are meeting as we debate and I hope and expect that matters will be resolved.

I have no doubt that that is a factor. I have welcomed the Justice Committee’s involvement. I have had regular meetings with the ASPS and the Scottish Police Federation. Equally, I meet with those two gentlemen regularly. That takes me back to my next question. What is the point of the remaining discussion? It is about the reporting lines for the heads of HR and finance. It is not about operational independence or control, and it is not about Mr Emery seeking to be in charge of HR or finance; it is simply about the reporting lines. We are not dealing with two people who are naive or who do not have great credibility. Mr House is an experienced officer who has been an outstanding chief constable of Strathclyde Police and who was shortlisted for the post of Metropolitan Police commissioner. He is one of our finest police officers. Vic Emery is a significant businessman who has contributed greatly in business and who continues to contribute in public life in Scotland. The two worked together on the Scottish Police Services Authority. They know and respect each other and they are working together to resolve matters.

Throughout the debate, points have been made about the necessity for operational independence. We have had a debate on the structures for policing, during which Alison McInnes and others said how important it is that there is no ministerial interference in policing. However, no sooner have we got the bill through than Mr Macdonald and others seem to insist on me and the Government interfering. We have to allow those two men of outstanding calibre to narrow the very small issue that now remains. They are meeting as we speak and I hope that matters will be resolved. Mr Macdonald might care to look at the letter to me from Mr Emery that is now lodged in SPICe. I believe that the matter will be resolved. Work is on-going. That takes me to my second point, which relates to the position of the police service in Scotland. If we listened to Labour, we would believe that nothing is happening in the authority or the police service of Scotland other than the current issues between Mr House and Mr Emery. However, in fact, work is on-going. Four outstanding deputy chief constables have been appointed and recruitment of assistant chief constables is on-going. Whatever Margaret Mitchell suggests, the chief constable is doing good work to ensure that we get the right pyramid structure in Scotland. Policing in Scotland is delivering. Labour seems to dispute the number of police officers in Scotland, and that is its right and entitlement. After all, as Christine Grahame, Colin Keir and others pointed out, south of the border, in the region of 16,000 police officers are to be lost. The Labour Party south of the border believes that that number is scandalous—it thinks that only 10,000 officers should be lost. We know that Labour is wedded to the Barnett formula, so I presume that Labour in Scotland would wish us to lose 1,000 officers. The Scottish Government will not countenance that. Facts are chiels that winna ding. Labour members keep coming to the chamber and talking down the Scottish police service. Sadly for them, the statistics keep showing how outstanding the police service in Scotland is and how it is getting better. We have a record number of police officers. Notwithstanding Ms Marra’s dearest wish, there has even been an increase in the number of police back-office staff in the past quarter—how disappointed she must be. Recorded crime is at a 37-year low, and violent crime is at a 30-year low. Firearms offences have halved in number since we have come into office. The Scottish police service keeps delivering and the Government will keep investing in that police service.

I am in my final minute. The statistics might not suit Labour’s desire to create press stories, but the press stories are out there and they are based on clear facts and evidence. A record number of police officers are delivering a safer, better Scotland, and the faith and belief of the people of Scotland have never been greater, notwithstanding some Opposition spokespeople.

The only outstanding matter is the line of accountable responsibility that the SPA chair is seeking. Does the member not accept that? What other aspect is she suggesting is still in dispute?

Where?

Does the member dispute the fact that HMICS has investigated the allegations of backfilling and found that the only instances of backfilling are in a limited number of situations in which pregnant police officers and male and female officers who have been injured cannot be put on front-line duties? Apart from that, HMICS is not aware of any instances of backfilling.

Ms Marra was a member of the Justice Committee when Chief Constable House made it clear to that committee that he had no intention of backfilling and that it would meet no purpose. Is she suggesting that he is a liar?

The total number of people who appeared in custody courts without legal representation on 3 December in Aberdeen, Arbroath, Dundee, Perth, Alloa, Falkirk and Dunfermline while defence solicitors were protesting is 17. There was no strike action in Forfar, but there was in Kirkcaldy, where 16 people appeared without representation, which brings the total to 33. [Kenny MacAskill has corrected this contribution. See end of report]. Normally, people from custody would appear without a solicitor in attendance only in exceptional circumstances, but I should make it clear that no one needed to appear without legal representation as a result of defence solicitor protests. Duty solicitors were available on all the dates in question, as they would usually be, to ensure that access to justice was maintained. However, some clients have appeared in court unrepresented, even though they seem to have had prior conversations with a defence solicitor.

Those are operational matters for the police. Mr Macdonald would require to approach the chief constable. I cannot possibly provide that information, as it is not routinely provided to the Government.

As I have said previously, I met the Law Society on 20 November. It wished to have further meetings and thought that it would be helpful if I could meet members of the bar association directly. I will meet bar association representatives and the Law Society tomorrow. We have put two matters to the Law Society. The first is that we are willing to consider an increase in the disposable income threshold, which is a matter that the profession seems to have majored on. I accept that and am willing to increase the threshold from £68 to £82, but that will require to be met from within the existing budget, which would affect fees. That proposal is with the Law Society and I await its response. As regards collection, I believe that the matter should be dealt with by solicitors. They are the ones who interact and interface with agents. That is what they do when they collect private fees and when they deal with assistance by way of representation. It is what civil agents do. We are seeking to get parity in that regard. I have made the offer that SLAB would be willing to seek to recover contributions from people who have not made payments, but that would have to be done on a commercial basis. That would apply to any other business—large or small—in Scotland.

That is a matter that I cannot really give advice on. It is for those who are taking part in the action to give us such an indication. It is rather regrettable that very little intimation of strike action has been given. That has caused considerable inconvenience, not simply for clients who are unrepresented but for the Crown, the Scottish Court Service and sheriffs who are required to preside. I will make it clear to the Law Society that, although members of the legal profession, like other people, are entitled to take action, people usually give some intimation of their proposed action so that preparatory steps can be taken. I will discuss that issue with the Law Society. It is a matter of note that the action that has been taken to date has been restricted to action that will not affect the fees of its members.

Kenny MacAskill has identified an error in his contribution and provided the following correction. At col 14215, paragraph 3— Original text— The total number of people who appeared in custody courts without legal representation on 3 December in Aberdeen, Arbroath, Dundee, Perth, Alloa, Falkirk and Dunfermline while defence solicitors were protesting is 17. There was no strike action in Forfar, but there was in Kirkcaldy, where 16 people appeared without representation, which brings the total to 33. Corrected text— The total number of people who appeared in custody courts without legal representation on 3 December in Aberdeen, Arbroath, Dundee, Perth, Alloa, Falkirk and Dunfermline while defence solicitors were protesting is 23. There was no strike action in Forfar, but there was in Kirkcaldy, where 16 people appeared without representation, which brings the total to 39. Hyperlink to corrections page.

The Scottish Government intends to legislate through the criminal justice bill that will be introduced to Parliament next year to simplify the law relating to the powers of the court to impose consecutive sentences on offenders who are still serving sentences for previous offences. Under the current law, the courts have a power to impose an order under section 16 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, which provides the court with the discretionary power to return an offender to custody as a punitive measure. In addition, the court has discretion to decide whether the sentence for the new offence should run consecutively to any section 16 order that has been imposed. That means that the court is able to impose a section 16 order and a sentence for the new offence that run consecutively. However, although those powers are already available to the court, we have looked at how the law in this area operates and have concluded that it is not as clear as it could be. Our proposed changes will ensure that the courts are clear that they can impose a punishment so that the offender completes their previous sentence before the sentence for the new crime starts. Parliament will be given the opportunity to consider and scrutinise the provisions when the bill is introduced.

The law is clear, and we have stated what the 1993 act prescribes. It is a rather complex area of law that has caused difficulties for some on the bench. We believe that the law would be enhanced by being simpler and more understandable not simply to those with legal qualifications, but to laypeople who have commented. We believe that the current law is adequate but is unclear and would benefit from being clearer. We have discussed these matters with others in the legal family, if I can put it that way. The issue has also been driven by people who have been the victims of crime who have discussed it. We believe that, although some aspects of law are, by their very nature, complex and require those with specialism to understand them, it is in the best interests of our society that the law should be as clear as possible and, preferably, understandable to all. The bill will clarify the law to make it more understandable and clearer not simply for the judiciary, who are required to implement and act on it, but for the man and woman in the street, who sometimes has to look to the law for comfort and solace.

The member raises two matters. Concurrent sentences have formed part of the law of Scotland for many a year—centuries, I presume. I do not know whether Mr Macdonald is suggesting that concurrent sentences should not be allowed in any circumstance, but it appears to us that such matters are best dealt with by the judiciary. In our society, it is the judiciary who impose the appropriate sentence, having heard the facts or, indeed, the case. We will retain that, but where complexities exist to do with concurrent and consecutive sentences, and where the 1993 act appears to be rather complex and difficult to read, our law will be enhanced by making the position clearer. We remain committed to setting up the Scottish sentencing council, on which the Parliament has legislated. I spoke to the Lord President just last week about on-going work on the council’s establishment. Options and costs for the council are under consideration and a decision will be made in due course, in dialogue—of course—with the judiciary, who have a fundamental part to play in the council.

How did I know that Mr McLetchie was going to ask that? I never tire of him asking the question or of me responding that unconditional automatic early release was brought in by a Conservative Government many years ago. He will be glad to know that, thankfully, this Government has taken steps to ensure that such release is not unconditional. Equally, we remain committed to following the quite sage advice of the McLeish commission, which indicated that it was of the view that automatic early release should go, but that various triggers and criteria would have to be met, such as giving consideration to the impact on the judiciary, the Scottish Prison Service and—not least—social work departments. Those criteria and conditions have not been met. On that basis, despite the fact that there has been appropriate tinkering to ensure that matters are improved, we must live with what a Conservative Government imposed on us many years ago.

We should put it on record that progress is being made. Statistics have shown that violent crime is at a 30-year low. Yesterday, when I announced the increase in the maximum sentence for possession of an offensive weapon from four years to five years, I indicated that the average sentence for knife crime and handling of weapons was nine months. At 9.30 this morning, we published statistics that show that the average sentence for such crimes is now 10 months. Despite the progress that has been made, we still face problems with a minority who seem to think that they can carry weapons with impunity. They should realise that we have tough laws, which are getting tougher. Our visible police presence will enforce the law through stop and search. The courts are taking the appropriate action to implement what we, as a Parliament, believe is necessary to target the misuse of weapons that damages many communities.

In Scotland, we have in place a strong legislative framework, robust monitoring arrangements and agencies working together with the expertise to protect the public from sex offenders. Of the 33 recommendations, 31 have been implemented: nine were implemented before 10 May 2007 and 22 have been delivered since then. Work to implement the protection of vulnerable groups scheme in Scotland began on 28 February 2011. To date, 279,000 people have become scheme members. Once implementation is completed, research into the impact of the scheme will be conducted. The Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 amended Scotland’s sexual offences prevention order regime. That has resulted in the police successfully applying for conditions that require offenders to take specific action where previously there was no such obligation. The 2010 act also allows us to prescribe in regulations the increased frequency with which homeless sex offenders must verify their personal details to the police. Those regulations will be brought forward to Parliament shortly.

Yes, the position is that recommendation 10 required homeless offenders to report more regularly to the police. As I mentioned, the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 has made those amendments. We are bringing forward the regulations, so the matters are in hand and are being dealt with. The ground has changed since 2007, but the Scottish Government is doing what it can to ensure that we deliver and seek to keep our people safe from those who would harm not just our children but anybody in our communities.

Let me remind both Paul Martin and Patricia Ferguson that section 100 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, which came into force on 1 November 2011, amended Scotland’s sexual offences prevention orders scheme by allowing for positive obligations in SOPO conditions. A sexual offences prevention order can now place a positive obligation on the offender to report more frequently or at a specified time to a prescribed police station. The 2010 act also allows us to prescribe in regulations how frequently homeless sex offenders must verify their personal details to the police. Those regulations will be considered by Parliament shortly. That is us delivering on what was required and, indeed, recognising what needs to be done. The Government is not a housing allocation agency; that matter falls to housing associations and local authorities. The decision on where people are housed is a matter for the organisations that are charged with it. Under the multi-agency public protection arrangements, they have to work with other agencies, including the police in particular, to ensure that we keep our communities as safe as they can be. The decision about where someone is housed is a matter for the MAPPA regime.

The Scottish Government keeps sentencing policies and matters relating to sentencing under review and brings forward proposals for consideration by Parliament as appropriate. Our aim is to ensure that the courts have the powers available to them to impose custodial or tough community-based sentences appropriate to the circumstances of each case. Proportionate and effective sentencing policies can assist in tackling specific issues. For example, people are 50 per cent more likely to be sent to prison in Scotland for knife possession than in England and Wales. The message is clear that people who choose to carry a knife risk significant penalties.

It would be wrong of me to comment on any individual case, but on the general matter let me say that we believe—and this has been the position of every Administration—that sentencing is best left to the judiciary. That said, we are committed to, and Parliament has passed the basis for, delivering a Scottish sentencing council, which I keep under discussion—indeed, just yesterday I met with the Lord President. It appears to me that the best vehicle for dealing with such issues will be the Scottish sentencing council, the delivery of which has been enacted by Parliament and which we are working with the judiciary to seek to deliver in due course.

Recorded crime in North Ayrshire has decreased by 5 per cent since 2007. In 2006-07, 9,871 crimes were recorded in North Ayrshire; in 2011-12, 9,378 crimes were recorded there. That welcome reduction is helping to contribute to the lowest levels of recorded crime in Scotland for 37 years.

Police officers throughout Scotland do a fantastic job, and the innovative work in North Ayrshire is simply a part of that. The Government believes that a visible police presence correlates with our having the lowest recorded crime in 37 years. The visible police presence reassures good citizens and deters those who would be bad. That is why we are delighted that we have maintained the 1,000 additional officers that we committed to: we have delivered them and they are working in our communities.

Significant and record funding is being put in to tackle domestic abuse. Much of the funding for dealing with the victims, apart from the support for Victim Support Scotland, comes through other portfolios. I have no doubt that my Cabinet colleagues would be able to comment on that. The member is right to raise the issue. It is a matter that the former chief constable of Strathclyde, who is now the chief constable of the new police service of Scotland, has commented on. It is clear that domestic abuse is part of the culture of violence that we have in Scotland, and it is an issue that we have to address. When that is allied to the abuse of alcohol, significant problems are experienced, although it is not always dependent on alcohol. I give the member an absolute assurance that the current police services and the new single service will continue to prioritise the issue, and my colleagues in other departments will continue to address the victims’ needs. Equally, we will continue to work with Victim Support Scotland, Scottish Women’s Aid and all the other agencies, which do a remarkably good job in tackling what is in many instances a cultural problem that needs to be addressed by each and every one of us, especially males.

No, I do not believe that it will. The deployment of officers will always be a matter for the chief constable, but as I said in response to Kenneth Gibson, we believe that it is the visible police presence that has got us to a 37-year low in recorded crime, together with the significant progress that we have made across other areas of crime. The whole purpose of reform is to ensure that we do not go down the route that is being taken south of the border, where almost 16,000 officers are to be lost. That is almost as many officers as currently serve—and will continue to serve—in Scotland.

On 29 October 2012, I wrote to the Justice Committee advising that I had agreed the Scottish Prison Service chief executive’s recommendation that the SPS proceed to develop Her Majesty’s prison Inverclyde as a custom-made national prison for women offenders, with both the regime and the building fully meeting the aspirations and recommendations of the commission on women offenders. In order to facilitate that change of use for the planned HMP Inverclyde, HMP Greenock will be retained in the medium term as a local prison for male prisoners.

Absolutely. The member makes a fair point. In addition to benefits from the building of the new prison, there will be economic benefits from the continuing operation of HMP Greenock, which will retain around 180 employees with an annual wage bill of £5.2 million. HMP Greenock also incurs expenditure of circa £2.31 million on a range of goods, services and utilities. The construction of the new 300-cell prison in Inverclyde, which will cost in the region of £60 million, should create substantial economic benefits; after all, a large project of that nature requires many different skills and will create employment opportunities. The public service contracts for HMP Inverclyde will be procured in accordance with the necessary European Union legislation to ensure that the facility is fit for purpose and provides value for money. That said, the Scottish Prison Service and the appointed construction contractor will liaise with Inverclyde Council on economic development issues and the opportunities that the project presents for local employment and for local businesses, to build on the current significant input by and contribution of HMP Greenock in relation to employment.

We are taking a variety of measures. As we cannot move immediately to HMP Inverclyde, work is on-going at Cornton Vale to ensure that it is fit for purpose, that various issues are addressed and that there is investment in mental health services and so on. In addition, the first allocations are being made from the reducing reoffending change fund to support mentoring programmes for women offenders across Scotland. That was one of the clear measures identified by Dame Elish Angiolini’s commission to help to address reoffending and to keep women on the straight and narrow once they are released. I give the member my full commitment that the outstanding work of the Angiolini commission is being delivered and that we are seeking to work towards delivering the outcomes that the commission thought necessary and on which we concur.

Analysis of the six arrests in the past 12 months in respect of European arrest warrants that were issued in Scotland shows that three suspects were arrested within hours or a matter of days. One of those cases involved an accusation of murder, and an arrest was made in five hours. Arrests were made in a further two cases in four months and nine months respectively. The final case involved a period of six years and five months between the warrant being issued and an arrest being made.

I totally agree. I disagree with the way in which the matter has been handled by the Home Secretary, and we have registered our objections. The decision was made without any intimation to us, at a time when Strathclyde Police was actively making it clear that it was seeking to arrest an individual or individuals in Spain in respect of a very serious crime that had taken place in Scotland. Such a decision would not be helpful in promoting the interests of justice in Scotland.

Essential work continues to be undertaken to ensure that that abhorrent form of child abuse is prevented and that the perpetrators are brought to justice. We are refreshing the national guidance on child protection and have set up a working group to develop multi-agency local protocols on a number of child protection issues, including child sexual exploitation, for all parts of Scotland. Following my recent visit to the child exploitation and online protection centre in London and the recent publication of the report “Exploring the scale and nature of child sexual exploitation in Scotland”, which the Scottish Government commissioned, officials will soon meet key stakeholders to discuss what further action needs to be taken.

Adam Ingram makes a fair and valid point. As the report that I mentioned highlights, it is difficult to estimate the prevalence of child sexual exploitation in Scotland, just as it has been in the rest of the United Kingdom. The problem is not visible, and investigation is hindered by the differences in how the issue is defined, but action needs to be taken. As the national child protection guidance has been reviewed, the collection of national child protection statistics will change from next year. That will lead to the publication of more robust statistics, including more detailed information on child exploitation and sexual abuse. The Scottish Government will explore options to improve local data collection in Scotland on child sexual exploitation, which will potentially include working further with the University of Bedfordshire on piloting a data monitoring tool with a local authority in Scotland. We will take the action that we think is appropriate and work with partner agencies, law enforcement, the Government south of the border and stakeholders in Scotland to ensure that children are protected. It would be fair to say that it is also the responsibility of each and every one of us to ensure that the children in our communities who are vulnerable are protected. Law enforcement will do its bit, but equally we must work together to protect the most vulnerable.

Rebuttals can be made, and such issues can be addressed. It is clear that we deal with civil matters and criminal matters differently. We are considering how to address those issues, and I assure Alex Fergusson that those who represent law enforcement will do their utmost in that regard. As Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I am aware of the number of people who are now spending time in prison—rightly so—for historical offences. The offences may have been perpetrated many years ago, but those people took the innocence and childhood away from many innocent vulnerable people, and they will be punished. In respect of other matters, it is appropriate that we seek to provide assurances, and those matters are being worked on by myself and governmental colleagues to ensure that we address the on-going problems faced by individuals who have suffered trauma. However, in light of the member’s interest, I am happy to discuss matters with him outside the chamber to give him confirmation as to what work is on-going.

Today’s debate on drink-driving is timely, as we are entering the final phase of our drink-driving consultation, which closes on 29 November. As members know, our consultation seeks views on our proposals to reduce the drink-drive limit in Scotland. The current drink-drive limit has been in force since the mid-1960s. Although social attitudes towards drink-drivers have hardened over the years, it is tragic that the latest figures show that an estimated 30 lives continue to be lost on Scotland’s roads each year as a result of drink-driving. The consequences of drink-driving can be tragic. The impact of drink-driving accidents can shatter families and communities, and we must take action to reduce the risk on our roads. Last week, the “Reported Road Casualties Scotland 2011” report was published. I will give some key findings from it. It was estimated that 750 casualties in 2010 were due to drink-drive accidents. About 20 deaths were estimated to be due to drink-drive accidents in 2010, which is a similar proportion to that in Great Britain as a whole. That is a fall from the 2009 figure, but the average for the past five years remains 30 deaths. The number of casualties that result from drink-drive accidents has fallen by 35 per cent since 2000—from some 1,150 in 2000 to 750 in 2010—but the figure is still too high. In 2011, 3.4 per cent of drivers who were involved in injury accidents and who were asked to take a breath test registered a positive reading or refused to take the test. We welcome any reduction in the number of casualties, but I still find the figures unacceptably high. In particular, the number of deaths on our roads is far too high. Each year for the past five years, 30 families on average have had to contend with and cope with the loss of a loved one because someone thought that it was acceptable to have a drink and then get behind a wheel and drive. Despite repeated warnings, some people are still intent on getting behind the wheel of a vehicle while they are under the influence of alcohol. That is reckless and totally unacceptable, and it is putting lives at risk. The people of Scotland are fed up of drink-drivers and their poor excuses. It is remarkable and tragic that a significant minority of drivers still ignore the warnings. Drivers are repeatedly told of the consequences of drink-driving and drug-driving through the summer and festive campaigns, which make it clear that drink-drivers and drug-drivers will be met with the full force of the law. They will lose their licence; their vehicle can be seized and crushed; they can incur a fine; and they could face a lengthy prison sentence. Despite that, hundreds of accidents still occur each year and carnage takes place on our roads as a result of the selfish actions of drivers who get behind the wheel while significantly impaired and who pose a severe risk to themselves, other motorists and pedestrians. The question must be asked: does the current drink-drive limit provide a sufficiently clear message that drinking and driving is unacceptable? We believe that the current limit has had its day. The time is right for a change that will bring Scotland into line with the vast majority of Europe. If we look at the drink-driving limits across Europe, we see—as our consultation paper confirms—that only the United Kingdom and Malta have a legal blood alcohol concentration limit of 80mg of alcohol in every 100ml of blood. Our European neighbours have not lowered the drink-drive limit on a whim; they have taken that action to address problems with drink-drivers on their roads. We have long called for a reduction in the drink-drive limit, and we would like to follow in their footsteps. The day after we launched our consultation, the British Medical Association welcomed our proposals. We should listen to those who deal with the horrific effects of drink-driving. Dr George Fernie, who is a member of the BMA’s Scottish council and a police surgeon, said: “the BMA has been lobbying for a reduction in the drink driving limit for some time and, with the devolution of this power to the Scottish Parliament ... is pleased to see some progress on this important issue. We believe that such a move will help prevent deaths and reduce the number of lives ruined by drink-driving. A reduction in the limit ... would be in agreement with the best available evidence on the effects of alcohol on driving.” Our consultation shows that we are making early and effective use of the power that has been devolved by the Scotland Act 2012 to reduce the drink-drive limit. We welcome having the power to set the drink-drive limit but believe that the act was a missed opportunity. The very limited transfer of powers on drink-driving did not go far enough. We wanted a package of powers to be devolved that would allow us to consider whether the police should be able to carry out breath tests on drivers at any time, anywhere. We called for powers to consider differential drink-driving limits—for example, for young and novice drivers—and sought powers to consider changing the penalties for drink-driving. None of those crucial powers was devolved by the UK Government.

Absolutely. We are pressing on as expeditiously as we can. I recall that we called for the changes when others were in power in the Parliament—we have done so as a party and as a Government. The powers were not devolved when others were in power, and we were not supported by the Administration at that time. Having got the power that we have, we will not look a gift horse in the mouth, and we will proceed as quickly as we can to implement a change in the drink-driving position. The change will be dealt with not in primary legislation but in subordinate legislation, and the only matter is one that I have commented on publicly. There are technical challenges that the police face in dealing with the recalibration of the equipment. That is a natural consequence of varying the limit, but we will work with the police. They are on the case and, as soon as they have made the necessary change and the legislation is passed, we will implement it. However, we think that an opportunity has been missed. As Mr Macdonald asked a question, perhaps it would be remiss of me not to say that I got a letter from him yesterday on rehabilitation matters, which are also reserved to the United Kingdom Government. If he wants to join me in asking the UK Government to devolve the powers over those matters as well, I will be happy to add them to the list of outstanding matters that we think would be better dealt with by the Scottish Parliament.

I am not aware of that. We made an offer some time back and said that, if the United Kingdom Government was not prepared to devolve the powers in question, we would be happy to undertake a pilot, but as far as I am aware there has been no change in perspective. That may not be the case, but my understanding is that that is the situation down south. However, I can confirm that the Association of Chief Police Officers south of the border firmly supports the proposal. Significant sections of society down there would welcome it. Earlier this month, I wrote to Patrick McLoughlin MP, the UK Secretary of State for Transport, to ask for the transfer of further powers on drink-driving to be considered. The drink-driving limit is important, but it must be seen as only one part of efforts to tackle drink-driving. We are in the midst of a consultation. Although the full results will not be known until after the end date and when the responses have been analysed, it might be helpful to provide a flavour of some of the key issues that are emerging. Many people who have responded to the consultation agree that the Scottish Government should be handed more powers to tackle drink-driving.

I cannot remember the precise details, but I have been writing to the UK Government on the issue for a considerable time. When the issues were first raised, we asked for increased powers. I cannot say whether that went to the Scotland Bill Committee, but I can say that the UK Government—and, I would hope, others—will be under no illusion as to what is being sought. Many respondents to the consultation consider that effective and well-thought-through marketing campaigns are a critical accompaniment to a lower drink-driving limit, although other actions are necessary. We acknowledge the concerns of some that a lower drink-driving limit might have an impact on trade for pubs and restaurants. We can understand that, especially in the current economic climate, some businesses might have concerns, but I know that pubs or restaurants would not want their customers to place themselves or other road users at risk. I am confident that if people act responsibly—for example, by nominating a designated driver—there should not be a widespread impact on pubs and restaurants. We are trying to achieve a behavioural change so that people do not contemplate drinking and driving. Scotland has an uneasy and unbalanced relationship with alcohol, and when people drink and drive it can be a lethal concoction. Our central message is and always will be: “Don’t drink and drive.” The risks of drink-driving should not be underestimated. Evidence shows that people with a blood alcohol concentration of between 50mg and 80mg are six times more likely to die than those with zero blood alcohol. Although any level of alcohol can impair driving and people can react differently to alcohol, evidence shows that, at around the 50mg per 100ml level, impairment in driving manifests itself through a much increased likelihood of involvement in accidents. The BMA has highlighted that, for drivers with a reading of 80mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood, the risk of a road traffic crash is 10 times higher than the risk for drivers with a zero blood alcohol reading.

I recall that the Association of Chief Police Officers condemned the coalition Government cuts of approximately 18,000 officers, but there was faint support for Labour—which also condemned the coalition for cutting that number and said that it would simply cut 10,000 officers. At the end of the day, we need to support a visible law enforcement process. It is estimated that between three and 17 Scottish lives could be saved per year. That is why we comment on the issue. The UK Government’s Crime and Courts Bill, which was introduced earlier this year, contains provision that will create a new drug-driving offence. That is a reserved issue, but we will seek to work with the UK Government to deal with that somewhat separate but tangential aspect. We wish to have the powers to deal with that, but in the absence of those powers we will work with the UK Government to ensure that we address the matter. Members will be aware that drug-driving is a complex area, which is why the panel that is addressing the matter, which will report shortly, is composed of academic and scientific experts in the field of alcohol and drug misuse. We will seek to work with all partners and agencies. Scotland has a continuing problem with drink-driving, but it is a problem that we are determined to address. Drink-driving remains a constant hindrance in our efforts to make Scotland’s roads and communities safer, and it continues to be the cause of far too many accidents, injuries and deaths on our roads. One life lost is one too many. We have a duty to those who have lost their life as a result of the mindless actions of those who drink and drive, and we must tackle the scourge of drink-driving head on. I hope that members will support our efforts to win the battle against drink-drivers and that they will support the proposal in our consultation to reduce the drink-driving limit. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government consultation paper on reducing the drink drive limit, which sets out its proposal to reduce the limit to help make Scotland’s roads safer and introduce a limit that would bring Scotland into line with most of the rest of Europe; notes the Scottish Government’s continued efforts to secure a more extensive set of powers over drink driving from the UK Government to tackle the scourge of drink driving, and encourages all interested persons to make a response to the drink driving consultation.

Is the member opposed to the devolution of all those powers or just some of them?

Yvette Cooper was prepared to say that she would reduce the number of police officers south of the border by 10,000. Given the position that Mr Macdonald is taking, is he prepared to say by how much Labour would reduce the number of police officers in Scotland?

I am not aware that the police’s view is that random testing is an integral part of enforcing the law. The police welcome a reduction in the drink-drive limit and think that it should be tied in to other measures, as in the North report, which the member mentioned. Will the member give an assurance that he supports that proposal and would welcome the powers being devolved?

Does the member accept that the argument made by ACPOS and by serving police officers is that the police are on the streets, and that they want the powers to be able to pull over these hard-core drink-drivers? That is why random testing is so important.

The Government fully agrees with David Stewart. Given that Northern Ireland is moving towards a graduated licence scheme, if the Scottish Government gives an undertaking to ask the UK Government to implement that across the UK and, if the UK Government does not do that, to ask for the powers to do it ourselves, will Jenny Marra support us?

And if we ask for that power?

In the main, this has been—as Jenny Marra mentioned—a remarkably consensual debate, aside from the more confessional aspects, whether to do with age or drink. Some points were made in jest, but many had good aspects. There have been great contributions from across the chamber. Many Labour members who spoke to the issue—not necessarily to their party’s amendment, which has little relevance—made good speeches; Dr Simpson, David Stewart and Siobhan McMahon all made comments with which I fully and heartily agree. Equally, James Dornan, Dennis Robertson and, indeed, Alison McInnes all raised sound matters that demonstrated the consensus. We are at the end of a stage in a journey. Tribute was correctly paid by John Mason to Dave Thompson, who raised the issue of the drink-driving limit. I first raised the matter with UK Government back in 2007; five years on—better late than never—we are there. It is right to reduce the limit to 50mg. Many members—Richard Simpson, in particular—made points about why we should not go to 0mg, but there are clear reasons why we should reduce the limit. Here is the answer to the point that Alex Johnstone made: evidence that the British Medical Association submitted in 2010 to the House of Commons Transport Committee’s inquiry into drink-driving and drug-driving law indicated that the relative risk of drivers with a reading of 80mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood being involved in a road traffic crash was 10 times higher than that for drivers with a reading of 0mg, whereas the relative crash risk for drivers with a reading of 50mg per 100ml of blood was twice that for drivers who had a zero blood-alcohol reading.

I will come on to that. The police have asked for a lowering of the limit in order to save lives, and for further powers for random testing to enable them to target drivers. Those measures join together. Many members, in particular Dennis Robertson and James Dornan, made comments about a change in attitude and culture. All of us of a certain generation—we have been making such confessions—recall that there was a change. Members have commented on how, at one stage, it was viewed only as bad luck to be caught drink-driving. Drink-driving was fairly routine, although it was not necessarily the norm. It was entirely unacceptable, but it was viewed as a matter of bad luck if one was caught. In the 1970s, the message was driven home that it was entirely unacceptable because of the deaths and carnage that it caused. Alex Johnstone made a fair point that progress has been made, and Richard Simpson also touched on that. Nobody denies that we are reducing death and carnage on the roads. Things are better, but we will still have to address two aspects, to which I will return. As Stewart Stevenson and others said, roads and cars have changed. The vehicles that we possess are now significantly more powerful and can, even with much smaller engine capacity than previous vehicles, accelerate more quickly. Many of us who have been involved with the police or fire service also know that some measures that have been introduced to improve the safety of vehicles have had unintended consequences in terms of brain injuries. Sometimes, things that were built to make a vehicle safer and stop it being crushed cause head injuries when drivers are flung forward into them. We accept that, although progress has been made, we face a hard core, and we face difficulties despite the continuing festive campaigns. I make the point to the Labour member who raised the matter—I cannot remember who it was—that it is important that we have those campaigns, but it is not for me to direct them, because I do not have the required specific knowledge, nor is it for the Government to direct them. We take the advice of the police and RoSPA. We work with them and ensure that we drive the message home, whether at Christmas, in the summer or—as Nanette Milne said—through the police, the fire brigade or others working with youngsters. I assure members that we will seek to build on those actions; they will continue, but they will be led by the experts. We face a difficulty in two respects on the roads. One is the hard-core section of our society that seems to think that the drink-driving laws do not apply to it. Doubtless, those people think that many other laws do not apply to them either, and they will ignore the warnings and consequences. They are prepared to take that chance. The way to deal with them is to give the police the powers for random testing. That would ensure not only that the incidence and likelihood of being caught would increase, but that the hard core would know that. Richard Simpson made the point that the progress that has been made in France relates to the likelihood of being caught and of a conviction being secured. The hard core thinks that the law does not apply to it, and those people want to avoid being dealt with by the law. That gives us the basis for driving forward the approach that we must take with them. Points were also made regarding young drivers. Dennis Robertson’s daughter is, doubtless, a sensible driver; as he correctly said, the overwhelming majority of young people are sensible not only in how they drive, but in how they behave. However, there is a hard-core minority of young people who flout the law, as with the hard core of their older peers. Mark McDonald commented on statistics; he might not have been able to provide them for the Conservative Party, but he was able to provide from an Ipsos MORI poll some that show that some of the messages that got through to my generation when we were aged between 18 and 24 or 35 need to be reviewed, reiterated and driven home once again to people in that age group now. We must renew the messages that we send out to young drivers and to the hard core of drink-drivers. On young drivers, I am open to David Stewart’s suggestion. I believe that graduated licences should be considered and that the scheme should address alcohol consumption. That matter would have to be consulted on, then come back to Parliament for debate. The Northern Ireland Government is moving to take action on graduated licences, which will address alcohol levels and allow other restrictions to be imposed. Given that often in all areas of this country young people kill themselves and their friends as a result of drink-driving, it is incumbent on each and every one of us to tackle the cause of the tragedies that have been articulated by members during the debate. I agree with David Stewart, which is why I say to Jenny Marra that I will ask the UK Government to consider introducing the measures that the Northern Irish are to implement. If it refuses to do so, I hope that Parliament will recognise that, if graduated licences make sense and will save lives, we must be given the powers to progress the idea. The issue that we are discussing is not a constitutional one; we are making progress on it because the Scotland Act 2012 has given us the ability to do so. I remind Lewis Macdonald and Jenny Marra that the matter was raised initially with the Labour UK Government with a view not to its giving us the powers, but to its taking action. As on aspects of firearms law, we have said that if the correct law can be implemented more quickly by the UK Government on a UK basis, that is a good thing, which we will accept without standing on ceremony. However, if the UK Government will not take action, whether on air weapons, the drink-driving limit, graduated licences or random breath testing, it is incumbent on the Scottish Parliament, as the democratically elected representative body of the Scottish people, to act and to seek those powers.

Absolutely. I will be happy to do that. The same discussions will take place between me and Patrick McLoughlin as took place between me and Labour ministers. We simply ask that action be taken. If the UK Government will take it, that will be fine and dandy—we will be happy with that, and on we will go. Nanette Milne correctly raised the issue of drug-driving, the responsibility for which is currently reserved. Siobhan McMahon commented on it, too. Ultimately, I want such matters to be dealt with by elected representatives in this chamber, but I give members an absolute assurance that we will work with the UK Government. We must wait for the research. Drug-driving is a complicated issue. How we should address it is not a simple matter; it is much more complicated than how we deal with liquor and alcohol. We will seek to work with the UK Government. [Interruption.]

I must issue the caveat that if action is not taken south of the border, despite the position that has been enunciated by Peter North and others, we reserve the right to seek the powers to make progress, because the issue is an extremely complicated and difficult one that we must address. We are talking about saving lives; it is clear that about 30 lives a year could be saved. That is not a huge number, but the trauma for families is great when a loved one is lost, as Dennis Robertson said. Feelings run deep, not only in families but in communities, especially in rural areas, as Alex Johnstone will be aware. For good reason, people in many rural areas have to use vehicles. John Mason correctly identified that alternative strategies must accompany the law. The issue is not all about enforcement—much of it is about education—but we must tackle it. The confessional aspects of the debate aside, I welcome the consensus that we are heading in the right direction. I believe that the outcome of the consultation will be that 50mg is the correct limit to adopt. If we are to make progress, additional action must be taken. The UK Government has declined to do so, so we require the relevant powers. I look forward to discussing the matter with Labour members and other members as we seek to reduce the drink-driving limit and to make Scotland safer.

Our priority is disrupting and dismantling criminal enterprises, and I welcome the excellent work undertaken by the police and prosecutors to recover the ill-gotten gains from organised criminals across Scotland. More than £60 million has been recovered through that effective legislation since 2003. These matters are dealt with by the police and the Crown Office—they do not hold proceeds of crime data at the level of detail that has been requested. To collate that level of detail would be complex and labour intensive due to the number of cases involved and the technical difficulties associated with linking individual cases to specific geographical locations.

They do receive a significant share, but Mr Martin forgets that crime knows no geographical boundaries, which is why I addressed the Association of Chief Police Officers of England and Wales. Many of the problems that are faced by communities that are blighted by drugs are similar whether in the West Midlands or in Merseyside. I pose a counter-question: if a drug delivery from Liverpool that was bound for Glasgow Provan is disrupted elsewhere by the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, who claims the proceeds of the crime? Is it the responsibility of Liverpool, is it the responsibility of Provan or does the responsibility lie elsewhere? Equally, the principle is that we pour money back into the areas that suffer most. We will not go in the direction of many Labour members, which is to have a postcode lottery. Far too many areas in Scotland are blighted and each and every area is entitled to some support.

Separate statistics for those returned under European arrest warrants and those returned under other arrangements have not been kept in all years. However, since the beginning of 2004, between 60 and 70 persons have been returned to Scotland under a European arrest warrant.

It is clear from the available figures that the European arrest warrant has increased the number of persons being returned to Scotland to face justice. The Home Office might believe that the framework that governs extraditions from Europe could revert to the Council of Europe convention on extradition of 1957. Irrespective of whether that is possible, however, those arrangements would not be as satisfactory. The actions and attitude of the UK Government towards Europe are jeopardising the administration of justice in Scotland.

The bill implements two separate objectives that were identified as priorities under the Scottish Government’s four-year making justice work programme: the creation of a Scottish civil justice council and the introduction of contributions in criminal legal aid from those who can afford them. I am pleased that the Justice Committee has broadly welcomed the proposals for a Scottish civil justice council under part 1 of the bill and that there is almost unanimous support for the creation of the council. Its creation is a key recommendation of Lord Gill’s landmark review of the Scottish civil courts because the council will be central to implementing many of the review’s other recommendations and will become an agent of change, giving the civil justice system a far greater capacity to continue to improve. As Lord Gill’s review made clear, the civil justice system is very much in need of improvement and modernisation. That change is vital to ensure the quality of justice that individuals, families and businesses in Scotland expect and, more importantly, to which they are entitled. It is also vital to the Scottish economy, as effective and efficient resolution of disputes is good for business, helps to cut costs and helps to free up reserves that are tied up in litigation funds. Therefore, I am committed to implementing a far-reaching programme of civil courts reform that is founded on Lord Gill’s recommendations for change. It will be the most significant reform of Scotland’s civil justice system in more than a century. We are well on our way: following constructive dialogue with justice stakeholders over the summer, we are now finalising a draft courts reform bill, which will be put out to public consultation in the coming months. The changes on which we will consult will improve the judiciary’s handling of cases and reduce delays to cases that are proceeding through the courts. Ultimately, they will ensure that the people of Scotland have access to a high-quality system that secures just outcomes without unnecessary delay. Making those changes will require a combination of primary legislation and procedural changes to court rules. Therefore, the council’s immediate—and significant—task will be to help to deliver those reforms. Establishing the body now will speed up the pace of change by ensuring that the council is able to advance its work alongside the structural reforms rather than after them. The council’s work will not end when it has carried out that task. As I said, the council will also serve as an agent of change: it will be responsible for keeping the civil justice system under review. That will put an end to the piecemeal approach to reform that has contributed to the need for such fundamental change. It will also help to ensure that it is not another 100 years or more—or even 25 or 10 years—before the civil justice system catches up with society. The system will be capable of adjusting to change as and when it becomes necessary. Some comments have been made on the composition of the council. I believe that the bill, with its provision for flexible appointments, strikes the right balance in allowing the council to take account of the range of interests in civil justice and to have the technical expertise for its detailed work without creating an unduly large and unwieldy body.

We are happy to enter into discussions with the Lord President on that. We must recognise that there is a balance to be struck. I understand that, even today, representations have been made by the Association of British Insurers and the Sheriffs Association. It is a question of getting the right balance. The council will have statutory members, but the Lord President will have flexibility to take such matters into account. I am happy to reflect on the issue as the bill progresses through the Parliament and to enter into discussions with the Lord President. I give Ms Marra an assurance that it is the intention that as many lay members as possible will be brought on board, although, as in any organisation, there are limits. Equally, it is clear that it is the Lord President’s intention that matters will be dealt with in sub-committees, which will enable people who have particular expertise in a particular area to contribute to the council’s work without having to be on the general council. I have reflected on the stage 1 evidence and the Justice Committee’s remarks on those points, and I consider it appropriate to widen the provisions to allow lay members to be elected as deputy chair. There has also been discussion about the most appropriate procedure for appointments. I believe that it is correct that the Lord President, who will have responsibility for oversight and direction of the body, should have a key role in determining its composition. I agree that the appointments process must be transparent and robust. It must also be proportionate. I consider that the bill, which contains a duty to publish a statement of appointment practice, provides for a fair, open and transparent process. Furthermore, the Lord President has stated to Parliament his intention to draw on the principles set by the Commission for Ethical Standards in Public Life in making appointments. I welcome that commitment. On transparency, I hope that members will be pleased to note the intention to extend freedom of information coverage to the new council and to the Criminal Court Rules Council through subordinate legislation that is to be brought to Parliament in the new year. When he opened the legal year in September, the Lord President said that the creation of the council under the bill signalled the first stage in a “remarkable enterprise in legislative reform”. Given the significance of the task ahead, many have emphasised the importance of getting the proposals for the council right from the outset. I believe that we have got them right, and I hope that the Parliament agrees. I turn to part 2—

That is a matter that I am happy to clarify. My understanding is that, given the council’s role, it will interact with me and the Justice Committee, but I will check that and get back to the member. We do not want the council to be stuck in splendid isolation. It will be a body that will oversee the rule changes that we seek to make. I will get back to the member on what is a technical but highly important matter. Part 2 of the bill sets out proposals to introduce contributions to solicitors’ fees in criminal legal aid. I am pleased that the Justice Committee and many in the justice system, including the Law Society of Scotland, support the principle that it is right that those who can afford to pay towards the costs of their defence should do so. In a climate of financial constraint and pressure on public finances, that principle rings true. If we are to protect access to justice as much as possible—both in relation to civil and criminal cases—we must target legal assistance at those who need it most. Doing so is the only way to preserve the overall integrity of the legal aid scheme. For those in the chamber who may be less familiar with the details of legal aid, I would like to make it clear that what the bill proposes is evolution, not revolution. Criminal legal aid has always been subject to a means test. People whose income and savings are above a certain level have been ineligible for legal aid unless they can prove undue hardship, and people who plead guilty to a criminal charge have been liable to pay a contribution to their costs if they can afford one, just as happens in civil legal aid. The expansion of contributions will bring criminal legal aid into line with civil legal aid and correct a manifest injustice of the current system. How can it be right that a victim of domestic violence who must go to court to protect herself should be liable for a contribution to her civil legal aid, while the perpetrator, with substantially greater resources, could receive full criminal legal aid without a contribution?

Yes—absolutely. The bill’s whole purpose is to preserve the system’s integrity in tight financial times. We have no intention of going down the route that has been taken south of the border, where huge aspects of the law are no longer eligible for legal aid. To protect victims, whom I know everyone in Parliament wants to protect, we must make tough choices. In this world, perhaps those who can afford to make a contribution when they are charged with a criminal offence should do so. I accept that the Justice Committee has asked important and valid questions about the detail of implementation. In particular, it asked whether the income thresholds are appropriate, whether collecting contributions will create difficulties for law firms, whether accused persons’ human rights might be affected and whether there will be impacts on the administration of justice. I hope that I can reassure Parliament on each of those issues, which I have no doubt will be discussed in more detail at stage 2. On the level of contributions, I will make three points clear. First, £68 a week is the threshold below which contributions cannot be levied. The £68 figure can be amended upwards in regulations, but the bill specifies the starting point. The regulations will deal with such important matters and, accordingly, I have promised to provide draft regulations to Parliament before stage 2 begins. Secondly, the £68 threshold is not gross income or even take-home income; it is the disposable income that a person has once a long list of costs has been deducted. On top of that, a contribution could be waived if undue hardship could be caused. The figure is the absolute level of weekly disposable income that will be protected under the scheme. Contributions will be assessed on the level of disposable income that is above £68 so, if someone has £69 in disposable income, their contribution will be based on the £1 that is over the benchmark and not on £69.

The definition of disposable income will be set down in regulations. It is currently dealt with under the civil legal aid scheme. It takes into account deductions for a spouse and children. Deductions will take place for welfare benefits that Capability Scotland has raised with us, which the Scottish Legal Aid Board will address. I cannot provide the precise text that will be in the regulations, but the definition of disposable income will take into account deductions as it does under the civil legal aid scheme, which the criminal legal aid scheme will mirror. The definition will also take into account points that have correctly been made by people who represent those who have difficulties—which I appreciate—with mental health matters. Finally on this issue, I point out that contribution levels will be graduated and will in many cases be small—the lower a person’s income, the lower the contribution payable, in proportion to his or her income. That is fairer to applicants who have lower incomes. I know that there are concerns about ensuring that people with disabilities are not adversely affected—not least because of the uncertainty about welfare reform. The Scottish Government and SLAB have listened to those concerns and have agreed that disability living allowance should be fully discounted from income calculations in assessing contributions. I will continue to engage with organisations such as Capability Scotland to ensure that no negative impacts occur. I appreciate the anxiety that some criminal law firms feel about collecting summary fee contributions. Of course, collecting fees from clients is a routine part of business for most law firms, so I suggest that the responsibility is not new. We are trying to ease as far as is reasonable the burden of collection, while maintaining as generous a legal aid scheme as is possible. The bill therefore provides that the board will be responsible for collecting contributions for solemn cases. I am pleased that the Justice Committee has welcomed the proposal that summary contributions be treated as fees. That will assist firms’ cash flows in a difficult financial climate. However, I will continue to consider further measures and enter into on-going discussions with the Law Society of Scotland. It has been suggested that those who fail to pay their contribution may lose their representation, which could cause problems for them and the courts, but I do not believe that that is a serious risk. Most people will have no contribution. Most people who have a contribution will have only a small one, and most of them will pay it—evidence from England and Wales confirms that. There has been no increase in unrepresented litigants since the introduction of a contributions scheme there, and their scheme is less generous than our proposals. I appreciate that we may need to put in place arrangements to ensure that the justice system is not affected when people refuse to pay. I am in no doubt that we can achieve that, and I will enter into discussion with the Law Society about it. In conclusion, the bill will improve our civil justice system and help to maintain a fair, consistent and generous legal aid scheme. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill.

Is the member aware that the magistrates court in England operates an in-or-out system in which there is no contribution? In that system, anyone with an annual disposable income of more than £3,398, which is just over £65 a week, fails the means test and does not get legal aid at all—not even with a contribution. Is the Scottish system not much better? Is she arguing that those who receive civil legal aid should have a harsher commitment to make than those involved in criminal cases?

Let me make it clear that war pensions are currently discounted in the assessment for ABWOR. The criteria for assessing disposable income will be set out in draft regulations. Given that we are seeking to mirror what is done in ABWOR in many instances, the position of war pensions will be considered. Considering the sympathetic view that we have taken with regard to ABWOR, the member could read into that the sympathetic view that we are likely to take.

We have had a very good debate. There is uniformity around the chamber in providing some general support for the principles of the bill, and I am grateful for that. Both the convener of the Justice Committee—in a flamboyant speech, if I may put it that way—and David McLetchie commented on the hybrid nature of the bill. However, we need to have these matters. I accept that, in an ideal world, we would have an entirely separate focus on these aspects, but we need to avoid overloading the Justice Committee or other committees. However, I accept the legitimate point that was made by Mr McLetchie, as well as by Graeme Pearson, Christine Grahame and many others. The devil is in the detail and this is a matter where there is a great deal of detail. Some things will have to come out in regulations. Perhaps in dealing with the detail, I can try to address some of the specific points that were raised. First, Margaret Mitchell asked whether the civil justice council will be a statutory consultee. The council will have the power to “consult such persons as it considers appropriate”, as provided for in section 3(2)(d). That is a power rather than a duty. There will be opportunities to contribute to the council’s work through its committees, and it is envisaged that the council will carry out consultations where appropriate. That seems to me to strike an appropriate balance. Mary Fee said that the council should be made an NDPB to ensure scrutiny and accountability. However, the council will advise the Lord President and oversight rests with him. It will not be under ministerial direction and will therefore not be an NDPB. I think that that is how it should be. However, the Lord President will not have unfettered discretion: ministers may amend the balance of the membership; an annual report and business plan must be laid before Parliament; and I intend to make the council subject to freedom of information. Malcolm Chisholm correctly made the point that we should have the appointment principles for the civil justice council on the face of the bill, rather than relying on assurances. I do not think that we want to make the process unduly bureaucratic, but I am willing to consider putting some statement of those principles in the bill at stage 2. I think that the commitment that has already been made by the Lord President can be added to. Jenny Marra asked whether the council’s powers in respect of policy could creep into the Government’s and the Parliament’s decision-making powers. We need to make clear that the council will be an advisory body. It will have duties to advise the Lord President and it will have powers to advise Scottish ministers. The council must lay an annual report before Parliament. There is no need to place a protection in the bill. The decisions that appropriately rest with Government, Parliament and the judiciary will continue to do so—that is addressed in our response to the stage 1 report—so there is the appropriate separation of powers. Mr McLetchie raised a legitimate point about why there will be only two solicitors on the council, which he is correct will be fewer than on the existing councils. The bill provides for a minimum of two solicitors and it also provides for a minimum of two advocates. The bill seeks to achieve a balance, where we have a limited number of people who can be members of the council. As was pointed out by others, much of the work will be carried out at committee level, and the current councils have around 29 members at any one time. There will necessarily be fewer members of different types if membership is to be kept to a workable limit, but I can give an assurance that the involvement of the solicitor profession will continue—at a minimum of two, although it might be more, given the Lord President’s selection. Also, in terms of the working arrangements, those who have the appropriate skills will be asked and will be contributing. Lewis Macdonald asked whether the Scottish ministers should be able to direct, or seek advice from, the council. That point was also raised by Malcolm Chisholm. I think that it is appropriate that oversight and direction of the council should sit with the Lord President and not with ministers. That is appropriate because the council will be a body that advises him, not ministers. However, it is quite clear that the council will be able to advise ministers and we do not need to compel the council to do so in the bill. We can get advice from the body, which may come through the Justice Committee or the Government. If we feel that it is appropriate to do so, we can take that advice and legislate on it. If we feel that the council is going in a direction that we do not like or recommending a policy that would be unacceptable to Parliament, we are not required to accept that advice. The balance that has been set is appropriate. Helen Eadie asked whether council members should be paid. The bill allows council and committee members to be remunerated for non-salaried positions. Serving judges, Scottish Court Service staff and Scottish Government and SLAB officials who have a salary and remuneration will not receive anything in addition for attending. Those who are perhaps giving up their time in private practice will be entitled to receive the appropriate remuneration. That strikes an appropriate balance—those who are doing their job in improving justice for which they are paid anyway should not get an additional entitlement, but others who are giving up their own time from paid work should be given that opportunity. Questions have been asked about the second part of the bill. I reassure Christine Grahame, who asked whether the suspension of legal aid mid-trial would cause problems for the system—I think that the issue was touched on by Mr McLetchie, too—that the bill does not give power to suspend a certificate if a contribution is unpaid. We are confident that arrangements can be made for the few cases in which an agent withdraws. As Mr McLetchie knows, the Public Defence Solicitors Office is a matter of some sensitivity to the profession, but it is possible that we could put in the PDSO and that would be the solution. However, I have indicated that I will not prejudge matters and I am happy to discuss the issue with the Law Society. That option is available, and if the Law Society can think of another way to do it, I am happy to enter into that discussion. The reason why I am unable to give an unequivocal answer is that we are entering into discussion and it would be inappropriate to prejudge its outcome. Christine Grahame also asked whether the assessment of spouses’ income is unjust. That issue will be covered in regulations. A spouse who is a victim will not have their resources assessed and an allowance will be made for the cost of dependants, including spouses. Also, issues related to spouses can be ignored if there is undue hardship. Graeme Pearson referred to the use of the PDSO. As I have said, that is a matter of some sensitivity to the Law Society, and I accept that. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned thresholds, which Jenny Marra, too, commented on. Contribution levels were substantially reformed in 2009 and they were uprated in 2011. I appreciate that there may be some issues with where matters have got to since 1986—when I was still a practising lawyer—but we have been addressing the issue. If there is any slippage, that relates to those who have gone before us. We do not think that SLAB is better placed to collect summary contributions, which are best collected by the legal agents. The exception is when there is a significant sum involved, which is why we are using SLAB to collect contributions for solemn proceedings. That is what happens in civil proceedings and ABWOR: it is the solicitor who sees, assesses and deals with the person at the time who will collect the contributions. In the main, we are not talking about huge amounts of money, and it is for that reason that we remain committed to that approach, because it is important that the solicitors addresses that. Mary Fee thinks that the contribution of £470 in case 4 of the SLAB examples is unfair. The person in that example earns £482 a week. That is not a king’s ransom or a Premier League footballer’s wages, but £470 does not seem to me to be an unfair level of contribution for somebody who is facing a criminal charge to make when they have an income of £482 a week. We realise that those are matters of balance and will have to be reviewed. That is why we are happy to ensure that the regulations will be available to the committee as we go into stage 2 and stage 3. They will have to be reviewed and updated as circumstances change. We have given a direction on DLA and are doing something similar on war pensions. These are difficult times. We must make changes to legal aid, but there is a fundamental principle that the victim of crime should not be expected to contribute while the perpetrator is not expected to do likewise. The bill changes a manifest injustice that existed in the law of Scotland. There will be difficulties for the legal profession in some instances, but let us remember that 82 per cent of those who apply for and receive criminal legal aid will do so without making a contribution. The remaining 18 per cent will make a limited contribution—one that they are perfectly capable of meeting.

The management of speed is a primary consideration for road authorities, police forces and safety camera partnerships. We will continue to fund the Scottish safety camera programme, which brings together police, Transport Scotland and other partners to influence driver behaviour positively and reduce the number of speeding offences.

Road safety is our first priority. All vehicles should continue to keep a safe distance from the vehicle in front, irrespective of speed limits. Enforcement will be a matter for the police in any instances in which drivers act irresponsibly and break the law. Although we have new powers to control speed limits in Scotland, we have no current plans to increase the 70mph and 60mph limits or the speed limits for different classes of vehicle. Speed limit increases would be considered only when there is clear, unambiguous and comprehensive evidence in favour of such a change. However, I am aware of the points that Dave Thompson and others such as the Road Haulage Association have made, and matters will be kept under review.

The location and type of accommodation for offenders are an important part of the environmental risk assessment process. Those operational matters are fully discussed by all the agencies involved in the management of offenders and decided on a case-by-case basis. Guidance for agencies on assessing and managing housing-related risk under multi-agency public protection arrangements can be found in the Scottish Government’s national accommodation strategy for sex offenders.

First, I put on record our sympathies and feelings for the family of Mrs Sutherland, and I thank those who were involved in the ultimate successful prosecution of Mr Rooney. I hope that Gordon MacDonald will appreciate that I cannot go into the specifics of the case or discuss the management of Mr Rooney. Those matters are rightfully for the City of Edinburgh Council, Lothian and Borders Police and NHS Lothian, which had a statutory obligation to manage and house Mr Rooney in the community. Those responsible authorities have commissioned a significant case review in order to learn the wider lessons from this tragic case, and the police have informed Mrs Sutherland’s family of that development. I would be happy to discuss the matter with Gordon McDonald once the significant case review has been carried out but, until then, the appropriate agencies are the council, the police and NHS Lothian, and we should allow the significant case review to be carried out rather than prejudging any matters.

The consultation is being led by the Scottish Court Service and sets out its proposals for the future structure of our courts. Any final proposal to close courts will need to come before Parliament, most likely in spring 2013, and I am therefore not prejudging the outcome of the current consultation process for any specific proposal. However, I am clear that reform of the courts is necessary. We cannot deliver better access to justice by avoiding the need for change. The towns that we live in, the places where we work, the way in which we do business, and the availability of transport have all changed considerably since Victorian times, when many of our court buildings were established. Crime is at its lowest level for 37 years and the number of civil proceedings has fallen sharply. Major reforms of the justice system are in train, and our court structures must adapt to reflect those reforms.

I do not think that Mr Gray recognises or understands the landscape that was created by the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008. The Parliament decided that the separation of powers was appropriate and important, and that there should be a differentiation and separation between the executive, the legislative and the judicial. It also recognised that it is important that the judiciary should be independent from political interference and that the judiciary are the people who are best placed to deal with the Scottish Court Service. I am sorry that Mr Gray is so disparaging about our most senior judge. If he engages with the Scottish Court Service, which is running the consultation, I will not prejudge the situation. I have more faith in the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service than Mr Gray does and I understand the need, in a democracy, for the separation of legislative and judiciary powers to preserve the democracy that we all hold so dear.

Many of Mr Gray’s worries are legitimate. We should be trying to ensure that courts are as proximate as they can be, and that we take into account the cost of travel to people who work there and those who have to give evidence or appear there. That is why I suggest that Mr Gray would be well advised to read the document, particularly the chapters that relate to Haddington. As I recall, there is a clear statement of the cost, time and availability of transport from Musselburgh, Tranent and Prestonpans to Haddington, showing that it is cheaper, quicker and easier for people in those areas to go to Edinburgh than it is for them to go to Haddington. Mr Gray would do well to read the consultation document, to consider whether the needs and wants of his constituents in those parts might be better served by going to Edinburgh, and thereafter, perhaps, to give the Lord President the dignity of his office and engage more meaningfully with him.

Again, those matters should be put to the Scottish Court Service. The service accepts Mr Thompson’s point that the current facilities in Inverness and Dingwall have limitations, and I am sure that it would welcome the opportunity to have new purpose-built court facilities to replace some of its older and less flexible sites, but the financial situation is such that funding new facilities will be extremely challenging in the short to medium term. However, if local stakeholders believe that a business model exists that could fund a new court using proceeds from finding new uses for the existing buildings, I encourage those stakeholders to engage with the Scottish Court Service on that. It is clear that the current buildings cause great difficulties. I urge Mr Thompson to discuss the matter with the Scottish Court Service—he might find a willingness to see whether we can work towards shared solutions.

There is a clear expectation that the jobs will follow the work. There will not be less work; it will just be conducted in a more productive manner and in buildings that are more suited for the purpose. I can give staff an assurance that the Scottish Court Service proposals are that staff who currently work in a court that is designated to close will simply move to where the work is due to take place.

As Claire Baker will know, the decision is not for the Scottish ministers but for the Scottish Parliament. However, it is my responsibility to bring those matters to the Parliament once the Scottish Court Service and the Lord President have carried out their duties. The review deals not only with the proposed closure of some courts, including sheriff and justice of the peace courts but with aspects relating to where the High Court sits on circuit and to where jury trials are carried out. Those matters are best dealt with by people contributing to the consultation, which is not yet finished, and discussing with the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service to see what actions can be taken from there. Thereafter, a formal consideration can be made, ultimately, by the Parliament.

Absolutely. That is why, as I said in response to Iain Gray, the Scottish Court Service has considered where the people who appear in courts, to give evidence or as jurors, come from. Party litigants are a particular aspect that must be dealt with. Equally, we must deal with the issues for those who are cited to give evidence or to sit on juries. Those aspects must be considered in the round. It is clear that transport issues and the nature of communities change, whether that is through the opening up of the A1 in East Lothian or perhaps the improvement of roads in the Borders or the construction of the Borders railway. The document is a consultation, so we should not prejudge matters; we should do the Lord President the honour of allowing the consultation to take place. I am certain that Christine Grahame’s points will be taken on board, because it is appropriate that we ensure that people can access justice as easily as possible.

I am glad that Mr Macdonald raised that issue because I am extremely knowledgeable about those matters. I went to school and grew up in Linlithgow, as did the First Minister. When I first practised law, I appeared in Lithlithgow sheriff court. A previous Administration closed that court and moved it to Livingston. It did so on the basis that most people who were using and were required to appear in the court were likely to be located in the south rather than the north of the county. I do not remember a great deal of outrage from the Labour benches about moving the court to Livingston but, equally, both the First Minister and I reassure Mr Macdonald that, although that had an impact in terms of job relocation, the apocalypse has not struck Linlithgow. The town, which I know well, is thriving, albeit that the court is now located where the people are, as opposed to where it was located historically when the county was Linlithgowshire.

I assure Nigel Don that the police are consulted on such matters. Indeed, informally and anecdotally, my experience with the police is that they take the view that the less travel they have to various places, the better. Equally, some courts are no longer fit for purpose in terms of safety or security. We have also seen changes in how people are detained in custody. We must have a synergy in those matters between where people are detained and the courts at which they are to appear. The police are already ahead of the game in reducing the number of places where people are held, and that must tie in with the pace at which they will be taken to an appearance from custody.

Today’s debate is a timely opportunity to engage members in the further development of the historic reforms proposed by Lord Carloway in his report on criminal law and practice. I again thank Lord Carloway for his report and the huge amount of work that lies behind it, and congratulate him on his recent appointment as Lord Justice Clerk. I am sure that the whole chamber will share those sentiments. The debate is timely because the First Minister announced in the programme for government a criminal justice bill that will enact Lord Carloway’s proposals and because the Scottish Government is currently running a consultation on how to implement those proposals. The debate is an opportunity for members to contribute to that process. Members will recall the decision of the United Kingdom Supreme Court in HMA v Cadder and the emergency legislation that had to follow. I am grateful for the forbearance of all those who participated in that process. Although the emergency legislation has proven effective as an immediate response, there was and is a clear need to reappraise our justice system for the future. I believe that Lord Carloway has provided us with a clear and coherent package of reform from first arrest and detention through to final appeal. His recommendations are clearly reasoned, carefully constructed and closely interconnected. They provide us with a landmark opportunity to redesign our system around modern, fundamental concepts of human rights, while preserving the integrity of a system that we are rightly proud of. The Scottish Government consultation paper on the Carloway report reflects on comments and developments since last year’s publication of the Carloway recommendations. It covers debate in this chamber, before the Justice Committee and beyond. I express my appreciation for the committee’s work and my thanks to all those who gave evidence. Although I have made clear my view that Lord Carloway’s recommendations are a comprehensive package from first arrest to final appeal, there remain many issues to discuss on how they can be made a reality. As always with legislative matters, the devil is in the detail.

Lewis Macdonald makes a fair point. The consultation is not yet concluded, although a clear steer has been given. Discussions will have to take place, and I have no doubt that I will make an appearance before the Justice Committee. I give an assurance that we will take time to reflect on the consultation responses. I will be more than happy to engage with the member, with other justice spokesmen and, indeed, anyone else about our direction of travel. I give Lewis Macdonald a clear assurance that we intend to provide as much opportunity as possible to reach as much consensus as it is possible to do. It might not be entirely possible to reach a consensus, because strong views are held on either side on issues such as corroboration. Ultimately, people might have to come down on one side or another, as I will come on to discuss. Equally, we should take the opportunity to debate, engage and focus, so that when we ultimately proceed we will have brought on board as many people and as good a majority as possible. It is clear from the debate and the committee sessions that many of Lord Carloway’s recommendations have been widely welcomed and accepted. There has of course been debate on and challenge to some of the recommendations—for example, on the role of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission—but most of the focus has centred squarely on corroboration, to which I shall return shortly. It is not my intention to revisit the debate on Cadder, or even the general findings of Lord Carloway’s report. Instead, I will focus on how Lord Carloway’s recommendations are to be taken forward. That is the approach of the Government’s consultation and I will focus on some of the key questions in the consultation paper. The consultation paper accepts the recommendations for sweeping change to the system for arrest and detention of suspects. Allowing the police to arrest suspects on reasonable suspicion should provide a transparent and easily understood process. Those changes will balance the needs of the police in their duty to investigate crime with recognition of the rights of individuals. The consultation seeks views on whether Lord Carloway’s proposed maximum periods of 12 hours for detention and 28 days for investigative liberation are sufficient and whether there should be extensions in certain exceptional circumstances. The consultation also asks for views on the practicalities of investigative liberation and what operational challenges it presents. I look forward to debate on those issues. On the length of time that suspects spend in police custody, Lord Carloway observed that if suspects are held for longer than 36 hours under the new regime, weekend courts should be considered. The Government fully accepts that suspects should not be held unnecessarily or disproportionately in police custody pending appearance at court, and the consultation seeks views on the best way to bring suspects before court as quickly as possible. Advances in videolink technology may well be part of the solution by helping to offset some of the operational and financial challenges involved. We all know that technology can help make savings, but it comes at a cost. It is fair to say that our consultation on Lord Carloway’s recommendations will not take place in isolation. We judge that the Government’s making justice work programme is ensuring that work is co-ordinated among police, the Scottish Legal Aid Board, prisons and courts so that all aspects are dealt with. Some members may have already had the opportunity to see that prisoners in full committal at Barlinnie or elsewhere can be seen by a sheriff sitting in Glasgow sheriff court. Some aspects such as that will be able to be replicated and used across Scotland, certainly with regard to Lord Carloway’s recommendations. On suspects accessing legal advice, the Government agrees in principle with the recommendation that legal advice for suspects should be provided at the point of detention. There are legal aid implications to that and the consultation seeks views on how the recommendation can be delivered in a way that is effective and affordable because, as with technology, legal advice comes at a cost. Work is under way and the Scottish Legal Aid Board is engaging with the Law Society of Scotland and other representatives. Lord Carloway restated the requirement for suspects to obtain legal advice from a solicitor before and during questioning. He accepted that suspects may decline the right to a lawyer, but recommended special protections for child and vulnerable adult suspects. The consultation places that within the general context of avoiding unnecessarily drawing children who are accused of minor offences into formal criminal justice processes, while ensuring a strong system of protection for those who are suspected of serious offences. I urge members who have an interest in the issue to participate in the consultation. Such matters are subject to engagement, and agencies and organisations such as Families Outside seek to ensure that we get the balance right. The consultation paper highlights changes to criminal investigations and prosecutions that would have a substantial effect on the legal aid budget. We must continue to ensure that people have access to legal representation when they need it and that solicitors are fairly remunerated. At the same time, we must consider the potential implications for legal aid expenditure in Scotland at a time of reduced budgets. As I said, the Scottish Legal Aid Board seeks to engage constructively with the Law Society on the matter. I thank the Law Society for its tholing—if I can put it that way—and constructive approach to our recent discussions on matters that pre and post-date the Cadder decision. The Government cherishes the independent role of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, which is a critical part of the checks and balances in justice. There was considerable debate in the Justice Committee about the merits and appropriate powers of the High Court when it considers cases that the commission refers. With regard to the finality and certainty of recommendations, we will listen carefully to the views that are offered in the consultation. It is perhaps understandable that Lord Carloway’s recommendations on corroboration have generated the most interest and sparked the most comment, although they are part of a package that deals with matters from arrest to the outcome of the ultimate appeal, as I said. Lord Carloway explained that the rationale for the rule stems from another age, that its usage has become subject to overly complex rules and that it can bar prosecutions that would seem entirely appropriate in any other legal system. Lord Carloway made a compelling case. As a Scots lawyer—once, but no longer—I share the historic pride in our system that inspires many people to argue for the requirement for corroboration to remain. However, I can see that there are times when the tide of history becomes too strong to resist. Lord Carloway could find no other western criminal justice system that has a general requirement for corroboration. We should reflect on the fact that all his research and endeavours turned up no other western democracy that appears to have such a rule. I have a good conceit of the justice system in Scotland, but I also admire many other western democracies, which I think get the balance right.

Christine Grahame makes a fair and valid point. Some criminal justice systems are adversarial, some are inquisitorial and some are a hybrid. I will come on to what she said, because many people think that there are requirements that will be necessary if corroboration is dispensed with, as Lord Carloway suggested. Lord Carloway found that the rule focuses artificially on quantity rather than quality of evidence. He found that the law has developed into a tangle of complicated rules, which are applied differently from court to court, and he found an alarming number of cases that might reasonably have gone to trial if there had been a different test for sufficiency of evidence. I appreciate that abolition causes concern to many people. Indeed, it would be worrying if there were no debate around changing something that is so synonymous with Scots law. However, I note that much of the concern has, rightly, focused on whether abolition should proceed without any other changes being made—Christine Grahame correctly and understandably alluded to the matter. First and foremost among the views that have been expressed is the view that it would be unfair to remain with a simple majority for jury decisions. There are also wider points about how judges direct juries and how they decide that a case is not strong enough to go before a jury in a specific case. I have noted with interest Michael McMahon’s proposed member’s bill, which seeks to reform our three-verdict system. I welcome debate and responses to the consultation on all those issues, but I am not minded to revisit Lord Carloway’s recommendation on corroboration or to refer the issue to a royal commission for further study. The requirement has been appraised and found wanting by the second most senior judge in our country, and it strikes me that conducting a further review would simply extend the current uncertainty over our system for years to come. We have had to address aspects of that uncertainty by emergency legislation. However, I am fully committed to listening and reflecting on all consultation responses that look at how reform can best be achieved and, if necessary, to bringing forward proposals for additional protections that may be needed to create a fair and balanced system. Therefore, I call on all interested parties—those who will speak today or those who will respond to the consultation—to tell me about what, if any, additional safeguards they think need to be put in place. I am aware of recent criticisms of the Parliament’s legislative record, which have even gone so far as to draw unfavourable comparisons with Westminster’s reforms of Scots law. As members would expect, I utterly repudiate those claims, but they lead me to stress the importance of engagement. If stakeholders want a different course of action, they should make the case for it and show us the evidence that supports it. The consultation is the time for engagement, as I said earlier in response to a question from Mr Macdonald. The Carloway report is but one part of a coherent modernisation package that is under way, which will bring together the Carloway report and Lord Gill’s recommendations for reform of the civil courts, Sheriff Principal Bowen’s proposals for sheriff and jury reform, and on-going work to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the summary courts. Taken together, those things will give us the right legal framework, court structures and procedures for many years to come. We need to re-evaluate our criminal justice system following Cadder and show deference and respect to Lord Carloway for his work, as I have said. Issues that are raised relating to corroboration will have to be further considered, but we should not hesitate and lose a historic opportunity to review and reshape our justice system for the 21st century. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government consultation paper setting out its approach to implementing Lord Carloway’s historic recommendations to reform the investigation and prosecution of crime in Scotland; notes the Scottish Government’s inclusion in Working for Scotland: The Government’s Programme for Scotland 2012-13 of a Criminal Justice Bill to deliver these historic reforms as a package; highlights the importance of delivering these measures in a coherent way alongside wider reforms to courts and tribunals planned through the Making Justice Work programme, and encourages all interested persons to make a response to the consultation.

Does the member not accept Lord Carloway’s comments on cases in which there are real doubts about whether justice has been done? Whether there would ultimately be convictions is a matter for the courts, but we should do everything that we can to ensure that justice is done. Lord Carloway suggests that, in the main, we should proceed by way of seeking corroboration for convictions but, as John Finnie correctly suggested, considerable savings will be made and money freed up if, instead of two officers routinely going to London, Edinburgh or wherever to uplift a label and then requiring to speak to it in court, justice is dealt with at higher levels. Frankly, we have to question why two officers are required to speak to a label.

What is meant by the suggestion that there should be further revision of the law of corroboration, given that it has been revised so that we have corroboration by admission and corroboration by special knowledge? Over many centuries we have revised, ameliorated and watered down corroboration so that it does not require, as many members of the public think, two police officers or two individuals. What further suggestions is the member making?

On the Cadder judgment, how would an ECHR review have affected the position, given the appeal court’s decision in HMA v McLean? Is the member suggesting that our review could have overturned the decision of a High Court bench?

The debate has been good and wide ranging, with some contributions that were excellent and to which I will return. A point was made about the debate being premature, and the issue of timing was raised by Helen Eadie. I assure her that, as I said to Lewis Macdonald, we are not at the end of the process. Further debate will be required, especially given the safeguards that we have commented on, and the bill will be subject to full parliamentary scrutiny. In Annabel Goldie’s closing remarks, she was critical that we had been dilatory in not moving fast enough since a debate last December; she also seemed to say that we are going too far, too fast. Doubtless, as ever, the truth is somewhere in the middle. Rod Campbell made an excellent speech in which he pointed out that corroboration has been, understandably, the basis and focus of debate externally and in the chamber. He commented on the many other significant matters that require to be considered and addressed. We will have to come back to them. Rod Campbell and others, including Lewis Macdonald, commented on the issue of police bail, which we need to take a significant look at. Lord Carloway has made proposals, and there are safeguards in the operation of the bail system, but there are doubtless opportunities for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service to move for, and the court to grant, bail on strict conditions. A variety of issues relate to that, but whether we are dealing with the victims of domestic violence or other victims, we must ensure that the circumstances are right. I assure Rod Campbell—who correctly raised issues other than just corroboration—and Lewis Macdonald, who raised that particular issue, that we agree that we need to look at it carefully. However, I believe that there are sufficient initial checks and balances in the system—as a chamber, we have recognised that over many years. There has been frequent comment on the issue; indeed, the policy directions given by the Crown in relation to advice and guidance on police bail and other matters have changed. The SCCRC has also been mentioned, and we must consider that, too. In particular, the interests of justice test has been touched on by some. I think that Lord Carloway was right when he anticipated that people would perceive that the gatekeeper role was, once again, being given to the High Court to close matters down. I refer members to the evidence given by Lord Carloway to the Justice Committee. He stated that he sees that test being applied in situations such as when the High Court receives new information about a case. That new information may not have been included in the SCCRC reference, or it may have emerged since the reference. Therefore, rather than seeing that as a duplicitous act, we should see that Lord Carloway was seeking to assist the SCCRC when further matters may have come to light. We should look more closely at the evidence that was given.

We have to look at the issue in the round, which is why it was appropriate for Rod Campbell to mention that there were aspects other than corroboration that need to be looked at. I think that Lord Carloway was seeking to assist in situations in which new evidence may have come to light that could not have been available to the SCCRC. That is an issue that Ms Grahame’s committee and others will no doubt look at; I just thought it important that we should put on record where we are in that regard. As with the debate externally, the focus in this debate has been on corroboration. There are three questions that we must consider. Why do we have corroboration in Scots law? What has changed? If we are to abolish corroboration, what safeguards require to be given? Margo MacDonald dealt with why we have corroboration. When I asked Lord Carloway about the issue, he indicated—as I think is mentioned in his report—that, as far as he could see, it goes back to Romano-canonical law. It is not for me to criticise Romano-canonical law, which is the basis of law in many jurisdictions and which has doubtless provided great support. Scotland has benefited from the fact that the civil law that we have practised is based on aspects of Roman law. There no clarity on the basis on which corroboration came in, but it came in at those times.

I do not think that I have ever suggested that it was rubbish. I think that Annabel Goldie denigrates my argument. Stewart Stevenson made a valid point when he said that things have changed. We must take account of that. We had corroboration at a time when some of the judiciary lacked education and legal expertise. The situation now is different. We did not have DNA evidence, which provides certainty to the millionth degree, or video evidence. The world has changed. Matters require to be considered in that context, in the round. Margo MacDonald spoke about the basis for the intention to remove the rule of corroboration. The intention is to enable the court always to have the best evidence before it, so that it can assess its credibility. As Lord Carloway stated, corroboration can be seen as an archaic rule. We want to focus more on the quality than on the quantity of evidence, as John Finnie said. Corroboration has served Scotland well. Equally, the 110-day rule—which, as Annabel Goldie will recall, was viewed as one of the gold standards of Scots criminal law when I was going through university—has gone, but Scots law has not collapsed. We have moved into the 21st century and recognised that some changes need to be made. We must set corroboration and why we have it in context, and look at what has changed. As many members have said—and as Lord Carloway accepted, although he did not think that it was appropriate for him to address the issue—there require to be safeguards. As an Administration, we, too, accept that there require to be safeguards. The primary matter that has been raised was mentioned by Michael McMahon, with whom we have been in communication. We are happy to take on board the valid work that he has already done, for which we are very grateful to him. The verdict system has to be looked at. We will not prejudge what the outcome of that process may be, but I accept that it is valid for the verdict system to be examined. I welcome the contribution that Michael McMahon has made through his consultation, and we look forward to being able to build on that.

Absolutely. First and foremost, we must recognise that Lord Carloway made clear something that is accepted by the Crown: in the vast majority of cases there will be no change to the evidence that is required. Preferably, there will be evidence from more than one source, and if there are two eye witnesses, that will be even better—the more, the merrier. I give an assurance that we do not have a desire to change the whole way that either the police or, indeed, the Scottish legal system operates. It is a matter of making sure that we go for quality of evidence, not quantity. Some members have spoken about how matters can be agreed. I have been involved in discussions with a major Scottish financial institution at the request of one of Scotland’s constabularies—representing the views of all constabularies—about the problem that they have faced whereby they must routinely send two officers down to London to pick up information to be used in prosecutions. Christine Grahame is right: we have agreement of joint minutes of admissions. Equally, however, routinely, two officers are required to pick up and speak to what is, in effect, a label. They do not know what the item is; they just say, “I was the officer that flew south. I picked this up along with my colleague and that, before you, is the item I uplifted.” Frankly, that is nonsensical. When folk worry about costs, let us look at that. Let us look at what others think. I surprised that the Tories did not refer to this, but “If abolishing corroboration means that more people can be brought to trial then that is to be welcomed.” It was not me who said that—it was David McLetchie. I have to say that I am not necessarily looking to see more people prosecuted, but I think that the right people should be prosecuted. I take on board the view of Scottish Women’s Aid, which has said: “Our organisation’s clear position is that the implications of removing the requirement for corroboration must be explored further. However, in doing that, we should look not at what will happen if that is done but at how we can make such a move work.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 20 December 2011; c 780.] The Tories should take that on board.

It is not for me to increase the number of convictions—that will be for the judicial system. We have to make legislative changes that may change how the scales of justice are balanced. We are looking to make sure that justice is done. That is why I will also quote the views of Susan Gallagher, the deputy chief executive of Victim Support Scotland, who said: “The recommendation to eliminate corroboration in Scotland is particularly welcome as long as any test applied ensures that it does actually lead to better quality of evidence.” I refer the chamber to Malcolm Chisholm’s speech. This is not about getting more convictions per se; it is about achieving justice. If people who should be convicted because they have perpetrated heinous crimes are going free, we owe it to victims and our broader communities to achieve justice. This is not simply about a system of rules of engagement for m’learned friends on either side—prosecution and defence; it is about making sure that we address the problem.

We and the Crown do not necessarily accept that. The figures may be offset by the increased likelihood and propensity of people to plead guilty, because the evidence will be quite clear and there will not necessarily be the same palaver to be gone through.

Obviously, the children’s hearings system sometimes deals with civil matters, where the burden of proof is different. Clearly, matters that are referrals follow the same circumstances elsewhere. Both Aileen Campbell and I will deal with that issue, and I will be happy to come back to Christina McKelvie on that. On resources, the Administration does not envisage that there will necessarily be a huge increase in resources. There is on-going cant and hypocrisy from the Labour Party, which presided over huge cuts south of the border—Alistair Darling’s cuts were to be deeper and tougher than those of Thatcher—that have been slightly mitigated by the Conservative Party. When we bring forward proposals to streamline matters, whether we are talking about the Scottish police service, the Scottish Court Service or legislative changes, all we get from Labour members is a palaver of matters that would involve increased expenditure—they never tell us where they would make cuts. The reforms will ensure that we protect justice. I welcome Lord Carloway’s submission to the Parliament.

I have regular meetings with all the chief constables to discuss a range of matters. I recently met Chief Constable House at the serious organised crime task force meeting on Monday 10 September 2012.

I am aware of the outstanding facility that exists at Gartcosh. I know from the only discussions that I have had that the temporary HQ will be based at Tulliallan. Longer-term decisions about the location of the HQ and of other parts of the police service—whether they are located on one site or are dispersed around the country, as some people seek—will be for the chief constable to take. I can confirm that, in principle, the Scottish crime campus would provide a purpose-built national facility for the police service of Scotland and its partner agencies.

I met police board conveners earlier today and Philip Braat, the new convener of Strathclyde police authority, was there. Matters do come to light, which is why we carry out reviews and investigations. Mr Braat and the other conveners were very proactive on what they seek to do as we move towards a single service. As with all aspects of policing and, indeed, of administration at local government or national Government level, there is always room for improvement and there are always lessons to be learned, but Philip Braat and his colleagues are seeking to do what they can to continue to provide an outstanding police service in Strathclyde.

Work has started on developing a Scottish strategy for administrative justice, and I will keep Parliament updated as that work progresses.

Some of that will be a matter for discussion with my colleague the Minister for Housing and Welfare. We are in regular discussion with a variety of bodies as we move towards devolution of powers over administrative justice. As I and others have said, people in Scotland are more likely to interact with a tribunal than they are with the court system, so the devolution of those powers is significant. We must work with a variety of agencies, the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service on the issue. I have recently been in communication with Richard Henderson, who is the chair of the Scottish Committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council, so I can assure the member that we are on the case. It is a complex area, given that some matters are reserved, some are devolved and others are of a hybrid nature. We think that the principle is good. I am sure that my colleague will be supportive of and sympathetic towards the suggestion that the member makes about housing.

On 6 September, we launched a consultation on reducing the drink-driving limit in Scotland. We believe that a lower limit will help to make our roads safer for all drivers, including young and newly qualified drivers, who can often be hampered by a lack of driving experience and an inaccurate assessment of their level of competence. Those factors can only be made worse by the effects of alcohol. We wanted to explore the possibility of introducing a lower limit for young and newly qualified drivers as part of our drink-driving consultation, but unfortunately the United Kingdom Government rejected our request to devolve the power to do so in the Scotland Act 2012. We intend to approach the UK Government again to seek further powers on drink-driving, such as the ability to prescribe differential drink-driving limits for different types of drivers.

Absolutely—I concur with Mark McDonald on that. Members are all aware that there are far too many road tragedies in Scotland, whether in rural or urban areas. I know that Grampian suffers significantly in that respect. We believe that a legislative change could provide some help, to which we can add the reduction in the drink-driving limit, although we wish to consider going further with regard to a variety of other road traffic matters. Mr McDonald makes a valid point. This is a cultural issue. Two particular categories of drink-drivers are causing us problems at the moment. One category is a hard core of recidivists who seem to think that the law does not apply to them. We would have preferred to have random stop-and-search powers devolved to us from the UK Government, but we were not given those powers. Recidivists have to realise that the law applies to them, that their drink-driving will be addressed by the police and that they will face the severe consequences that follow. We also need to try to caution young drivers and to recognise that perhaps some of the effects of advertising on a whole variety of matters—advertising that brought the issue to the attention of people of my generation and led to a cultural change—are perhaps diminishing. We need to work with all agencies—the fire and rescue service, the police and education authorities—to ensure not only that we enforce the law and that the law is appropriate, but that we change the culture and remind young drivers that driving under the influence of alcohol is likely to cost them their lives and others their lives.

The priority for our highly successful cashback for communities programme is to invest the proceeds of crime back into communities to benefit all Scotland’s young people. Since its inception, more than £46 million has been invested throughout Scotland, directly benefiting more than 600,000 young people and generating more than 11,000 young person volunteers, who are putting something back into their communities. All cashback funding that is received through proceeds of crime has already been invested in or committed to projects for young people and communities that have been hit by crime through to 2014-15. That includes almost £27 million on sporting activities and facilities projects; £8.5 million on grant schemes that support small, diversionary youth work projects throughout the country; more than £3.5 million on cultural activities including arts, music and dance; and £2.25 million on a community assets programme, which aims to help support communities to find solutions to their own problems.

I hope that we can achieve cross-party consensus on that. It is an issue that has been raised before—it is not just Sandra White who has raised it. I remember Lord George Foulkes—as the First Minister refers to him—raising it, and I agree with him. Proceeds of crime are currently capped at £30 million, with all other money being remitted to the Treasury. Although we have not breached the cap, the endeavours of the Lord Advocate and his colleagues are taking us towards a situation in which we may do so—that may occur at some time in the future. It seems appropriate that proceeds of crime that are recovered by the authorities in this country should be returned to our communities. I hope that members across the chamber agree that such matters should be dealt with here, that there should not be any cap at all, and that money should certainly not be going to the Treasury when it could be reinvested to improve and secure our communities.

We try to provide extra to those areas that require most by putting money back into areas that suffer from the blight of crime. We accept that there is a rural-urban divide. The cost of allowing kids to participate in, for example, art, dance or football can be greater in rural areas because we require to pay for buses and so on. We take into account a variety of factors. Those areas that suffer disproportionately should be rewarded, and that is what we do. Those areas that have a problem because of rurality and peripherality must also be supported. I am happy to assure the member that we provide for those areas that suffer disproportionately, but I make it clear that there will be no postcode lottery. Every child should be given the opportunity to be all that they can be, irrespective of where they reside.

Our position is that action to introduce the crime of aggression into Scots criminal law at this time is likely to fall outwith the competence of the Parliament by virtue of the foreign relations reservation in the Scotland Act 1998. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court is the treaty that established the International Criminal Court. Following the agreement that was reached at the Kampala conference in 2010, member states that are party to the treaty, including the United Kingdom, have until 2017 to decide whether to ratify the amendments that were agreed at Kampala on the crime of aggression. We understand that the UK Government has not yet reached a decision on what it will do. Until we know whether the UK Government is going to ratify the Rome statute amendment relating to the crime of aggression, action to legislate would fall outwith the competence of the Scottish Parliament.

Absolutely. Anyone who perpetrates heinous offences such as genocide and crimes against humanity should be brought to account. The Government is clear that it supports empowering the International Criminal Court to bring justice to those who are actively involved in the planning, preparation, initiation and execution of illegal wars, whoever they are and whatever position they might hold. I hope that the UK Government will listen to the views offered in the Scottish Parliament and hear the strength of feeling on the issue, and that it will support the ratification of the amendments to the treaty. The Scottish Government will then be in a position to act.

The Scottish Government continues to work with key partners, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and voluntary organisations, to tackle domestic abuse. We have allocated funding of £34.5 million over the next three years to tackle violence against women, including domestic abuse. That funding demonstrates our strong commitment to the area at a time of unprecedented financial constraint. It enables us to support a wide variety of projects and organisations, such as Scottish Women’s Aid, which focus on supporting victims. We also support the Caledonian system, which addresses men’s offending behaviour.

Absolutely: the legal profession should be aware of that. I am aware of the outstanding work that is being done by Grampian Police’s domestic abuse unit, to which I pay tribute. I am reminded of the view of John Carnochan from Strathclyde Police’s violence reduction unit that violence against women is a men’s issue. We require to provide for and support those who are victims, but fundamentally we also have to change the culture of violence and the attitude among men who seem to think that women are fair game. Whether it is Grampian Police, John Carnochan at the violence reduction unit, the legal profession, parliamentarians or indeed citizens, we all have a role to play, and those of us who are male have a particular role to ensure that we address the subject. That is not simply true in relation to domestic abuse, as it is also driven home in the campaign that was launched recently to tackle sexual offences and the crime of rape—a campaign that I, the Lord Advocate, Sandy Brindley from Rape Crisis Scotland and the police have participated in.

Views on that issue have been canvassed in the chamber on many occasions. The domestic abuse court in Glasgow has done outstanding work, and the initiative that has taken place in the city of Edinburgh is also outstanding. However, there are difficulties in some areas. As I have mentioned before, it is simply not credible to set up a domestic abuse court in Lochmaddy, nor indeed in Stornoway, Lerwick or other places. There is a significant cause for concern in the area of Northern Constabulary. Equally, I am sure that the police and the courts are on top of matters there. We seek to work with the courts, the legal profession and the judiciary to ensure that we tackle and address that.

The decision to conduct and co-ordinate such activity is part of operational police planning and is subject to a number of variable factors. No specific plans have been announced to repeat that joint, high-profile enforcement initiative. However, I assure the member that if the chief constable, the divisional commander or whoever decides, in conjunction with the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency, for example, to do so, they will have my full support.

The outcome of the 25 July meeting of the A9 safety group is that it will consider a series of actions. One of those is for the group to investigate the case for an average speed system between Dunblane and Inverness. The member might wish to communicate with that group.

The United Kingdom Government has not provided concrete assurances to cover any monetary impact as a result of increased demand on the civil legal aid budget through welfare reform. We continue to seek clarity on the issue, most recently through the joint ministerial committee and regular discussions with Department for Work and Pensions ministers.

Well, yes. We have problems here and it would be much better if we were able to provide the solutions.

We strengthened the law relating to rape through the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009. That important legislation modernised and clarified the law to ensure that it was appropriate for a modern Scotland. It replaced the old common-law offence of rape with a wider statutory offence that more accurately reflects modern society’s understanding of what constitutes rape. It also provided, for the first time in Scots law, a simple, easy-to-understand definition of consent. When the 2009 act was implemented in late 2010, we raised awareness of the reformed and modernised laws. In addition, awareness raising is on-going. For example, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service highlighted a recent successful conviction of a man for rape under the 2009 act that related to the provisions that mean that if a victim removes consent during sexual intercourse and the accused continues, the crime is one of rape. I can confirm that we are working within the curriculum for excellence and with specialist services to ensure that young people understand what sexual violence and rape are, and that the message is clear that such conduct is totally unacceptable. I will be attending and speaking at the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland rape prevention campaign launch event in Edinburgh on 13 September. That police-led campaign is designed to increase awareness of what constitutes rape and to challenge attitudes and opinions about rape, including specifically—but not exclusively—the attitudes of young men.

The matter to which the member refers is an issue of great concern, which is why I ended my answer by saying that matters had to be dealt with especially with regard to young men. The new legislation that the Parliament passed in 2009 is of benefit. It makes it quite clear what the definition of consent is; it also makes it clear that various matters that would not have been categorised as rape are now dealt with. Regardless of what may be suggested by any individuals, there are not different categories of rape. It is a heinous offence. If it is perpetrated in an extremely violent manner, that makes matters even worse, but the crime per se is entirely unacceptable in any shape or form, whoever it is perpetrated by and in whatever manner. With regard to funding, the huge cuts from Westminster notwithstanding, this Government has committed £34.5 million to tackling violence against women, which represents an increase of more than 50 per cent. We are always keen to see what we can do to support significant ventures. Whether on rape crisis or violence against women, outstanding work is being done, so we are happy to look at such matters. The Government’s commitment, as embodied in its 50 per cent increase in funding, shows how we are putting our money where our mouth is.

Scottish Government officials met representatives of the violence reduction unit on 25 June 2012 to discuss how innovative prevention initiatives are helping to keep violent crime at a 30-year low.

I am aware of the matter that Margaret Mitchell raises—I believe that Stewart Maxwell has raised it in the chamber previously. There is a clear desire by everybody—not just the police and justice authorities, but health boards—to ensure that the information is provided. If I recall correctly from when the issue was raised previously, such information is already being provided in south Wales and in other areas south of the border. There are technical issues relating to information technology systems and so on, but I assure the member that we welcome the pilot and that the issue is being looked at by the police and the health board. The impediments and the delay relate more to technological challenges than to any desire not to proceed. I am happy to keep the member appraised as matters progress. I give her my full assurance that we are looking to build on the pilot. The obstacles tend to relate to IT systems, but they can be dealt with. They have been resolved elsewhere, so there is no reason why they cannot be dealt with in Scotland.

The cost of policing marches and parades in Glasgow was discussed during my meeting with the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents on 19 June 2012. Officials also discussed the issue recently with Assistant Chief Constable Higgins of Strathclyde Police in the context of the Jubilee weekend marches in Glasgow.

I accept that there are significant issues. Early on in our Administration, we faced the incident at Glasgow airport; about three weeks later, we faced the apprentice boys march in Glasgow. As I recall, at a time when we faced challenges in Scotland from an attempted terrorist atrocity, about 1,800 officers were deployed to cover that march. This is fundamentally about balance. In terms of the legislation, we have to ensure that we do not catch innocuous events such as a Boys Brigade march when we seek to take action against events that have huge cost implications. Such issues are for local authorities to deal with. However, as an Administration we have made it clear that although we recognise the rights of individuals to take such opportunities—even when we disagree with what they are protesting about—a whole variety of issues need to be taken into account, including the implications for police. I have discussed the issue with the ASPS, and my ministerial colleague Roseanna Cunningham is taking it forward. We accept that there are huge implications in terms of policing and cost, and we are more than happy to work with local authorities to ensure that, as a country, we get the right balance between the right of people to march and demonstrate and the right of communities to be protected and not face significant costs and challenges to their police, who have other things to do apart from simply looking after the desires of a small minority.

I will speak to amendments 5 to 8, 13 and 14 in my name, and amendment 73 in the name of Lewis Macdonald. The Scottish police authority’s ability to hold the chief constable to account for the policing of Scotland is wide ranging and allows the authority to scrutinise and challenge the chief constable on all of his or her functions and roles and on all aspects of policing. Amendments 5 to 8 make the authority’s role more proactive. Amendment 5 gives the authority an explicit function to promote the policing principles that are set out in section 32 of the bill. Amendment 6 requires the authority to keep under review the policing of Scotland. Amendment 7 makes it clear that, as part of holding the chief constable to account for the policing of Scotland, the authority is to hold the chief constable to account particularly for carrying out his or her duties as listed under section 17. Amendment 8 relates to the authority’s obligation to maintain the police. It makes it clear that the authority is obliged to provide the chief constable with details of how the authority intends to allocate the financial resources that it expects to have available to it in respect of that financial year, as it will be important for the chief constable to know what financial resources he or she can expect to have for the year in order to be able to plan effectively. Amendments 13 and 14 strengthen the accountability of the chief constable to the authority so that the chief constable “must ensure”, rather than “must seek to ensure”, that the policing of Scotland is done with due regard to any recommendation or guidance issued by the authority. In amendment 73, Lewis Macdonald proposes that the authority should not be able to authorise any of its committees or any member of its staff to call on a senior officer to resign or—where appropriate—to retire from office in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness of the police service. I cannot support that amendment, as it is for the authority to decide how it will organise its functions. If the authority has, for example, a human resources sub-committee, it may be entirely appropriate for that sub-committee to have the role of calling on a senior officer to resign or retire. I have it made clear in my letter to the Scottish Chief Police Officers Staff Association that I would expect the authority to set out the process that it will follow in taking a decision, and I fully expect that any representations that are made will be considered by all the authority’s members. I move amendment 5.

I understand the concern that SCPOSA has raised with the member; indeed, I have met the association. However, we have made it clear that these are matters for the authority, and ultimately Mr Macdonald recognises that fact. His position is that they should be dealt with by the full authority, rather than by being delegated to a sub-committee. It seems to me that how they are dealt with should be a matter for the authority, which will be charged with good governance. Representation will also be made by SCPOSA or any successor organisation. We should take into account the fact that the power will be used sparingly by the authority—I have no doubt about that. When it has to be used, it should be for the appropriate authority to decide how it handles the matter. Equally, as has been referred to, it is doubtless the case that every authority member will be well aware of it and have to consider it. Amendment 5 agreed to. Amendments 6 and 7 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. Section 3—Maintenance of the police Amendment 8 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. Section 4—General powers of the Authority

I will speak first to amendments 36, 38, 58, 60, 61 and 72, in the name of Lewis Macdonald. The amendments are to provisions that are not new. In fact, the police provisions come from section 9(1)(b) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, as amended by the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. The fire provisions in the bill update sections 35 and 36, on assistance and delegations, of the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005. They are therefore tried and tested approaches. As we have heard, Mr Macdonald’s amendments would allow ministers to specify the circumstances in which the Scottish police authority and the Scottish fire and rescue service would require to obtain ministerial consent before they entered into contracts or made arrangements for assistance to be obtained from, or functions to be delegated to, other persons. I cannot support amendments that enable the Government to interfere in the operation of the SPA and the SFRS in that way. I am also concerned that with services such as policing and fire and rescue, there might be a requirement to bring in additional resources or people at very short notice to deal with a particular problem or to free up others to deal with that problem. Do we really want the services to be waiting for ministerial consent before they can do that? Accordingly, I do not support amendments 36, 38, 58, 60, 61 and 72. However, I reiterate that I am totally opposed to the privatisation or contracting out of our vital public services. I also assure members that, should a future Government want to privatise the direct carrying out of police functions, primary legislation would be required to allow a range of police powers to be given to non-police officers. I turn to amendments 35 and 57, in the name of Jenny Marra. I thank Ms Marra for her engagement throughout the bill proceedings on the use of supported businesses in the procurement of goods and services for the SPA and the SFRS. From the outset, I have said that the Scottish Government recognises that supported businesses have a valuable role to play in assisting people who have disabilities to integrate into the labour market and in helping to improve their overall independence and wellbeing, which is crucial in the building of a healthier and fairer Scotland. However, I cannot support amendments that single out the SPA and the SFRS as public bodies that must enter into at least one contract with supported businesses in a three-year period. It would be wrong of ministers to prescribe in legislation the type of supplier that a public body must contract with. Ms Marra is also wrong to give the impression that, through that requirement, we could secure the future of businesses such as Remploy. It is essential that the SPA and the SFRS retain their flexibility to issue tenders and enter into contracts that meet their needs and secure value for money for the public purse. Jenny Marra’s point goes beyond policing and fire and rescue services, and the Scottish Government will actively consider the issue for inclusion in the public procurement bill in relation to public bodies across the board. Indeed, the issue was mentioned in the exchange with Helen Eadie during Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body question time. I do not support amendments 35 and 57. I do not support the amendments in the group.

Does the member recall that I said that the issue should be dealt with across Government and not simply in the SPA and the SFRS? That ties into the response, from a Scottish Parliament perspective, given to Helen Eadie, which I recall Ms Eadie welcomed

Following the defeat of his amendment at stage 2, Mr Lamont has reintroduced it as amendment 37. I understand where he is coming from, but I am not sure how he expects ministers to publish a statement that covers all possible eventualities and which, despite that, seems to be set in stone for ever more. More important, the bill is already clear in excluding from the power of direction the way in which specific operations are being or will be carried out. That provides sufficient clarity and protection from interference in on-going or planned operations. The bill also provides for parliamentary scrutiny by requiring that any direction must be published and laid before the Scottish Parliament. I am, therefore, not persuaded that a statement by the Scottish ministers would add any value or enhance transparency, and I will not support the amendment. As I have said before, the nature of policing, the nature of society and the nature of crime are continually evolving and it is not reasonable to expect all future eventualities to be addressed prior to the first use of the power. It might be helpful for me, instead of trying to predict all the scenarios in which such a power would not be used, to provide the chamber with some illustrations of when such a power could be used. The power might be used to ensure that the SPA complies with general Government policy that applies across the whole public sector, such as policy on pay and workforce issues. Alternatively, it might be used to ensure that the SPA takes action on recommendations arising from the work of external independent bodies, such as the Auditor General, parliamentary committees and public inquiries.

This is a group of technical amendments that clarify that an individual who is engaged on temporary service with the police service of Scotland has exactly the same status in law as constables who are appointed directly to that service. Amendments 9 to 11 are minor technical amendments to make the wording consistent. Amendment 12, which provides that “An individual engaged on temporary service under such arrangements holds the office of constable”, replaces three specific provisions on the direction and control, functions, powers and privileges of such individuals. The effect is to clarify that those individuals have exactly the same status in law as constables who are appointed directly to the police service of Scotland. Through amendment 12, we remove the need for the specific powers currently described in section 16(4). Amendment 16 is a consequential amendment to the definition of constable to confirm that constables on temporary service are included. I move amendment 9. Amendment 9 agreed to. Amendments 10 to 12 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. Section 17—Chief constable’s responsibility for the policing of Scotland Amendments 13 and 14 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. Section 26—Police staff Amendment 38 moved—[Lewis Macdonald].

Under subsections (1) and (2) of the section that amendment 39 would insert, the Scottish ministers would have to publish a full business case before commencing parts of the bill under section 124. As I said at stage 2, the outline business cases, produced in accordance with Treasury guidance and published in September 2011, provided a strong, evidence-based case for the move to single services. Both those business cases demonstrated that single services were the most likely to deliver the necessary savings and other benefits of reform. It was on that basis that we introduced the bill. Full business cases are to be produced to set out in detail the effect of delivering single services. To enable those business cases to be produced, a series of critical decisions on the design and delivery of the services is needed. It is sensible and right that those decisions should be taken by the police authority, the SFRS board and the chief officers once they have been appointed. They include decisions on the size and shape of the executive teams to lead the services; on the configuration of specialist services such as firearms, murder investigation and flood rescue to meet the needs of communities across Scotland; and on how support services such as HR and training are delivered. Parliament and the services themselves would be rightly critical if ministers sought to take such decisions on the services’ behalf. The two services need to take ownership of the new structures that we are creating and make the detailed decisions that will enable full business cases to be produced. It therefore does not make any sense for the Government to produce full business cases before those decisions have been made. On subsections (3) and (4), the bill already enables the Auditor General to initiate examinations into the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of the police authority and the police service and the arrangements that they make in relation to best value. Those provisions give the Auditor General full scope to undertake the type of activity that is suggested by the amendment. However, it is important to emphasise that, under the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Act 2000, the Auditor General is deliberately independent of the Government and the Parliament, and it should not be for us to tell him or her—the Auditor General will soon be a her—what to examine or how and when to examine it. However, I assure Lewis Macdonald that, following discussions with the Auditor General, I am confident that he or his successor would respond positively to any request from the Parliament to examine the new services.

Of course tensions and disagreements will arise; that is a natural function of scrutiny and engagement between boards and those who operate with them. However, it would be disproportionate to require a legislative solution. The bill will create a framework for delivery of shared local outcomes, which will give local authorities broad powers to shape delivery and to hold local commanders and senior officers to account. It is clear where ultimate responsibility for local services will lie: the chief constable and the SFRS will be responsible for ensuring that adequate service delivery arrangements are in place in each local authority area. I believe that the lines of accountability in the bill provide more than sufficient clarity that unresolved concerns about local delivery will be able to be directed to the chief constable or the SFRS without the need for separate statutory provision. I invite members to recall the evidence at stage 1, including that from representatives of the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers, ACPOS, police authority conveners and staff associations, which comprehensively rejected statutory dispute resolution. Therefore, I see no grounds for supporting amendments 44 and 65. Similarly, amendments 47 and 47A would bring us back to statutory dispute resolution mechanisms, which have been discussed on numerous occasions. Have we so little faith in the ability of local partners to work together to resolve difficulties maturely that we need to provide detailed escalation and arbitration routes in statute? Amendments 41 and 62 resurrect amendments that were defeated at stage 2, with slight adjustments, and are supplemented by amendments 15A and 21A. I welcome Mr Macdonald’s recognition of the difficulties that new services will face in providing information that preceded their establishment. However, the other concerns that I raised at committee still stand. I remind Mr Macdonald that we are not creating 32 police forces and 32 fire and rescue services. We are creating single services, which will deliver all aspects of policing and fire and rescue, wherever and whenever they are needed and which will deploy specialist resources to meet the needs of communities. The deployment of such resources will often be demand led, varying from day to day, week to week and year to year. The resources that are deployed in any area on one given day could very well be different on another day. On that basis, I cannot support those amendments. However, I can reassure Parliament that the police are already leading work that will identify the number of local community and response officers in each local authority area. That will be a core part of the local plan and will provide transparency to the council and communities from day one. Similarly, amendments 46 and 63 would require local plans to include additional information on budget allocation and workforce deployment. Local officers will deliver across all of the priorities and objectives set out in the plan. For example, a community police officer might be talking to primary kids about drugs in the morning but dealing with a domestic abuse incident in the afternoon. Does Mr Macdonald really think that it is sensible and practical to allocate the budget for that police officer to different objectives? The bill already requires local plans to set out how the services propose to deliver local priorities and objectives. That is a far more meaningful requirement—it focuses on the means by which outcomes will be delivered, rather than on detailed costings or on a head count of personnel who are expected to be deployed in a local area. I therefore cannot support those amendments. Although local authorities will no longer have responsibility for the funding and operation of the police service, they will have an important role in shaping and scrutinising police and fire and rescue services in their area. I recognise that local authorities will want to ensure that they have sufficient on-going resources for that role. I assure members that, as is normal, those costs will be met through the local government settlement and that there will be discussions with COSLA on that settlement. A statutory duty is not required for that to happen and, therefore, I cannot support amendment 45. I support amendment 43, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which provides clarity around the role of the local authority. I also support amendments 40 and 64. The relationships between the local authority and the local commander and between the local commander and the local senior officer will be critical to the success of local relationships, and those amendments reflect best practice without giving the local authority the power to veto an appointment. I will briefly touch on the matters raised by Mr Macdonald with regard to VAT. We discussed with COSLA whether it wished us to lodge the amendments irrespective of the attitude taken by the Treasury, it said no and we have obliged. I know that many eyes in the United Kingdom will be focused on Northern Ireland today as the Queen meets Martin McGuinness. It might be useful to explain why the Police Service of Northern Ireland will be VAT exempt but the police service of Scotland will not be—better together indeed. It might be useful to explain why, despite what we offered, academy schools and police commissioners in England will be VAT exempt, but the police service of Scotland will be liable to meet VAT—better together indeed. It might be quite important to point out why the only police service in the UK that will not be VAT exempt is the police service of Scotland. Let them explain how we are better together. These matters can be addressed by changing VAT south of the border. That opportunity is there to do that, given the new alliance that there is in this chamber, across the country and, doubtless, in Westminster. If members want to make sure that our police service is not liable to VAT, they need to make sure that action is taken south of the border—otherwise we will take those powers once there is constitutional change.

The Scottish Government offered a whole variety of proposals that mirrored matters that had been dealt with south of the border to address national parks not being subject to VAT. Other examples are academy schools, which were recently brought in, and police commissioners. Each and every one of the suggestions that we put forward was rejected. We asked what would be acceptable and the UK Government refused to provide us with any options. The position remains quite clear: this Government has done everything to ensure that our police service is not the only police service in the whole of the United Kingdom that is found liable to meet VAT. The situation can be changed by a simple amendment to an act of the British Parliament. If those who operate in the better together campaign cannot change that south of the border, they should allow those of us who wish to make that change to have the powers to allow this Parliament to rectify the mistakes and arrogance from down there.

I fully understand what Lewis Macdonald is seeking to achieve through his amendments. I share his concerns about the cost to the public purse and the message that such a reappointment would send to the public. However, I cannot support the amendments. There may be unforeseen and exceptional circumstances in which it would be appropriate to reappoint a retired chief constable or chief officer. Any such appointment would have to be consistent with the principles of best value, and only in exceptional circumstances could the reappointment of an individual who has retired, is in receipt of a pension and has benefited from a lump sum deliver best value.

I am happy to put on record that it would happen only in exceptional circumstances that, in all likelihood, would never arise. However, we must prepare for every eventuality. The chief constable and senior team might be incapacitated for some reason. We have seen such instances that have affected the Police Service of Northern Ireland, and there have been difficulties in the higher court in Scotland. I am happy to put on record that I am talking about exceptional circumstances that we do not expect to occur. Nevertheless, we must prepare for every eventuality. I assure members that the appointment of chief constables must be approved by the Scottish ministers, and I would expect there to be very good reasons for a reappointment before it would ever be approved.

When amendment 49 was debated by the Justice Committee at stage 2, Mr Pearson said that we should place concerns about staffing issues and police numbers on record in the bill to show the public that we identify with those concerns. However, I consider that concerns about staffing and police numbers are best addressed through the regular face-to-face engagement between me and my officials and various representative bodies, such as the Scottish Police Federation and Unison. The bill gives Scottish ministers the power to direct HMICS to carry out inquiries into any matter that we consider appropriate. I could direct HMICS to do what Mr Pearson suggests without it needing to be specified in legislation. Giving an isolated example of the kind of thing into which HMICS may inquire could be construed as intending some sort of limit on the kind of inquiries that HMICS is to make. That would be an unfortunate unintended consequence, therefore I cannot support amendment 49.

Lewis Macdonald’s amendment would place in the bill an obligation on the Scottish ministers to make a statement in Parliament within six months of the bill coming into effect on what actions have been taken to comply with the objectives of OPCAT through the implementation of independent custody visiting. The provisions in the bill for independent custody visiting are in pursuance of the objectives of OPCAT, which was ratified by the UK in 2003. That established a national preventive mechanism, of which the independent custody visiting scheme that is proposed in the bill would be a part. Visits to places of detention ensure that the rights and treatment of detainees and the conditions in which they are held are monitored and protected. The responsibility for independent custody visiting rests with the new Scottish police authority. The visitors will report direct to the SPA and any areas requiring action will be directed by the SPA to the new chief constable of the police service of Scotland. It will therefore be for the new Scottish police authority to report on the progress of the independent custody visiting scheme as it develops, not for Scottish ministers. The annual report by the national preventive mechanism will report on compliance. It is the intention that the scheme will become a member of the NPM. Although I am content to support continuing dialogue on this issue, I do not think that it is appropriate to place that requirement on ministers. In any event, the new visiting scheme will develop over time and a six-month deadline is not appropriate. I therefore ask Lewis Macdonald to withdraw amendment 50.

I concur with all members who have spoken of the need for robust parliamentary scrutiny of policing. Of course, how that is achieved is a matter for the Parliament, not the Government of the day. Indeed John Finnie’s amendment requires the Scottish Parliament, not Scottish ministers, to keep the act “under review” and “publish reports”. As has been mentioned, policing by consent has been the cornerstone of Scottish policing since its inception. We must maintain that principle as we move forward, and the Parliament has a key role in ensuring that we do so. We are all well aware that the establishment of a single Scottish police authority and police service significantly changes the structures of accountability and scrutiny of policing, and we have built into the new structure plenty of opportunities for Parliament to play a role in that scrutiny. Strategic priorities, strategic plans and annual plans are all to be laid before Parliament, as are the Scottish police authority’s annual report and reports from Her Majesty’s chief inspector of constabulary and the new police investigations and review commissioner. Parliament can also proactively inquire into any aspect of policing and require any person to attend proceedings to give evidence or to provide documents for such an inquiry. I am not clear that Mr Pearson’s proposed commission would have any additional function that is not already available to the Parliament, although I note that necessary safeguards on disclosure of information relating to the investigation of crime are absent. Moreover, its membership would not differ from that of a parliamentary committee. I am not therefore convinced that it is necessary to establish a new type of body. It has been suggested that the Justice Committee is already busy and does not have sufficient time to scrutinise the transition to and operation of the new police service. This Parliament was set up to scrutinise all devolved matters. Surely with a new single service the scrutiny of policing should be central to this Parliament’s priorities, and surely, as a corporate body, we should be ensuring that we set aside sufficient time to carry out this role effectively, diligently and proportionately. This Government is receptive to establishing a new committee under existing standing orders. That would provide a more flexible solution that can be adapted as the new service beds in.

No. I am simply supporting John Finnie’s amendment 67, which would facilitate this alternative approach. It is up to Parliament, not the Scottish Government, to decide the nature of committees, and we are happy to support the decision that Parliament makes. Although amendment 67 seeks to commit Parliament to keeping the bill’s operation under review—which emphasises the importance of the two key public services of policing and the fire and rescue service—it does not dictate the mechanism by which that should be done. Maintaining that flexibility of response is important for this chamber, not for me or my successors.

No, I do not accept that at all. There is a clear divide. Having a parliamentary majority makes a difference that we welcome—we do not deny that it makes matters easier—but I think that the member underplays the role and importance of Parliament and what is available to members. [Interruption.]

I do not believe that a Scottish policing commission is necessary. It would also present some risks that should be carefully considered. First, the relationship that would exist between Parliament and the commission is not clear. Would the commission take over Parliament’s role in the scrutiny of policing, or would it have an additional role? What would happen if Parliament and the commission took different views on an issue? Furthermore, the commission could result in overlap and confusion that could blur the existing governance and scrutiny arrangements for the police. The bill already sets out a clear and logical structure for scrutiny at each level, and it would not be helpful to add another layer. Finally, there are significant concerns—which Mr Pearson underplays—that the commission could fetter the Lord Advocate’s independent role in the investigation and prosecution of crime, particularly because it would have powers to compel police officers, and possibly prosecutors, to provide information relating to the investigation and prosecution of crime. The Scotland Act 1998 and the standing orders of this Parliament provide that Parliament cannot obtain such information, which could be sub judice, and that is for good reason. In summary, I suggest to members that the establishment of a parliamentary commission to scrutinise policing is neither necessary nor advisable. If Parliament wishes to impose a specific scrutiny mechanism by means of the bill, I recommend John Finnie’s amendment 67. I repeat my offer to work constructively with the Parliament to establish a committee for that purpose, if it would be helpful. However, it is not for the Government to establish a parliamentary committee; it is for Parliament.

All the amendments in group 12 will make further provision to assist the preparations for transfer to the new services. Amendments 15 and 21 will require the current police and fire and rescue authorities and joint boards, as well as chief constables in the Scottish Police Services Authority, to provide information and assistance to the Scottish police authority chief constable on the SFRS. Amendment 23 provides for specified sections of the bill to be commenced the day following royal assent. That reflects the fact that Parliament and stakeholders have pressed us to ensure that the new bodies and senior officers are in place as soon as possible so that there is sufficient time for them to prepare to take up their full operational functions from April 2013. It is also worth noting that the police service of Scotland will not come into being immediately; the chief constable will be in post only to lead the necessary preparation work. Amendment 20 flows from the early establishment of SFRS. It will remove provisions that deal with an initial counting period of less than six months. As a result of amendment 23, such a short initial period will not occur. Amendments 28 to 32 will adjust the provisions relating to the police property transfer scheme so that any property or obligations of current chief constables can be appropriately transferred to either the SPA or the new chief constable. I move amendment 15.

I support amendment 1. Without that definition, the amendments that were made at stage 2 that will require ministers to consult the joint central committee of the Scottish Police Federation are difficult to interpret and might not have the desired effect of enabling the federation to present a single view on behalf of all its members. We refer to the federation in legislation as it is a body that is established in statute. They are the exception, not the rule. We also value the role of the other staff associations, so I take this opportunity to put on record that the Government fully recognises the support that David O’Connor, president of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, has personally and professionally given to reform. I will continue to work closely with David and the ASPS executive committee. That is the most legitimate and effective mechanism for obtaining the views of the superintending ranks—the operational leaders of the police service. The remaining amendments in the group are minor or technical adjustments, and I ask members to support them. Amendment 1 agreed to. Section 99—The Scottish Fire and Rescue Service Amendment 17 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

I recognise the need to balance the rights of individual officers with the need to ensure that the police service has the flexibility to organise itself and deploy resources to best deliver policing in all Scotland’s communities. Paragraph 9 of schedule 4 provides safeguards for officers who transfer to the service. It provides that an officer “must not be assigned duties which ... would necessitate that constable moving home to a place” that would have been in another force area in the current eight-force structure. Paragraph 9(4) provides that the safeguard applies until such a time as the officer “is or becomes a senior officer”, is promoted, or consents “to the lifting of the limitation”. Even when the exceptions apply, I expect the police service to take a sensible, measured and considered approach to resourcing, not least because of the cost of relocation. I am not convinced that the case has been made since we last debated the matter at stage 2. I remain convinced that the bill’s provisions strike an appropriate balance between the rights of individual officers and the new service’s need for flexibility. I therefore cannot support the amendments.

I am pleased to open the stage 3 debate on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. We have come a very long way in a very short time, and I thank everyone who has helped to shape this important bill. The bill has benefited from the detailed and careful scrutiny of four parliamentary committees. I thank the Parliament, the conveners and members of those committees—particularly the Justice Committee—and their clerks for their positive contributions. In addition to consulting formally twice, we have worked closely with key stakeholders, including the senior management of the services, the Scottish Police Federation, the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents and the Scottish Chief Police Officers Staff Association. Between them, they represent all ranks in the service. We also worked closely with Unison, the Fire Brigades Union, the Association of Principal Fire Officers Scotland, the Retained Firefighters Union and local government. Indeed, members of the FBU and Unison and the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland have been or are present in the chamber today. I value their wisdom and thank them for all their positive engagement and continued commitment to reform. Their continued leadership and commitment will be crucial in the months ahead. We have listened and, where it was right to do so, we have amended the bill.

I do not understand the member’s statement given that, as has been pointed out, the FBU supported the bill. In addition, the Scottish Police Federation is now full-square behind it, the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents has always championed it and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland was divided between senior officers who wanted it and senior officers who did not. Since 2007, we have made significant and sustained progress on building a safer and stronger Scotland. Our police and fire and rescue services are performing well. The number of fire deaths is almost 50 per cent lower than a decade ago, and figures that were published yesterday show that the number of recorded crimes continues to fall and is now at a 37-year low. Scotland is a safer place. Non-sexual violent crimes are now at their lowest level since 1982—a 30-year low—and the clear-up rate now stands at 75 per cent. The number of crimes of handling an offensive weapon has decreased by 10 per cent since 2010-11, and there has been a 44 per cent decrease since 2006-07.

Because, as we successfully put to the electorate last year, the alternative is to follow what the Liberal Democrats are doing as part of the coalition Government south of the border, which is to get rid of almost as many police officers as we have serving in Scotland—a record number—and, more important, to attack the terms and conditions of those brave officers who serve. We will not do that. We will maintain a visible police presence in our communities, and honour and adhere to the terms and conditions of the service that they have given without attacking them through Winsor. The men and women of those services would be right to be proud of that record. However, as I have just said, those achievements are under threat from the unprecedented that have been cuts imposed by Westminster. We need to make savings now to protect and improve front-line services. However, reform is not just about saving money. We can make a virtue out of necessity. We have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to create the sort of world-class, public-focused services that we want for Scotland. Most agree with us that restructuring to create single services is the best way to safeguard and improve services. Single services will keep all Scotland’s communities safe and strong by creating more equal access to specialist support and national capacity, such as counterterror investigation, murder investigation, firearms and flood rescue, and strengthening the connection between the services and communities. The bill provides a blueprint for modern police and fire and rescue services fit to meet the needs of an ambitious 21st century Scotland. It sets out, as never before in legislation, a detailed framework for the new services, modernising their governance to provide an enhanced focus on delivery of local services. It defines, for the first time, the clear roles and responsibilities of the key players, including unprecedented opportunities for Parliament to scrutinise the services regularly and systematically. I share Graeme Pearson’s ambition for proactive and focused parliamentary scrutiny of policing, if not his suggested approach. That is why I supported John Finnie’s amendment this morning to put beyond doubt that the Parliament can fully scrutinise all the provisions in the bill—fire and rescue as well as policing. We will also be using our influence to establish a dedicated parliamentary committee to carry out that role. The bill has benefited enormously from the input of stakeholders and the Parliament. For example, at stage 1 we were told that key appointments needed to be made as soon as possible to meet the start date of 1 April 2013. Therefore, in addition to amendments at stage 2, I lodged amendments at stage 3 to enable the early commencement of key provisions to facilitate the early appointment of chief officers, board chairs and members. As I have made clear, I do not anticipate that the chair of the SPA will take many decisions, aside from those required to facilitate the early appointment of the chief constable in advance of other board members being appointed. Stakeholders, and the Justice Committee, told us that the boards may be too small to operate effectively. Hence I lodged amendments at stage 3 to increase their size to between 11 and 15 members. At stage 2, I supported John Finnie’s important amendment to place human rights and equal respect at the heart of the oath that is taken by constables. Following concerns raised by David McLetchie and Graeme Pearson on the transparency of the SPA and the SFRS, this morning I supported amendments to place both under a duty to meet in public and publish agendas, minutes and papers. Following extensive discussions, the Treasury decided that the SPA and the SFRS should not be able to recover VAT, which means that they will be the only police and fire authorities in the UK unable to recover VAT. That decision is in stark contrast to recent ones taken in relation to police commissioners in England and Wales and academy schools in England. It ignores the fact that the SPA will continue to be able to receive funding from Scottish local authorities to pay the costs of agreed local priorities. The draft amendments that I shared with the Treasury and members of the Justice Committee would have put that beyond doubt. We made every effort to reach agreement with the Treasury and I am bitterly disappointed that it has not only rejected our proposals but failed to come up with any solutions.

No, it did not. We put forward matters, as suggested by the Treasury. We proposed amendments. We asked it to say what was necessary and it refused to do so. This Government did everything that it could to meet the criteria that were specified by the Treasury. We put forward amendments and it refused to accept them. Further, it was not prepared to make any suggestions. It is quite clear that we will be able to change the situation only when we have some control over it ourselves.

Well, we might like to think so, but, unfortunately, that is not the position. Unless the Treasury south of the border is prepared to amend the situation with regard to VAT, which it can do, we will have to have constitutional change that will give the Scottish Parliament the power to do so. Even with the requirement to pay VAT, the single services will deliver estimated savings of £1.7 billion over 15 years. However, the people of Scotland are being penalised twice: first by the Westminster-imposed cuts; and secondly by the £25 million a year VAT tax grab by the Exchequer. That is manifestly unfair and unwarranted. The timescale for reform is challenging. Passing the bill is just one step. We are working closely with the services and all the staff associations and unions to achieve a start date of 1 April 2013. We will need strong leaders to lead the services into the future. We are working hard to ensure that key appointments are made as soon as possible. We have already advertised for the chief fire officer and adverts for the SPA and SFRS board chairs and members, and for the chief constable, will be issued in July. I am confident that those posts will attract a strong calibre of candidate. This is a necessary and important piece of legislation. The reforms that are set out in the bill are necessary to safeguard and improve the front-line services on which communities depend and which are outstanding, but we face unprecedented cuts. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Amendment 1 is a technical amendment that deletes from the bill new section 194M(3) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. That provision was originally included to make clear that the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission’s power to decide to disclose information under new section 194M(1) of the 1995 act was subject to other provisions within the overall framework. However, new section 194M(3) is not essential to the operation of the framework, so amendment 1 deletes it to simplify the provisions in new section 194M. The result is that the natural context of the set of provisions in part 2 of the bill will mean that new section 194M(1) is qualified to the extent that is provided for in the other provisions, but without that having to be stated expressly. Amendments 14 and 15 are consequential amendments that delete references to new section 194M(3) at new section 194Q(1) and (3)(b). Amendment 2 is intended to address concerns that we have received from the United Kingdom Government that new section 194M could be read in such a way that it sought to override reserved legislation that would otherwise limit the disclosure of information. Notwithstanding that that has never been our intention, we have considered carefully the UK Government’s comments. We have always been clear that the Scottish Government is committed to being as open and transparent as possible on the al-Megrahi case within the devolved competence of the Scottish Parliament. Furthermore, we are satisfied that, as I said to the Justice Committee when the issue was debated at stage 2, the provision at new section 194M(4), which was inserted at stage 2, does not affect any restriction or limitation on disclosure that is imposed by reserved legislation. As members will be well aware, the Scottish Parliament cannot legislate on matters that are outside its competence. All acts of the Scottish Parliament require to be read within the context of section 101 of the Scotland Act 1998, which provides that acts of the Scottish Parliament are to be read in a way that is consistent with the devolved competence of the Parliament. However, following stage 2, we were asked by the UK Government to recast the provision, for two reasons; first, to make explicit that any limitation on disclosure imposed by an enactment is not overridden by new section 194M(1) of the 1995 act; and, secondly, to remove the reference to “any obligation of secrecy” that was contained in new section 194M(4) of the 1995 act. In lodging amendment 2, we have kept our minds entirely focused on ensuring that our policy aims are met. We are satisfied that our recast provision continues to meet our policy aims, as it is sufficient to address the concern that was expressed by the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission in its evidence to the committee that the bill as introduced did not provide the necessary authority for it to disclose information that is covered by legal professional privilege or by any common-law duty of confidentiality. If amendment 2 is agreed to, I can assure members that the commission will still have the necessary authority to decide whether it is appropriate to disclose information, even if that information is covered by legal professional privilege or by any common-law duty of confidentiality. On that basis, I move amendment 1.

I had discussions with the secretary of state and the Lord Advocate had discussions with the Advocate General, from whom we received a communication this morning. I believe that there has been full and frank discussion and that the fears and alarms of the commission have been addressed. We think that we have struck the correct balance between doing what we have always said that we will do with regard to being as open and transparent as possible on the al-Megrahi case and obliging foreign Governments and the UK Government by acknowledging their requests in a way that has assured them that they feel that their rights are protected. Amendment 1 agreed to. Amendment 2 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

Amendment 3 has been lodged to address concerns that have been expressed by the UK Government about the way in which the bill treats information that it has provided to the commission. The UK Government has expressed concern that it does not have final control over the release of information that is held by the commission but which it provided. We have explained that the bill enables any person who has provided information that is held by the commission to take legal action in their favour in respect of potential disclosure of information. That includes the UK Government. We had considered that that was sufficient to meet the balancing policy aims of relaxing the restrictions on the commission to facilitate the publication of information while protecting the interests of affected persons and interested persons in respect of the potential disclosure of their information. However, the UK Government has indicated that it is not satisfied with those protections. As we have consistently made clear, the Scottish Government’s policy is to be as open and transparent as possible about all aspects of the Lockerbie atrocity. Taking into account the fact that the commission’s statement of reasons for referring al-Megrahi’s case to the appeal court has been published, and reflecting that that was the main reason why part 2 of the bill was brought forward, we accept the need to ensure that the provisions contained in the bill do not jeopardise future co-operation between the UK Government and Scottish police, the Crown Office and the commission. Concern has been expressed that future co-operation between the UK Government and Scottish authorities may be put at risk if no change was made to the bill in this area. In view of that, we lodged amendment 3, which provides that consent of the UK Government is required for the disclosure of any information that “is held by the Commission” and which “has been supplied by the UK Government”. That puts the UK Government on the same footing as foreign authorities, whose consent the commission must seek before disclosing information that they have supplied. We accept that amendment 3 represents a very fine balance between being as open and transparent as possible and ensuring that there is no adverse impact on future co-operation in investigating serious cross-border crime. Avoiding the risk of a lack of future co-operation between other countries and Scotland in criminal investigations led us to ensure that the bill provides that foreign authorities retain control over information that they have supplied. Such considerations also apply within the UK, which ultimately led us, after much reflection, to include a consent mechanism for the UK Government. Amendment 7 is a minor consequential amendment following on from amendment 3. It makes it clear that there is no unnecessary double consent mechanism whereby consent from abroad is also needed in cases in which the UK Government’s consent is required. I move amendment 3. Amendment 3 agreed to.

Amendments 4 to 6 and 8 to 13 are minor technical amendments that are intended to clarify and simplify the provisions in the bill that require the commission to obtain the consent of foreign authorities before disclosing information that has at any time been supplied by them. The amendments do not seek to change the policy intent of the provisions, with consent still being required before the commission can consider disclosing information that it holds that has been provided by a foreign authority. Overall, the amendments seek to remove the distinction between information that has been obtained from foreign authorities through international assistance arrangements through the Lord Advocate and information that has been obtained on the commission’s own application. They instead make it clear that, quite simply, if the commission holds information that was supplied by a foreign authority, the commission must obtain that authority’s consent before disclosing that information. I move amendment 4. Amendment 4 agreed to. Amendments 5 to 15 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

I begin the formal stage 3 debate by thanking the members of and clerks to the Justice Committee for their careful consideration of the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill. As I am sure members will highlight, this is a small, important but complex bit of legislation that takes some time to understand fully. I also thank the external stakeholders who have taken the time to engage in the bill process and share their knowledge and views during scrutiny of the bill. In particular, the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission has been of great assistance throughout in offering views on how best to enable it to consider the release of information relating to cases that it has referred to the appeal court but which subsequently have been abandoned. I thank, too, the Information Commissioner’s Office for its assistance in helping us to understand more fully the data protection issues relating to part 2 of the bill. The bill deals with two distinct topics. Part 1 addresses an anomaly that has arisen with regard to the setting of the punishment part of non-mandatory life sentences. The bill sets out a clear framework that the courts must follow in future when sentencing prisoners to a non-mandatory life sentence. Part 2 provides a framework within which the SCCRC can consider whether it is appropriate to disclose information that it holds relating to cases that it has referred to the appeal court where that appeal subsequently has been abandoned. Part 1 is a direct response to an appeal court judgment in the case of Petch and Foye v Her Majesty’s Advocate in March 2011, concerning the setting of the punishment part of non-mandatory life sentences. The punishment part of a sentence is the length of time that a prisoner must serve before becoming eligible for parole. Following the judgment in Petch and Foye, a number of offenders have successfully appealed and had the punishment part of their non-mandatory life sentences reduced. It is important to emphasise that the judgment did not and does not mean that serious offenders have directly been released early from prison. Since the judgment took effect, any offender who has had their punishment part reduced will continue to need to satisfy the Parole Board for Scotland that they do not present a risk to public safety. If the Parole Board is not satisfied, the offender remains in prison. However, there is common agreement throughout the chamber that it is wrong that a person who is given a non-mandatory life sentence could become eligible to apply for parole earlier than if they had been given a fixed sentence for the same crime. The bill gives back to the courts the discretion to set the punishment part of a non-mandatory life sentence to satisfy the need for punishment of the offender. We are aware that throughout the parliamentary process there has been some criticism of the provisions on the grounds that they are too complicated. We accept that the provisions are complex but we do not think they are unnecessarily complex. The provisions exist in a particular context and seek to address a very particular issue. The sentencing of non-mandatory life offenders is a complex area of law, with a fair amount of detail involved. However, the courts are used to following the statutory framework provided. In the bill, our task is solely to resolve the Petch and Foye anomaly. We believe that the somewhat prescriptive approach that we have taken is preferable to passing legislation that may be simpler to read but harder to apply. We accept that the problem of how a judge should calculate the punishment part of a non-mandatory life sentence remains a difficult one, and we consider that it is important to set out the steps involved in legislation as clearly as possible, rather than placing the full onus on judges. I am aware that some—the Law Society of Scotland, for example—have suggested that the problem could be addressed simply by removing the requirement to strip out the public protection element of the notional determinate sentence when calculating the punishment part of a non-mandatory life sentence. We accept that, on the face of it, that would remove the step in the present calculation that created the Petch and Foye anomaly. However, our solution to Petch and Foye has to be seen within the context of Scots law and case law, including European convention on human rights case law. In particular, previous case law has accepted that determinate sentences contain, or at least can contain, an element that relates to public protection, even though they are not expressly divided in that way.

I accept that argument, but—as I was about to say—life sentences are split into a punishment part, which is fixed, and an indeterminate public protection part. When calculating a punishment part, ECHR case law says that the punishment part cannot contain an element relating to public protection because it would be unfair to do so. We therefore consider that removing the requirement to strip out the public protection element of the notional determinate sentence cannot be done, as the need to strip out any public protection elements from a punishment part is a clear obligation under ECHR in the context of the sentencing of life prisoners. Furthermore, the effect of the Law Society proposal alluded to would be to sweep away the existing framework for calculating the punishment part of sentences, with the aspects that it requires for certainty of effect and ECHR compliance, and leave nothing in its place. Although the Petch and Foye judgment affected only a small number of sentencing cases—only around 80 offenders have been given non-mandatory life sentences in the past seven years—as a Government, we wanted to act quickly and appropriately to address the problem raised by the judgment and ensure that people have confidence in the sentencing of the most serious offenders. We have done that in part 1. Part 2 provides a framework within which the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission can consider whether it is appropriate to disclose information that it holds relating to cases that it has referred to the appeal court where that appeal is subsequently abandoned. We introduced the provisions as part of our commitment to be as open and transparent as possible about all aspects of the Lockerbie atrocity and, specifically, to address the situation that had arisen with regards to the commission’s statement of reasons for referring the al-Megrahi case to the appeal court. Subsequent to the introduction of the bill, the commission’s statement of reasons has been published by a newspaper. However, our legislation is general, and we consider that it is in the interests of ensuring transparency and openness in the justice system that there is a framework in place to ensure that, in future cases, the commission is able to consider releasing information relating to abandoned appeals arising from a reference that it has made, where there is a substantial public interest. We have been keen to ensure that the framework that we put in place is as robust as possible. The al-Megrahi case, given its international nature, is one of the most complex cases—if not the most complex case—that the commission has had to investigate. We are confident, therefore, that our framework can be applied in a range of possible future cases. We have made a number of changes to the bill to ensure that the framework is as effective and appropriate as possible, and that has been commented on in terms of the amendments—indeed, I made such a comment in my response to Lewis Macdonald’s intervention in relation to the first group of amendments. Specifically, we have made provision to address the commission’s concerns in relation to information to which legal professional privilege or a common-law duty of confidentiality applies. We have improved the provisions requiring consent from foreign authorities to make it absolutely clear that, where information held by the commission originates from a foreign authority, the commission must obtain the consent of that foreign authority, irrespective of how the information came to the commission. In response to United Kingdom Government concerns, we have extended the consent requirement to cover information provided to the commission by the UK Government. That is necessary to ensure that future co-operation between the UK Government and Scottish police, the Crown Office and the commission is not put at risk. The bill addresses matters that have arisen in two important but distinct areas of our justice system. It meets our absolute commitment to do everything that we can to ensure that the public has confidence that our justice system is fair, transparent and effective. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

There has been a great deal of unanimity in the chamber today. Starting with Jenny Marra and continuing thereafter, we have had a plea for the legislation to be as simple as possible and to be understandable to the general public. I fully appreciate that point. The great and the good and many others have been rolled out in support of that view and have pled in its favour. I fully accept that, irrespective of whether we are dealing with criminal, commercial or consumer legislation, it should be as understandable as possible. Wherever possible, it should be understandable to the ordinary man and woman in the street, not just to those who are privileged enough to possess a degree in law. Sadly, that cannot always be the case. Some aspects of the law are by nature very complex, and that will always be true. Equally, if we did not have complex law, we would not need lawyers; we would need only pleaders. In the past, Parliament has passed legislation that we thought was relatively straightforward. We thought that it was relatively straightforward to say that it was iniquitous that those who suffered from pleural plaques should not be given the opportunity to obtain recompense. Some lawyers, including some eminent lawyers, thought that that was contrary to the powers of the Parliament and took the case as far as the Supreme Court. It is not only that law should be, wherever possible, understandable; it can all be challenged equally. I fully accept all the points that were made about law being as understandable as possible. That is the Government’s desire and, to be fair, it is the desire of every Government, whether present or past, or north or south of the border. Sadly, however, some laws are, by their nature, very complex.

To be fair, that was the aspect that Ms Marra raised, but many other people, including some in her party, raised the question of the law being unnecessarily complex. Mr Pearson mentioned Sir Gerald Gordon, who lectured me and whose textbook I had back when I studied law. I appeared in trials in the sheriff court in Edinburgh and elsewhere along with Michael Meehan. I instructed Joanna Cherry QC when I was a practitioner. They were all cited, along with James Chalmers, as people who said that the law was unnecessarily complex. I wish that it could be simpler, but it cannot, because it is a complex area of law. We should also remember that we are dealing with an appeal case in which the judge’s first decision was challenged, so one judge was accused of getting it wrong. The matter went to our highest court of criminal appeal, which was divided. The decision was a majority decision; there was no unanimity across the bench. We are talking about a case that challenged even our most esteemed senior judiciary. Some think that the decision was not right, which is why there was a majority judgment. As John Finnie and others have said—and I do not wish to be churlish here—no one has come forward with an alternative. We believe that the legislation will address the position that was taken by the majority of the appeal court judges. I regret that the legislation is not simpler, but we are talking about a complex area of law. However, it is complex because judges apparently got it wrong the first time, other judges could not unite on the matter, and we have had to act to address the situation. That is where we are. I assure Jenny Marra and Roderick Campbell that we will keep the matter under review. I am due to meet the Lord President tomorrow, which will be the first time since he was put into that esteemed office, and I assure members that I hope to be able to tell him that we have passed the bill. I will raise with him the issue of the complexity of the law and say that I hope that we can work with the appeal court that he, as Lord Justice General, will chair. When we appoint a new Lord Justice Clerk, we will also discuss the issue with him or her. Part 2 of the bill is on the SCCRC. There was an issue that we had to address. The bill was drafted in a general way, although it was always clear that the driver was to ensure that the commission’s report on al-Megrahi was published. We believe that there is a gap in the law. I think that Lewis Macdonald said that it is difficult to speculate on circumstances that might arise, but they might arise. Some people have gone to the SCCRC and subsequently not proceeded with an appeal. Those were not matters of public interest, so I do not think that anybody is lamenting the fact that the information is not out there in public, but there might be such an instance in due course. It is therefore appropriate to have a legislative framework that allows for that. It has been mentioned that the Sunday Herald published what are admitted to be the matters that have been referred to by the SCCRC. Something is fundamentally wrong if the SCCRC has to publish matters that it is precluded by law from publishing, resting on an assurance from the Lord Advocate that he will not prosecute. That cannot be right. It cannot be appropriate that something that is so important to our legislative framework as the SCCRC should have to rest on a nod and a wink from the Lord Advocate and an assurance that he will not prosecute if it publishes information. There is something fundamentally wrong with that. The bill ensures that we deal with cases that might arise—although we cannot say what they may be—and not simply the al-Megrahi case, but it also deals with the fundamentally wrong situation that, in a case as important as the al-Megrahi one, the SCCRC would breach the law in publishing information, albeit that the Lord Advocate in his kindness and wisdom might say that he would not prosecute. That cannot be appropriate in our system. It is therefore appropriate to put the matter on a solid legal basis so that the commission can publish what it feels to be appropriate. We have included measures dealing with foreign Governments and the United Kingdom Government. Mr Macdonald need have no doubts that the only reason why we included the United Kingdom Government was to satisfy the points that have been raised with me by Michael Moore, the Advocate General for Scotland and Foreign and Commonwealth Office ministers. However, let us be clear that what the Sunday Herald published could be superseded. Therefore, as well as ensuring that we give a legal basis and framework to the SCCRC, we must consider what would happen if we did not proceed and the United States Government said that it did not mind if more information was published, or if the UK Government said that the Sunday Herald or the commission could publish what it liked and it would not interfere. The bill ensures that there is a legal or statutory basis for the commission to do what has simply been homologated by the Lord Advocate. We give the commission surety that, if anything should change, it would be doing nothing untoward.

Absolutely. The assurance that we have given in relation to foreign Governments and the United Kingdom Government, which was raised with us by the Lord Advocate, is fundamental. It would undermine the whole basis of co-operation on law enforcement if information would not be given—we would not provide information if such an approach were reciprocated. It is therefore important that we give that assurance. The Tories continued their mantra chant on early automatic and unconditional release. The Tories have an opportunity to debate that in the Parliament tomorrow, although they have chosen not to do so. It is important that they make their point in debates, despite the fact that we continually point out that it was the Tories who invoked the automatic early release provisions. The learned Kenneth Clarke, who has held many offices of state and whom I meet and find personable, does not seem to think that it is necessary to proceed in that way. In many ways, he does things vastly differently from me, but he is sometimes much more liberal. The bill is nothing to do with automatic early release; it is to do with comparative justice and ECHR cases. The Tories have a right to bring their points to the Parliament, but they bring the issue of automatic early release into every justice debate. It would have been more appropriate to have had a debate on the issue in their debating time in the Parliament, rather than raise it in a debate that has nothing to do with the issue. The bill addresses a complex and difficult area of law. For those who know—as I think members know—what Petch and Foye were convicted of, there was something manifestly wrong in the situation and we had to sort it out. On that basis, I am grateful to members for their support for the bill. It is complex and it will be kept under review, but it provides the opportunity for the High Court and the SCCRC to deal with matters appropriately.

The chief constable of Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary is in regular contact with the Scottish Executive to discuss police-related matters.

I am more than happy to discuss the particular matter that Mr Fergusson has raised. I understand that the principle in those situations would be that the executor or executrix would receive the money and the court service would seek to recover it. Overall, fines collection rates are higher than ever and the Scottish Court Service is taking robust enforcement action. Unpaid fines bring the law into disrepute—not only do the victims of crime not see satisfaction, but it undermines the integrity, dignity and status of the office of sheriff or justice of the peace, and of those who have imposed the fine. The Scottish Government published an independent fines evaluation report on 30 November 2011. The report states that because of the robust approach that is taken by the Court Service there is now recognition that fines will be pursued. Defaulters are seeing that there is no hiding place, whether in the case of taking vehicles or other matters. We always try to improve things and it would be helpful if we could get direct access to benefit deduction through the Department for Work and Pensions. I am more than happy to speak to Mr Fergusson about the particular case to which he referred. I share his frustrations, as do all right-minded people. If a fine is enforced, it should be met and I assure the member that the Court Service does its utmost to ensure that.

As I explained last week, the series of stakeholder dialogue events organised by the Scottish Court Service on future court structures has now concluded. Those events were held to listen to views on a range of ideas around the efficient use of the court estate and the implications of impending justice reform—including the review of civil justice and jury trials. The Scottish Court Service is considering feedback from those events. If future proposals are presented to and accepted by the Scottish Court Service board I would expect to receive the results in autumn 2012, when they will form the basis of a formal public consultation.

I can absolutely reassure Joan McAlpine on that point. Obviously, the court service has a priority to look at the circumstances relating to the agency and involvement with the courts, but it recognises that these are historic matters. Sometimes things do have to change because our society has changed. I grew up and practised law at one stage when the sheriff court was in Linlithgow; population shift resulted in its being moved to Livingston. These things do not always remain static, but I assure Joan McAlpine that this is primarily a matter for the board. Ultimately, however, any decision it made would have to be consulted upon. It would then have to discuss that with me, and I would have to bring the matter to Parliament. I absolutely assure her that the situation would be viewed in the round, and not simply in terms of bricks and mortar.

No knives better lives continues to make excellent progress, with our £1.5 million investment now supporting young people in 10 local authority areas across Scotland. Along with record investment in policing, innovative prevention initiatives such as that mean that Scotland continues to get safer. Recorded crime is at its lowest level in 35 years; it is down 23 per cent since 2006-07. Violent crime has also reduced by 19 per cent over that period. The number of recorded offensive weapons crimes is at its lowest since 1997-98.

I thank James Dornan for raising that point. We accept that although progress has been made, there are still far too many incidents that sometimes result in great tragedies not just for individuals and their families, but for entire communities, which is why we continue with our efforts with the no knives better lives scheme, and why we support Medics Against Violence and the national violence reduction unit, as they investigate how to tackle gang violence. Equally, we continue to support the proportionate and legitimate use of stop and search and, indeed, the tough actions that are being taken by our courts. Scotland’s has the toughest knife-crime sentence regime in the United Kingdom. A custodial sentence is 50 per cent more likely in Scotland than is the case south of the border, and it will likely be 75 per cent longer than the sentence that would have been imposed south of the border. The average sentence for carrying an offensive weapon has increased from 118 days in 2005-06 to 288 days in 2010-11, which is supported by the Lord Advocate’s new prosecution guidelines. I assure James Dornan that we do not rest on our laurels and that we have made progress. However, there are still far too many tragedies and there is not single simple solution. We require tough enforcement and a visible police presence, and we need to educate and to change a culture that my predecessor termed the “booze and blade culture”. Progress is being made, although there is still a considerable journey to travel.

The judiciary is independent of the office of justice secretary, as Mr Findlay should be aware. I can say that the statistics show that people who carry knives are getting tough and severe sentences—the most severe sentences in the United Kingdom—and that the period of sentences has more than doubled. Equally, those who go beyond merely carrying knives—such as in the instance to which Neil Findlay referred—face tough and severe sentences. It is not for me to comment on an individual sentence. Suffice it to say that the Crown has the power to appeal sentences when it views them as inappropriate and I know that the Solicitor General—who is sitting next to me—and the Lord Advocate have not hesitated to do that when they have felt that justice has not been served. We have an appropriate system in which we separate the office of justice secretary, which is a political position, from those who must impose justice. I believe that we have the right balance with tough prosecution and an appropriate and independent judiciary. We do not rest in our efforts and progress is being made.

How can I answer, when the initial question was not for me?

Tackling antisocial behaviour and making communities safer and stronger remain top priorities for the Government. In March 2009, the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities jointly published the framework for tackling antisocial behaviour, which is entitled “Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland”. That followed a thorough review of national antisocial behaviour policy in which we recognised that prevention, early and effective intervention and diversion should be at the heart of the policy. Since 2007, more than £46 million has been invested or fully committed through the cashback for communities scheme, which provides preventative and diversionary activities and directly benefits more than 600,000 young people. It also prevents them from becoming involved in antisocial behaviour and offending. We have also tackled antisocial behaviour through the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Act 2012 and by providing support for the forthcoming high hedges (Scotland) bill.

James Kelly raises an interesting question. I am happy to undertake to find out what we are doing across the Administration on that. I know that many police officers use Twitter, for example. These things are a matter of balance because, in some areas, there is a digital divide, so Facebook pages or Twitter would not be available to some people. However, the point is well made. The technology is part of our world and antisocial behaviour is an issue: we should try to join both things up. I am more than happy to respond to James Kelly in writing about what is going on. I imagine that some of it is a matter of officers and constabularies simply showing initiative. We are happy to support such moves and, indeed, to share good practice. Some of these matters are best dealt with at local level, but the member is entitled to expect us to make good schemes known to others in order to ensure that all communities can benefit from innovative ideas, wherever they might have been introduced.

Within the Scottish Parliament, only the Scottish National Party and the Greens support the kind of constitutional change necessary to allow all the revenue from fines levied in Scotland to be available to the Scottish Government.

Excluding a large one-off fine, the Scottish Court Service transferred to HM Treasury a total of £28.6 million of fine income in 2010-11. The accounts of HM Courts and Tribunal Service show that it transferred £113.3 million to HM Treasury in the same period, suggesting that if Scotland transferred the same amount per capita as England and Wales it would be £14 million better off per annum. I note that members of the Opposition have asked for support for the expansion of courts, victim support services and other things; if we in Scotland could access that money, many of those requests could be delivered.

I do not know whether Lewis Macdonald heard my earlier response to Alex Fergusson, but I made it clear to Mr Fergusson that the Scottish Court Service is seeking to do what it can and progress has been made. We do not have any control over the Department for Work and Pensions and it would make things much easier if we had the same direct access to benefits to ensure that those who have received a sentence serve it. Equally, I would love that £4.5 million figure to be dealt with and we will continue to work on the matter. Nevertheless, that sum is significantly less than the £14 million that we are remitting annually south of the border. I wish that Mr Macdonald would recognise that all the things that he wants us to do could be done much more easily and more quickly if we could use all the funds collected in Scotland and did not have to remit them to the London Treasury. [Applause.]

The Scottish Government is committed to maintaining a visible police presence on the streets of our communities and we now have the highest number of police officers ever recorded. We will not be implementing the Winsor package, which recommends changes to terms and conditions for officers in England and Wales. I am delighted to confirm that officers from England and Wales can apply for a transfer to a Scottish police force. It is, of course, an operational matter for the chief constable but I have met many who have done so and I am delighted that they have chosen to serve here.

I have a great deal of respect for the Scottish Police Federation, welcome my meetings with its representatives and am delighted at its reception for me and other members of the Government. We have not imposed the Winsor package because we believe that it is an attack on the terms and conditions of those who serve in the force; indeed, we ruled out its implementation before Tom Winsor’s review even began. I believe that such a position is justified because of our debt to those who serve.

I am grateful for the opportunity to open the debate on making justice work for victims and witnesses. Under the Scottish Government’s making justice work programme, we are bringing forward the most radical reforms of our courts and tribunals for at least a century. The programme sets out a vision of Scotland’s justice system as one that is accessible, cost effective and efficient and where disputes and prosecutions are resolved quickly and fairly. To create such a system, it is vital that we improve the support that is available to victims and witnesses. No one chooses to be a victim of crime, and the impact on people’s lives can go on long after the courts have moved on to other cases. Victims must be seen not as passive spectators or mere users of services but as people who have a legitimate interest in how the justice system operates. Witnesses fulfil a vital civic duty, which must be recognised and treated as such. Without witnesses, there is no mechanism by which crimes can be investigated and prosecuted; no way of testing evidence; no way of ensuring that those who commit crimes are found guilty and punished appropriately; and no sense of community or society. Without witnesses, the justice system simply cannot operate. If witnesses are to come forward, they must feel confident that their contribution will be valued and, more important, that they will be supported. That is why improving the experience of such individuals is at the heart of the making justice work programme. It is also why, in our manifesto and our programme for government, we committed to bring forward legislation during this session of Parliament to ensure that victims’ rights are central to improvements in our justice system and that witnesses can fulfil their public duty effectively. Significant progress has already been made in this area, including some important legislative changes. For example, witnesses can now see their statements again before they give evidence; the courts can grant anonymity for witnesses in appropriate cases; in human trafficking cases, children up to the age of 18 have an automatic entitlement to standard special measures; and the coverage of the victim notification scheme, which used to apply to custodial sentences of four years or more, has been extended to custodial sentences of 18 months or more. Although much has been done, much remains to be done. Today’s debate is an opportunity to explore some of that work, to debate the proposals that we put forward in our recent consultation paper, “Making Justice Work for Victims and Witnesses”, and to discuss any other measures that might improve the support that is available to victims and witnesses. In developing our proposals, we have been guided by a number of basic principles, which I hope will receive broad support across the chamber. We believe that victims and witnesses should know what is going on in cases that affect them and should know what to expect in relation to proceedings, which should include knowing whether hearings will go ahead as planned. They should feel confident in coming forward, knowing that their personal safety will be protected, and they should be able to contribute effectively to cases that affect them. They should have access to appropriately tailored support before, during and after proceedings. In addition, we believe that offenders should pay for the injury, loss and distress that they have caused, when that is possible and appropriate. Although it is inevitable that the current focus is on the proposed victims and witnesses bill, we should recognise that significant progress is already being made in realising those principles.

We are looking at those matters. The answer is that that will depend. I am happy to share whatever information we have to date, but the measures that I am talking about today are being driven not by the need to raise revenue but by a point of principle. We want to enter into discussions and work out for what offences it will be appropriate to apply the victim surcharge because, clearly, there are some that it would be inappropriate to deal with in this way. I am happy to share information with other parties. Off the top of my head, I cannot remember whether such financial information is available, but I will write to the member on the issue, while assuring him that what we are proceeding with is based on principle as opposed to raising revenue. Clearly, in a time of financial austerity, revenue will be of interest to those who require it, especially victims organisations. In addition to the legislative changes that I have mentioned, a range of projects is being led by our justice partners under the making justice work programme. They are aimed at delivering improvements that legislation alone cannot address. For example, witness non-attendance is a major reason for adjournment in summary trials and it has an obvious impact on victims and other witnesses. Earlier this year, the Crown Office launched a pilot to text witnesses to remind them to attend court. Similarly, the getting people to court project, which is aimed at making sure that critical participants in cases attend court, is now under way. As part of that project, pioneering research is being commissioned to help us to better understand what factors influence attendance at court and what we need to do to improve. From having been at some briefings, I know that there is a small minority of people for whom nothing seems to work other than various sanctions, but there are many other people for whom we can improve the system. Other initiatives are being led by organisations such as Victim Support Scotland. With the backing of the £30,000 that the Scottish Government provided in 2009, Victim Support Scotland created a victims fund to help those who have no other access to support. That fund has been used to meet the immediate needs of victims such as funeral costs, the cost of redecorating a victim’s home following a violent incident, and help for a woman who has disabilities to purchase a second-hand mobility scooter after she was attacked and her scooter was vandalised. Such a practical use of funding can be key in helping victims to recover from what is often a traumatic experience, which is why we have just agreed to provide a further £30,000. We believe that such immediate practical support is often more appropriate than a compensation payment that might come many months or even years down the line. As I hope members will appreciate from those varied examples, the proposed victims and witnesses bill should not be seen in isolation. It will simply be a continuation of the improvements that have been made over the past few years, and it will be the basis of further improvements. That said, we believe that a bill can make a real difference, so we have proposed a broad package of reforms in our recent consultation paper. Some of the proposals focus on making offenders pay towards the cost of providing support services. For example, we have proposed the introduction of a victim surcharge, which could be applied in cases that result in a court fine and would raise funds that can be used for the benefit of victims. The victims fund has already been shown to be effective, and I know that Mr Stewart and members throughout the Parliament support that. We have also proposed requiring the courts to consider compensation when victims have suffered injury, loss or distress, and the introduction of restitution orders, which would give the courts an additional option to make offenders pay towards the cost of supporting police officers who have been the victims of violence while carrying out their duties. Other proposals are aimed at ensuring that victims and witnesses have access to better information about cases, that they can have more confidence that cases will go ahead as planned, and that they are served by organisations that have clear standards of service. Ensuring the adequate protection of vulnerable witnesses is also crucial. We have proposed the widening of access to special measures such as the use of a screen or giving evidence remotely via a video link, and the creation of an automatic right to such measures for victims in sexual offence or domestic abuse cases.

I am assuming that that will be the case, but I will confirm that for the member. Given the nature of that offence, I would be surprised if that was not the case. We are consulting on those matters. Like Mr Chisholm, I am aware of the deep distress that stalking causes. I am delighted that the Parliament has invoked legislation on that and that, as on other matters, we are leading the way in the United Kingdom. We must ensure that it is easier to convict the perpetrators of that offence, although Mr Chisholm makes the valid point that we must also protect the victims. I will confirm that point to him. The bill will ensure that Scotland complies with the forthcoming European Union directive to establish minimum standards on the rights, support and protection for victims of crime. As is the case in the making justice work programme generally, the reform will be a shared enterprise. No single organisation holds all the answers or can deliver reform by itself. Our proposals will be refined and delivered in collaboration with victims organisations and our justice partners. That will be particularly important when proposals might increase demand for certain services. We will continue to work closely with the Crown Office and the Scottish Court Service to fully understand the implications for resource management, which is especially crucial in the current financial climate. The process of consultation and engagement has already begun. During 2010-11, we talked extensively to various victims and witnesses groups, such as Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and Children 1st, to identify issues that impact on confidence in the justice system and the willingness of people to report crime. In the coming months, we will continue the discussions with victims organisations, which serve us well, and with individuals who have been victims. As Mr Chisholm will know, the measures on stalking were driven tirelessly by Ann Moulds. That work, along with the responses to our consultation paper, will inform the development of the bill. I am delighted that there is broad cross-party support for providing better support for victims and witnesses. I am grateful for the support that I have had from Opposition spokespeople and other members. Parliament is united on the issue. I hope and believe that that consensus is reflected in the principles that the Government has set out and is trying to follow. How we treat victims and witnesses must be a measure of the success of our justice system as a whole, so we all have an interest in driving reform. We are keen to build on the consensus as the bill is developed and when it begins its parliamentary passage. We are happy to spell out the approach in due course, which is why I am delighted to accept the Labour amendment. In approaching the task, we must be ambitious and innovative. We must not shy away from radical ideas if they are necessary to improve the system. Some changes might be difficult, especially in the current financial climate, but we must resist the temptation to leave things the way they are simply because that is the way that they have aye been. I am confident that, by working closely with our justice partners, by embracing innovative solutions and by being unafraid to take a bold approach, we can build a justice system that has the interests of victims and witnesses at its heart while ensuring the utmost fairness and transparency of process for the accused. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of victims and witnesses of crime in the justice system; believes that such individuals should feel confident in coming forward and have access to information about cases affecting them and appropriately tailored support before, during and after proceedings; believes that offenders should pay where possible and appropriate for the injury, loss or distress that they have caused by contributing to support for victims, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s consultation on detailed proposals to give effect to these objectives.

The Minister for Community Safety outlined the Scottish Court Service’s plans for reviewing future court structures in the parliamentary debate on Wednesday 29 February. The Scottish Court Service has just concluded a series of stakeholder dialogue events to listen to and hear views on a range of ideas relating to the efficient use of the court estate and the implications of impending justice reform, including the review of civil justice and jury trials. Feedback from the events will be considered by the Scottish Court Service before any formal proposals are developed for consideration by its board. If future proposals are presented to and accepted by the board, they will form the basis of a formal public consultation in autumn 2012.

There are no proposals at present. The member seems to wish to rush into matters, rather than allow the Scottish Court Service to enter into discussion, debate and dialogue. I am attending an event in forthcoming weeks that is also about discussing and debating the issues. I am sure that the member would be very welcome, should he wish to attend. Those discussions are being replicated across Scotland. The issue is, fundamentally, a matter for the Scottish Court Service. The member may not be aware, but the board is chaired by the Lord President. We have just appointed a new Lord President and, rather than scaremongering needlessly and trying to force the Scottish Court Service into a position, which it wishes to debate, discuss and engage with communities, Iain Gray might wish to enter into discussion with the Scottish Court Service, whose job this is, and even perhaps with the new Lord President, which would give the member the opportunity to congratulate him on his appointment.

Aileen McLeod raises an interesting point. It is quite clear that how we engage is a matter that we must address, and it is not being dealt with by the Scottish Court Service alone; the victim and witnesses bill that we will introduce shortly will also consider how victims and witnesses give evidence. Work is also on-going on, for example, how video-linking can be expanded, how we use technology to ensure that the court system runs better and how to ease the plight of those who have to give evidence. Equally, that work might be an opportunity for various areas that have geographical challenges to participate. Therefore, I can assure the member that we are looking across the board—not simply at the court estate—at how people give evidence, where they give it from and the manner in which they give it. That is a matter not only for the Scottish Court Service; as I have said, it is a matter for all strands of government. We are looking at new technology along with other aspects.

A central objective of the Scottish Government’s making justice work programme is to improve the experience of both victims and witnesses of crime, and I have made a commitment to bring forward a victims and witnesses bill during this session of Parliament to do just that. Details of our proposals are set out in the consultation paper, “Making Justice Work for Victims and Witnesses”, which was published on 22 May and is available on the Scottish Government consultation website.

I thank Stewart Maxwell for raising that constituency matter with me. If an offender has been sentenced to 18 months or more in prison, the victim can sign up to the victim notification scheme. Once a victim has signed up to the scheme, they are entitled to be informed of the date on which the offender will be released, when the offender is transferred, or when the Parole Board for Scotland has recommended release. The Scottish Government publishes information leaflets about the scheme for victims, and further information is available online. I accept Mr Maxwell’s point that the ability to access high-quality information is consistently raised as a key factor in determining the experience that victims and witnesses have of the justice system, which is why in our consultation document we propose the commissioning of a feasibility study on development of an online information hub for justice that will provide case-specific data for victims, rather than merely information for victims of more serious offences.

We accept that there are difficulties with the current scheme, which has been salami sliced on numerous occasions by Governments of various political shades south of the border ever since it was first introduced. The present scheme is vastly different from the one that I first experienced as a law apprentice back in the early 1980s. That said, we have great concerns about the UK Government’s proposals. We have written to it to intimate our opposition to, and our scepticism about, various aspects of them. Those matters are still confidential, but we will be happy to provide more detail as the process proceeds. We will be happy to update Drew Smith and Parliament as we go along.

The police service, under the leadership of Chief Constable Kevin Smith, is collecting information on policing resources, including police stations, as part of the work to create the police service of Scotland.

I can give the member that assurance. I am aware of her concerns. The intention behind having a single service is to ensure that in the face of swingeing cuts, we manage to preserve the integrity of the police service in Scotland and provide the necessary resources to cover a variety of matters in all parts of Scotland, and not in just those areas in which there is perhaps some critical mass. Equally, we are conscious of the old adage that all policing is local. It is important that policing remains that way, and it is therefore our intention that the information will be available to boards and to the new police authorities that are coming in at local authority level. We can trust in their good judgment, as we can trust those who will be on the Scottish police authority and the new chief constable—whoever he or she is—to ensure that the local, visible police presence that has resulted in a 35-year low in recorded crime is maintained.

Those are ultimately operational matters for the police service. I have never interfered with the structure of the eight current forces and I would not do so with a single service. The member’s point has been made previously by those who have been pursuing the benefits of a single police service in Scotland. It is not about centralising everything into one hub but about ensuring that we have flexibility. It is equally about ensuring that all areas of Scotland are covered, given the geography of the country. Some of the member’s points will be taken on board by those who are involved in the restructuring.

The Government has made it clear that there is a correlation between the record number of police officers and the 35-year low in recorded crime. It is our intention to maintain the 1,000 additional officers, not simply numerically but in terms of their contribution in our communities. In restructuring, as we go from eight services to one, it is accepted that some civilian jobs cannot be justified. Such matters, whether in human resources or in other areas, are part of the cost saving that will be made as a result of restructuring. We recognise the importance of the wider police family and, as I have said previously, the importance in Orkney of maintaining at least the rank of the current chief inspector who is based there when we have divisional commanders, and of maintaining the numbers, which, I recall, is something like 26 in the Orkney Islands. All that will be dealt with. I have no doubt that those who serve in the wider police family by carrying out civilian tasks will be equally required post restructuring. However, in other areas in Scotland, whether in relation to communications or human resources, we simply cannot continue to do things eight times over, because we cannot justify the cost. On that basis, we will preserve the visible police presence in our communities, whether in Orkney or our major cities.

My officials have worked closely with Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons in Scotland to develop a statutory monitoring service that will be both operationally and financially integrated within the inspectorate and which will report to HM chief inspector of prisons. The new service will be split on a geographical basis and carried out regularly by three monitors. I consider that to be proportionate to facilitate regular monitoring in Scotland’s prisons and that it will create a more robust reporting mechanism.

Absolutely—I can give that assurance. I understand the member’s concerns. I again pay tribute to those who have served on visiting committees. The Government has taken action to develop an advocacy service, which we think is necessary to deal with offenders’ needs, particularly those who are part of the churn of constant reoffending. Another aspect of the work of visiting committees is independent monitoring. I give the member an assurance that the system that will be provided within the office of HM inspectorate will be independent, will have the appropriate skills and information and will meet the requirements that she and others understandably seek.

Yes. We have a long-standing commitment to address the misuse of air weapons and we will bring forward legislation to regulate their ownership and use at the earliest possible opportunity.

Absolutely. Sadly, people have been using those weapons entirely inappropriately. I say for the record that I recently met the parents of Andrew Morton and gave them the same commitment that I give members. I also pay tribute to Andrew’s parents for their efforts to ensure that we bring in an appropriate regulation scheme. Air rifles are not toys: they, hurt, maim and, tragically, even kill, as we know all too well. It is the Government’s intention to bring in a regulation scheme that will license new weapons. We are working with the consultative committee to ensure that we take on board the legitimate use of air rifles by those who have to deal with pests and control vermin and those who are members of legitimate, authorised sporting clubs. However, the days of taking those weapons out and using them entirely inappropriately in housing schemes must end. We owe it to the memory of Andrew Morton to ensure that action is taken on that.

Is Lewis Macdonald implying that this should not be an operational matter for the chief constable, who is accountable to the board? Is he really suggesting that the Government should direct how many police officers and how many civilian staff there should be in any force?

I welcome the debate and the opportunity that it offers to consider an important issue. I say at the outset that the Government recognises and values the enormous contribution that support staff make every day in the police service. We are building a safer and stronger Scotland, with crime figures at a 35-year low. I welcome the opportunity to acknowledge the important contribution that police support staff have made, and will continue to make, to reducing crime across Scotland and helping to protect communities.

The situation is down to splendid work by the wider police family. I have commented that other factors are involved, but I believe that there is, particularly in Scotland, a clear correlation between the figures and the visible police presence, along with the outstanding work of constables—from the newest constable to the most senior chief constable—and support staff in a variety of tasks. That is fundamental and it contrasts with matters south of the border. Scotland would not have the world-class police service that it has without the dedication and commitment from everyone in the police family, whether they are support staff or police officers. I am sure that I speak for all members when I say how proud I am of everyone who works in the police service. I agree with Lewis Macdonald on the key role of civilian staff, but I reject other elements of his motion. I make no apologies for delivering more than 1,000 extra officers since 2007, and I am happy to reaffirm that we will continue to honour that pledge. Compare that to the situation in England and Wales, where the latest figures show a decrease of 4.2 per cent—more than 6,000 officers—in just a year. A report from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary predicts that officer numbers in England and Wales will have decreased by 16,200 by the end of the United Kingdom Government’s comprehensive spending review period.

That takes me back to the point that that is an operational matter for the chief constable. It is not appropriate for me to intervene in Lothian and Borders or in any other area. Those are matters of balance on which the chief constable decides and, ultimately, is held to account by the police board. That, of course, contrasts with Scottish Labour’s position and, certainly, with the Labour position south of the border. Earlier this week, Yvette Cooper reiterated in her address to the Police Federation of England and Wales annual conference that the Labour Party would have implemented 12 per cent cuts to police budgets in England and Wales—cuts that could have resulted in a reduction by as many as 10,000 officers. That is some gross hypocrisy, when Labour comes to the chamber to complain about redundancies in civilian staff but goes to the Police Federation in England and Wales and says that it would make 10,000 officer posts redundant. This Government will not let that happen in Scotland. Police reform and the work that we are undertaking to deliver a single service will ensure that Scotland continues to enjoy world-class policing. Reform is needed to protect against Westminster budget cuts the local policing that communities value and depend on. As I said last week, we are making a virtue out of necessity. Yes—the reform is driven by finance, but at the same time it is about ensuring that we get the best possible police service. That is what we are doing.

We are protecting police budgets and police numbers. That contrasts with Yvette Cooper’s position, which is why I got a standing ovation at the Scottish Police Federation, while Ms Copper was met with stony silence and cheers of derision because her position is simply opportunistic and oppositionist. Reform is not about doing what we do now—which is to do things eight times over—but about doing things differently. Reform will ensure that policing responds to 21st century challenges, and will create equal access to specialist and national services such as murder investigation and firearms teams, while strengthening the connections between the service and the communities that are served. All Scotland needs to have access to, and to be protected by, those specialist services. I appreciate that the transition from the current eight-force structure to a single police service of Scotland brings uncertainty for police officers and civilian support staff alike. I fully understand that, but I assure Parliament that we are working closely with the service to ensure the smoothest possible transition, including the early appointment of the chief constable and the chair of the police authority, so that key decisions about the new service can be taken. We will continue to work closely with trade unions, staff associations, local authorities and the service on the workforce issues. Ministers will create the broad framework and provide the finance in which the new service will operate, but it will be for the chief constable to decide what the balance of officers and staff should be. We currently have eight chief constables: the new single service will need only one. We will no longer need the administrative support staff that are required for eight chiefs. Just as we will no longer need eight chiefs, we will no longer need eight heads of human resources or eight heads of finance. The people of Scotland expect us to employ no more people than are required to deliver effective policing. Just as some jobs will change, many jobs will stay the same: support staff will continue to play a vital role in the new service; we will still need forensics staff at scenes of crime; we will still need experienced staff in communications centres to ensure that vital 999 calls are answered and dealt with; and we will still need specialist information and communications technology staff to keep systems up and running. All of them are fundamental. Support staff will remain central to the success of the new service, but yes—fewer support staff than we have at present will be needed at the end of the reform journey, just as fewer chief constables will be required. This Government will act responsibly to protect front-line services. Lewis Macdonald’s motion advocates an irresponsible policy of protecting duplicated functions and services that will not be required in the new single service. Reform offers a unique opportunity to do things better and to reshape policing to reflect the challenges and opportunities of the 21st century. Ultimately, it will be more effective and efficient, and better for all communities. I reiterate my recognition of the vital role that civilian support staff play and I commit to involving them and the trade unions fully as we move forward. I move amendment S4M-02906.2, to leave out from first “believes” to end and insert: “recognises and values the dedication and hard work of police staff and police officers in Scotland, which have resulted in a 35-year low in recorded crime; agrees that reform is essential to protect policing from UK Government budget cuts and that police reform will protect local services, create more equal access to specialist support and national services and strengthen the connection between services and communities while removing costly duplication; notes the strong progress being made to deliver a single police service of Scotland; recognises that civilian support staff will continue to play an important role in the new police service of Scotland, and supports the Scottish Government’s commitment to continue to work closely with staff associations and unions to ensure a smooth transition to the new police service of Scotland.”

Yet again, I put on record how proud we are as a Government that crime is at a 35-year low, and I reiterate our praise for those who have contributed to that. Whether they are civilian staff or police constables of whatever rank, we pay tribute to them for their service, given the dangers that they often face. Those who denigrate that do a disservice to those whom they should be praising, and they should think again. I have listened with some amusement to Mr Macdonald. As in most debates, Labour has come to the chamber making claims, but offering no increase in budget or suggestions about where money should come from. The Labour position seems to be that there should be a single service—that has always been its position. However, there is to be no loss in support staff or police numbers. I look forward to Mr Macdonald going along to the ACPOS conference that is coming up shortly and saying, “There’ll be no loss in chief constables. Hang on to your pips and braid—Labour’s going to look after you.”

I was at a dinner yesterday in the company of a chief constable. That chief constable may apply to become, and may become, the chief constable of the new force. If he does, I will be delighted to congratulate him. If he does not, I will pay tribute to him for his service. I noticed that there was a vehicle and driver waiting to collect him. If the chief constable is unsuccessful, his driver may also be out of a job. Sadly, that is a fact of life. We have no compulsory redundancies—that remains the case. However, we cannot make jobs up. If we go from eight chief constables to one, we cannot have drivers for eight chief constables. That remains the position. Labour’s position is totally hypocritical and fraudulent. There are to be no cuts in back-office staff, no cuts in police numbers, doubtless no cuts in the senior staff ranks, and no variation in the budget available. Yvette Cooper has indicated that Labour south of the border would cut police numbers by 12 per cent.

I do not normally agree with Mr McLetchie in these debates—which can be quite rumbustious—but he made a valid point that such things are about balance. Jenny Marra intervened on John Finnie with regard to Tayside. I am not aware of the on-going situation there, as it is a matter for the chief constable. However, I attended—along with Jenny Marra and Lewis Macdonald—the reception that the Scottish Police Federation hosted last week, at which I spoke to Inspector Hamilton from the Police Federation ranks in Tayside, and he raised no issues of concern with me. Jenny Marra raised the subject of civilianisation and police officers going into control rooms, which seems to be an issue in Tayside. I recall—as might Mr McLetchie—being lobbied by the Police Federation in Lothian and Borders a few years back. The issue was that police officers were being taken out, and civilians were going in, when the force control centre in Bilston opened. Such issues are a matter of balance: Mr McLetchie was right to say that it is ultimately for the police to decide whether a post should be filled by an officer. We will give the police our full support in that regard. I say to Alison McInnes that I would have some sympathy with her if the coalition Government was adopting the same position. However, I remind her once again of the debates that we have had in the chamber not only in the current session of Parliament but in previous sessions about the situation that is playing out south of the border with regard to civilian staff. The coalition Government is privatising the forensic medicine department south of the border: lock, stock and laboratory. That is not about making redundancies where there is duplication, but about wholesale privatisation, which this Government will never countenance. I appreciate that my time is almost up. This Government is delighted by our track record, and I can only remind Labour colleagues of the stony reception accorded to the Labour shadow home secretary. This Government is doing the right thing for the police service, which is why it is supported by the Scottish Police Federation. We welcome the contribution that is made by all those who serve in the police family, and the record to which they have contributed should not be denigrated by anyone or by any political party.

Does the member not recognise that political parties have the right—as the Conservatives had—to seek election on a number of platforms, one of which might be to increase police visibility by 1,000 officers, and that, if the electorate supports that, the party in question has the mandate and authority to introduce such measures? However, it is then up to the chief constable to decide how those officers are deployed and the balance between police and civilian staff. Is Ms Marra now going down the Yvette Cooper route?

If this was such an issue for police officers, why was it not raised last week by Inspector Hamilton of the Tayside police federation or, indeed, by Calum Steele of the Scottish Police Federation in the evidence to the Justice Committee that Mr McLetchie quoted?

I am pleased to open the debate on the general principles of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, and thank everyone who has helped to shape this important bill so far. In particular, I thank the convener and members of the Justice Committee for their detailed scrutiny and comprehensive stage 1 report, and I welcome their support for the general principles of the bill. I should set out the context. In 2007, we set out to build a safer and stronger Scotland, and we have made significant and sustained progress. Scotland’s fire and rescue services and the police are performing well. Crime is at a 35-year low and the clear-up rate for violent crime is at a 35-year high. That is helped by the 1,000 additional police officers whom we have delivered into Scotland’s communities. Fire deaths are almost 50 per cent lower than they were a decade ago. The police and fire and rescue services work with community partners to improve the lives of the people of Scotland and to support and help to sustain economic growth. The men and women of those services—whether they are bobbies on the beat, front-line firefighters or staff who carry out important duties behind the scenes—should be proud of that record of achievement, but the unprecedented cuts that are being imposed by Westminster mean that we need to take early, decisive action to ensure that we protect those achievements. We need to reform to protect and improve front-line services in our communities, particularly for those who need them most. Restructuring to create single services is the best way to achieve that aim. Single services will also create more equal access to specialist support and national capacity and will strengthen the connection between services and communities. That is part of our wider public service reform programme, which focuses on improving outcomes for the people of Scotland. I want to comment on the consultation and engagement that have taken place. As well as the two formal consultations, we have worked closely with the services, staff associations, trade unions, local government and others to shape our proposals.

We have listened to senior officers, officers and staff in both services and the people in communities who rely on those services. I welcome the positive way in which stakeholders have engaged with us on reform and their commitment to ensuring that it is successful. Many have emphasised that commitment—for which I am extremely grateful—in their evidence to the Parliament. That positivity has been echoed in the work of the four committees that have considered the bill and delivered constructive and comprehensive reports. The bill has benefited from, and will continue to benefit from, that engagement and scrutiny. The Government will continue to listen to Parliament during its scrutiny of the bill, to those who will be responsible for running and scrutinising the new services through their involvement in the 16 pathfinder pilots that we have set up to trial the new local arrangements, and to the bill sounding boards that we have set up to facilitate wider consultation with key stakeholders. If we work together, I am confident that we will deliver a robust, effective and high-quality act that meets the needs and expectations of Scotland’s communities and fulfils our ambitions for Scotland. The main legislation underpinning policing in Scotland is more than 40 years old. The bill will repeal that legislation and modernise it to create a service that will be fit to deal with the changing and more complex demands of the 21st century. The statutory framework governing the fire and rescue services was modernised in 2005. The bill will therefore amend that to establish a single service. The bill sets out, as has never been done in legislation, a detailed framework for the new services and it modernises their governance to provide an enhanced focus on delivery of local services. For the first time, the bill clearly defines the respective roles and responsibilities of the key players: Scottish ministers, the Scottish police authority, the Scottish fire and rescue service board, and the chief officers of both services. Also for the first time, the bill provides opportunities for Parliament to scrutinise policing and fire and rescue services regularly and systematically. The national governance structures will ensure a focus on the local. Single services will strengthen the links between the services and the communities that they serve by enabling individual local councils, not regional joint boards, to take on a new role at a national level and to shape services in their local area.

Matters will be dealt with locally and nationally. The local divisional commander will interact with the local authority at a higher level than the local authority would have interacted previously when delegates simply went to councillors or whatever. The opportunity to be in charge of what is happening locally and to play a part in what is happening nationally will be much greater than it ever was before as we move towards a national service. As we have said—and I will be commenting on this later—there will be a role for locally elected representatives to play at the national level on the SPA, but the greater accountability at local level will allow for greater interaction between the divisional commander and more senior officers. I welcome the Justice Committee’s constructive and wide-ranging report. I submitted a detailed, written response to the report yesterday and I will not attempt to respond to all 48 conclusions now, but I would like to consider some of the main issues that the committee raised. The timescale for reform is challenging, but financial realities mean that we need to take early action to protect and improve the services. We need to set up the new services as soon as possible to maintain the momentum for reform, to reap the benefits, and to provide certainty for the services, their workforce and the communities that they serve. The leadership of the services supports a start date of 1 April 2013 and I will continue to work closely with them and others to achieve that. That is just one step on the reform journey, and we will need strong leaders in place to lead the services into the future. I therefore strongly agree with the committee’s recommendation that key appointments such as the chief constable, chief fire officer, board chairs and the police investigation and review commissioner should be made as soon as possible.

We share that view; indeed, it has always been a desire of the Government. Ultimately, the matter is one for the boards, the authority and the respective chief officers, but we expect the board and authority to reflect Scotland’s communities not only in respect of gender and ethnicity but geographically and to ensure that the benefits of a single service—by which I mean specialisation, the availability of services and other such fruits—are shared across the country. In any case, we are working hard to achieve all of this and expect the chief officers and chairs of the boards to be in place in autumn 2012. I share the committee’s concerns on VAT. The main purpose of reform is to protect front-line services in the face of budget cuts from Westminster. Although we based our costings for reform on such a worst-case scenario, it would be a travesty if some of the potential benefits of the reforms were to be lost in that way.

I have always made it clear that I did not come into post advocating the creation of a single service. However, the budget cuts have made it a necessity. On that basis and after discussions with those involved in the services, we have decided to make a virtue of a necessity. We have to change if we are to deal with the fundamental cuts coming from Westminster. Nevertheless, as we do so, we should take the opportunity to ensure that we provide the best possible service and that we improve and enhance what are already outstanding services. I point out to Mr McLetchie that at the Scottish Police Federation conference a few weeks ago I received a standing ovation; meanwhile, as we speak, 20,000 officers are marching in London against the United Kingdom Government and the Home Secretary. The Scottish Government is actively exploring with Her Majesty’s Treasury the new bodies’ VAT status and I can tell Mr McLetchie that we have been gratified at the Treasury’s willingness to discuss the matter. Although discussions are still at a preliminary stage, we as a Government are grateful for the Treasury’s attitude and are working together on a solution. I welcome the committee’s conclusions on the role, size and composition of the Scottish police authority and the Scottish fire and rescue service boards. They will play a crucial role in the new services’ success, and the committee is quite right to point out that their primary function is to govern the new services and to hold the chief officers to account, not to provide local representation. As a result, we agree with the committee that we should not prescribe in legislation the boards’ exact make-up. It is more important that each board has the right combination of members with the skills and experience to do its job effectively. On the size of the boards, I note the committee’s concerns about their having any fewer than 11 members and the views expressed by witnesses at stage 1. We will take a final decision on the matter after this debate, but we are happy to engage with members and other groups in that respect. Critical to the success of the reform will be how the national boards and local authorities work with each other. The bill clearly links the national and the local by providing that local authorities will be consulted on strategic priorities and strategic plans, by placing duties on the chief constable and the SFRS that are tied to local service delivery and by ensuring that local plans reflect national strategic plans where appropriate. All that will be done while retaining the flexibility for local authorities to develop their own models of engagement and to formulate local plans reflecting local priorities and circumstances. The pathfinder pilots are considering how that will work in practice and their findings will inform any guidance on the issue. The independent investigation of the most serious criminal allegations and incidents involving the police is crucial to ensuring public confidence and to meeting our human rights obligations. It is therefore important that the police investigations and review commissioner has everything necessary to carry out their job effectively. The Justice Committee has made a number of observations and recommendations on how the commissioner will carry out their investigations, which I will consider carefully before stage 2. The reforms that are set out in the bill are essential to safeguard the vital front-line services on which communities depend. The reforms will improve performance by retaining local services for local communities while giving all parts of Scotland equal access to national expertise and assets. The new services will enhance partnership working at local level. Further, at national level, the Scottish Parliament will have more opportunities to scrutinise the performance of services and to hold them to account. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill.

Is the member saying that the decision that was taken by the chief constable, and supported by the police board in Lothian and Borders, was wrong? I understand that the police custody support officer’s pay rate was higher than that for the police constable, and the police constable offered flexibility.

Recorded crime in Scotland is at its lowest level since 1976. It is important to recognise that the majority of farmers enjoy a crime-free working environment. The Scottish Business Crime Centre, in partnership with the National Farmers Union Scotland and Lothian and Borders Police, has produced a practical guide to crime prevention in rural and farming communities. Initiatives such as farm watch are an important tool in promoting farm security and crime prevention in rural and farming communities. If the information and advice from the police is followed, it should decrease the likelihood of someone being a victim of crime.

I thank the member for raising the issue, because we need to recognise that it has affected not only the Borders but Dumfries and Galloway. Indeed, chatting to Adam Ingram at lunch time, I learned that it is also an issue in the South Ayrshire area that he represents. It would be right for the member to raise the matter in other parts of the Lothian and Borders Police area and indeed elsewhere but our information so far is that farm watch is working well; after all, it is all about people working with other authorities on these issues. If the member were to raise the matter with the chief constable, I would be more than happy to echo his comments that such schemes are examples of good practice and that we should seek to introduce them not only in more rural areas but in areas such as Midlothian and East Lothian that have significant numbers of farming communities who should be protected and whom we should be assisting in that respect.

The aim of the Scottish crime recording standard, which was introduced throughout Scotland in April 2004, was to provide a more victim-orientated approach to the recording of crime and ensure uniformity in crime recording practices across police forces. Responsibility for ensuring compliance with the standard lies with individual chief constables. As I noted in my reply to the member’s previous question, “cyberbullying is not a specific offence in itself ... and may not be identifiable separately”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 16 April 2012; S4W-06346.] in the annual “Recorded Crime in Scotland” bulletin.

I am more than happy to recognise that the issue exists. I do not know whether it is better to discuss the matter with me, my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, or indeed the Minister for Children and Young People, but the member is right to point out that, in the world in which we live, certain aggressive behaviour, no matter whether it is related to tweets about football or, indeed, children, is unacceptable and deeply distressing and indeed can be criminal. As I have said, the issue might be better dealt with by those with responsibility for children but the Government is certainly happy to liaise with the member to see what we can do collectively to ensure that these matters are minimised and that we protect people from frankly unacceptable behaviour.

It is the courts rather than the Scottish Government that decide sentences, and the courts will take into account any relevant factors before they make a decision on sentencing within the overall legal framework. The complete independence of the judiciary is at the heart of the criminal justice system in Scotland, and it is appropriate that such decisions are entirely a matter for the sentencing judge, who will hear all the facts and circumstances surrounding the offence and the offender. At the point of sentencing by the court, it can request a criminal justice social work report. As part of the reporting process, it is possible for the report writer, if appropriate, to interview the children of offenders to consider the welfare, interests and needs of those children. The purpose of the criminal justice social work report is to provide the court with appropriate information that will be helpful in deciding the most appropriate way to deal with offenders.

The member makes a valid point. That is why we as an Administration and we as a party supported Aileen Campbell’s attempts in the previous session to introduce measures that would have required the courts to consider the impact on the child. It is important that anybody who imposes a custodial sentence—or, indeed, a non-custodial sentence in many instances—looks into the interests of and consequences for the child. At the end of the day, it must be for the sheriff or judge to make the final decision—that is a fundamental tenet of our democracy—but the member raises an important point. I am happy to discuss the matter with her, and I discuss it with Tom Welsh and the chair of the Judicial Studies Committee. The member is correct. In taking issues into account and imposing a sentence, it is important that the court is aware of and at least considers what the ramifications for children will be.

The Scottish Government has taken forward significant reforms to the legal aid system. In the 2007 to 2011 parliamentary session, financial eligibility for civil legal aid was substantially widened so that more than 70 per cent of the Scottish population potentially qualify for it. In addition, summary criminal legal aid was reformed, and improvements were made to the fee structures for civil legal aid, solemn criminal legal aid and criminal appeal fees for counsel. A further series of changes was made following the 2010 spending review to reduce expenditure while maintaining the broad scope of the legal aid system. In October 2011, the Scottish Government published its detailed plans for the on-going reform of the legal aid system in Scotland in the paper entitled “A Sustainable Future for Legal Aid”.

The bill that was introduced last week is a separate matter, but the member raises an appropriate point. It should be borne in mind that making a false declaration is a criminal offence. That would be a matter for the Scottish Legal Aid Board, and I assure the member that the board takes such matters seriously. I am sure that the chief executive of the Scottish Legal Aid Board, Lindsay Montgomery, would be happy to advise the member of further steps that it takes to ensure that fraud is not perpetrated. The member may very well be at one with us on contributions in criminal cases. It has always been my view that there has been a manifest injustice in a victim of domestic violence, for example, finding herself liable to making contributions to obtain the appropriate civil orders for her protection, despite her keeping a roof over the heads of the children, while the perpetrator of the violence has received criminal legal aid without making any contribution. That has happened in many instances, and there is no basis for it. Equally, if someone who can afford to buy and run a car and meet all the costs that go with that indulges in drink-driving, it is perfectly clear to me that they should be capable of making a contribution towards criminal legal aid. I will be happy to advise the member on the issue that she asks about, and I have no doubt that the Scottish Legal Aid Board could provide further information. I hope that we can work together to ensure that there is some parity. The purpose of the bill that we have introduced is to ensure that, by bringing in contributions in criminal cases, we can continue to provide access to legal aid to those who, like Elaine Murray’s constituents, need protection.

The Scottish Prison Service, working with the police and other partners, has developed a variety of initiatives, including the new prison watch scheme. That innovative scheme has been a great success in Edinburgh prison, where it was piloted. Encouraging local people to work with the SPS and the police to catch those who try to introduce drugs, phones and other illicit items into our prisons is the way forward. I am confident that the success that has been achieved in Edinburgh will be repeated in Aberdeen and Peterhead prisons.

Absolutely. The scheme started in Saughton on the initiative of an officer who serves there. I am grateful to the staff and the governor of the prison. Maureen Watt makes a valid point about prisons that are located in the heart of communities. The situation might be somewhat different in Shotts prison or even Glenochil prison. It is a question of good practice. The scheme that has been piloted in Edinburgh is being rolled out in Aberdeen and Grampian prisons. I give the member an absolute assurance that, if the scheme works, we will seek to ensure that it works in every part of the prison estate.

The Scottish Government will provide additional funding in 2012 to 2015 to ASSIST—the advocacy support safety information services together project—which provides advocacy and support to victims of domestic abuse and their families in Glasgow city, as well as contributing to multi-agency risk assessment and safety planning. The additional funding will enable victims of domestic abuse throughout the Strathclyde police force area to benefit from ASSIST’s services.

There are two separate issues there. I am happy to look into the matter, and to discuss it further with Mr Martin if need be. Glasgow City Council is carrying out a strategic review of women’s services. That is separate from the ASSIST scheme, whose funding is increasing from almost £800,000 to more than £1 million, provided by the Scottish Government. The scheme is working, and there has been a reduction. We are at the lowest number for domestic murder, attempted murder and serious assault over a six-year period; overall there were 66 fewer victims. The Government is putting money where it is needed, which is working out in practice. I am aware of a review by Glasgow City Council, but I am happy to enter into discussion with Mr Martin.

I will lay a section 14 order to replace the prison visiting committees under the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 at the end of May. The draft order and an explanatory document will be published on the Scottish Government website for consultation. That will provide a further opportunity for the Government to seek a broad range of views on the proposals.

He was consulted. I meet the brigadier and inspector of prisons regularly, and I met him a few days back to discuss his latest report on Cornton Vale. I assure the member that my officials and I are in full discussion with him and he is quite content with the proposals that we will outline very shortly.

I am pleased to open the debate. I welcome the opportunity for the Parliament to discuss the report that the commission on women offenders published last Tuesday. The report is a powerful piece of work that sets out a compelling vision for the future of the criminal justice system in Scotland. It is clear that, even in the short space of time since its publication, the report has attracted a groundswell of support from large sections of the criminal justice sector, the wider public sector, politicians, the media and beyond. I take this opportunity to place on record my sincere thanks to Dame Elish Angiolini, Dr Linda de Caestecker and Sheriff Danny Scullion for the immense personal and professional commitment that they invested in undertaking such a thorough review and producing an important report. It will not be news to any member that since devolution the number of women in prison in Scotland has more than doubled, nor will it surprise them to hear that 76 per cent of custodial sentences that are handed out to women are for six months or less—despite our knowing that short prison sentences do nothing to reduce reoffending or address the underlying causes of criminal behaviour. Equally shocking is the fact that as many as a quarter of the women who are in Scotland’s prisons are there on remand. Only 30 per cent of those women go on to receive a custodial sentence. We know that many women in the criminal justice system in Scotland are frequent reoffenders who have complex needs and issues, which are often to do with their social circumstances—for example, they may have a previous history of abuse and mental health and addiction problems. Let us not forget that in many cases the women are themselves victims of crime or—this is crucial—that they are often parents of our next generation of young Scots. Despite the best efforts of many able and dedicated people, how females are dealt with in the criminal justice system is one of the most pressing social justice issues of our time. That has been the case for some considerable time. The situation cannot go on. A modern and just nation such as Scotland should not be prepared to let the situation continue in the 21st century. That is why I established the commission last summer and tasked it with a challenging remit to find ways to improve the outcomes for women in the criminal justice system and to address the issue of women who offend in our communities. I am grateful to the commission members for producing far-reaching and, in places, radical recommendations, which set out a vision for how we can work more effectively with women to reduce their reoffending and ultimately reverse the upward trend in imprisonment rates. I intend to consider the report in detail over the coming weeks and to publish a formal response before the summer recess, at the end of June. As I have said before, protecting the public will always be my top priority. To ensure the protection of the public and to mark the seriousness and gravity of their crime, prison will remain the only option for the women who have committed the most serious offences. However, the reality is that only 2 per cent of female offenders are involved in serious violent crime. The vast majority of the female offender population do not pose a serious risk of harm to the public. The sad truth is that in many cases those women are more likely to be a risk to themselves. For most women, the best chance of reducing their reoffending is if they remain in their communities, where they can address the issues that need to change in their lives. Importantly, they can also repay the community for the crimes that they have committed and the harm that they have caused. The commission made its position clear on the suitability and condition of Cornton Vale prison, as has the chief inspector of prisons in his inspection reports, the most recent of which was published yesterday. I accept the commission’s arguments on that matter and have tasked the Scottish Prison Service with considering in detail the recommendations about prisons. I assure the chamber that those points will be addressed in my formal response before summer. However, it is important that we recognise that new prisons cannot be built quickly or cheaply. I accept the implications of the recommendations of Dame Elish Angiolini and her colleagues.

I am happy to make it clear that we will produce a formal response before June, although I do not have a set timetable. There is nothing in Dame Elish Angiolini’s report that causes us significant concern. There are matters that we may have to tweak, and there are issues over the timetable. This is a report to be taken in the round. In the same way, we followed, and continue to follow, the direction of travel of the McLeish commission, which the Angiolini commission considered. On Cornton Vale, work on some aspects is in progress. As Mr Macdonald will know, the new prison in Grampian is a community-facing prison that will have accommodation for female offenders. On its own, that does not address the issue of Cornton Vale, which is why I await advice and options from the Scottish Prison Service before responding. I accept the logic and direction intimated by Dame Elish Angiolini. A prison cannot be magicked out of the air, in terms of its cost or construction. However, I accept the clear implication that Cornton Vale is not fit for purpose—notwithstanding the outstanding service of those who work in it—and that ultimately it will have to go. That is a matter that I will discuss with the Scottish Prison Service. In the interim, the new prison in Grampian will provide options. We will continue to address the issue through the removal of prisoners to Bruce house in Edinburgh and through the units that we have opened at Inverness and Aberdeen. We must ensure that there are robust and more effective and cost-efficient ways of dealing with women who offend than simply locking them up. The commission’s report highlights a number of excellent community-based projects that do just that, such as the 218 centre in Glasgow and the willow project in Edinburgh. I went to see another such service in Falkirk yesterday. When visiting those projects, I have seen for myself—as did the commission—that they demonstrate positive outcomes for some of the most chaotic women in the system. That is why I join the commission in paying tribute to the work that goes on in the projects and in many other parts of the criminal justice system to ensure that the often multifaceted problems of the most vulnerable and chaotic people in our society are identified and addressed in a holistic and effective way. I believe that the commission is right to insist that we learn from such examples and build on their successes throughout Scotland. The Government firmly believes that the best way to address the revolving-door syndrome of short-term prison sentences and reoffending is with tough and effective community-based penalties that force low-level, repeat offenders to repay their debt to society through hard work in the community, through which they can address many of the challenges, obstacles and difficulties that they face. It is important to say that the report is not and cannot be just about additional money. Indeed, at a time of financial constraint in the public sector, it is encouraging that the commission itself believes that many of its recommendations can be achieved largely through the reconfiguring of the significant resources that are already invested in the area. Prison is much more expensive than community disposals in financial terms and we know that the social cost is much higher still. If we find effective ways of addressing the cycle of low-level reoffending now, we will save money in the longer term. Much more important, however, is that that approach will also ensure that it is not inevitable that the children of today’s offenders become the next generation of offenders. We owe it to all Scotland’s children to give them the best possible start in life and as many chances to succeed as we can. The issues of how women are dealt with in the criminal justice system and the rising prison population are of course not new. This Parliament has debated them on several occasions over the years and, as Dame Elish Angiolini pointed out when she launched the report, there have been 10 previous reports across the United Kingdom on women offenders. It is up to all of us to ensure that the report does not pass without bringing about real and substantial change. It would simply not be acceptable if in 10 years’ time we were in the chamber debating a prison population that had doubled once more. Indeed, as the former First Minister Henry McLeish said in his 2008 report on Scotland’s prisons, “it is not inevitable that Scotland should have one of the highest incarceration rates in Europe. Scotland can do better.” I echo that sentiment.

Yes. I am happy to take these matters in the round. I welcome the wisdom and advice that has come from the Angiolini report, but, as I said earlier, 10 such reports have been produced throughout the UK. It is incumbent on us now to act on the Angiolini report, which is why I look for support around the chamber for that and, indeed, as we work across agencies. That is why we had on the commission not only a former Lord Advocate but a senior public health official and a serving sheriff. At the end of the day, the solution rests not with a single report but in working and delivery. The commission makes a number of very clear and practical recommendations that will require substantial input and effort from across Scotland, including from across the political spectrum. Delivering on the vision that the commission set out will require courageous and determined responses from all of us. Today, I invite members to work with me to deliver the change that is desperately needed so that we can make a real difference. I believe that the report presents us with a valuable opportunity to work together in the best traditions of politics and of our nation to create a fairer and more just society. I look forward to members’ speeches and I will be more than happy to work with them as we seek to implement the Angiolini report and change something that is manifestly wrong in our society.

The Government sought to do that in the previous session, but it was opposed by Labour. I look forward to a conversion along the way.

Decisions on the deployment of forensic services staff are for the Scottish Police Services Authority. I understand that the authority has relocated a number of posts as part of its on-going modernisation programme. They include those involved in post-production—that is, printing and processing of images that are taken at crime scenes.

The proposals that have been referred to were not imposed but discussed between management and unions. Photo processing currently takes place in eight places—at one location in each existing police service area. The original proposal was to have one site but, after discussion with staff and unions, it was agreed to have two sites. There will be two main outstanding hubs in Dundee and Gartcosh and the matter is between management and unions. As for protecting Aberdeen, we consolidated forensic science services almost two years ago. That was criticised by a colleague of Mr Macdonald and by other Opposition members, but we have preserved the integrity of a public service. We have an outstanding facility in Dundee and will have one at Gartcosh. There are also locations in Edinburgh and Aberdeen. That contrasts with what has played out south of the border, where the coalition Government has privatised the Forensic Science Service lock, stock and laboratory. We have retained a public service and we should receive credit for that.

Thank you for your forbearance, Presiding Officer. I thank the Justice Committee for its careful stage 1 scrutiny of the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill and I welcome the committee’s support for the bill’s general principles. The bill deals with two discrete topics. Part 1 addresses an anomaly that has arisen with regard to the setting of the punishment part of non-mandatory life sentences by the courts. Part 2 provides a framework within which the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission can consider whether it is appropriate to disclose information that it holds relating to cases that it has referred to the appeal court, where the appeal has subsequently been abandoned. Although there is not a direct link between the two parts of the bill, we are legislating in those two general areas for essentially the same underlying reason: so that the public can continue to have full confidence in the processes of Scotland’s justice system. Whether it is ensuring that offenders convicted of serious crimes are able to be sentenced appropriately by the courts or being as open and transparent as possible about all aspects of the al-Megrahi case, the Government is committed to doing everything that we can to ensure that the public can have confidence that we have a justice system that is fair, transparent and effective. Part 1 is a direct response to a March 2011 appeal court judgment that concerned the setting of the punishment part of non-mandatory life sentences. The punishment part of a sentence is the length of time that a prisoner must serve before becoming eligible for parole. Although that judgment, known as the Petch and Foye case, affected only a small number of sentencing cases, with only around 75 offenders having been given non-mandatory life sentences in the past six years, the Government wanted to act quickly and appropriately to remedy the problem that the judgment raised. As a result of the judgment, a number of offenders have successfully appealed and had the punishment part of their non-mandatory life sentence reduced. The judgment has produced what the appeal court noted was the anomalous result that some life prisoners may become eligible for parole at an earlier point in their sentence than would have been the case if they had been given a fixed or determinate sentence for the same offence. It is important to emphasise that the Petch and Foye judgment did not and does not mean that serious offenders will be directly released early from prison. Any offender whose punishment part has been reduced will still need to satisfy the Parole Board for Scotland that they do not present a risk to public safety. If the Parole Board is not satisfied, the offender remains in prison and in custody. Nonetheless, I am sure that we all agree that it is wrong in principle that our courts do not have sufficient discretion in law to avoid the anomalous result that some life prisoners may become eligible for parole at an earlier point in their sentence than would have been the case if they had been given a fixed sentence for the same offence. That is not what the law meant and it is, presumably, not what the sheriff who sentenced the offender meant. Therefore, we are giving back to the courts appropriate discretion so that they can set a punishment part of a non-mandatory life sentence to satisfy the need for punishment of the offender. We are aware that there has been some criticism of the provisions on the grounds that they are too complicated. We accept that the provisions are complex. That goes with the nature of the legislation and the terrain with which we are dealing. However, we do not think that they are unnecessarily complicated. It is important to remember that our provisions exist within the context of European convention on human rights and domestic case law, as well as the framework of existing Scottish legislation.

That is not the case. There are two separate matters. The Petch and Foye judgment caused considerable concern and was commented on not only by me but by justice spokespeople from all parties. There was significant public concern that must be addressed. In the bill, we address two specific matters: the Petch and Foye judgment, and a matter that relates to the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission. There is a time and a place for further legislation, and I have had discussions about that with Opposition members. The bill should not be viewed as an opportunity to make significant change; that will have to come in other legislation. Part 1 of the bill is about doing what is appropriate to resolve an issue that arose as a result of a court of appeal decision. Although the matter is complex, the proposal is not unnecessarily so. We have been open to those who complain and suggest that there is an alternative and better position but, so far, we have received nothing. By providing a clear statutory framework within which judges must calculate the punishment part of a non-mandatory life sentence, we are making the law clearer and reducing the risk that sentencing decisions will be overturned on appeal. Part 2 provides a framework within which the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission can consider whether it is appropriate to disclose information that it holds relating to cases that it has referred to the appeal court if the appeal is subsequently abandoned. Although the provisions are general, members will be well aware that we introduced them to address the situation that had arisen with the statement of reasons in the al-Megrahi case. The chamber will be aware that, late last month, the Sunday Herald published the commission’s statement of reasons for referring Mr al-Megrahi’s case to the appeal court. Although any urgency in passing these provisions might have diminished as a result, we are pleased that the Justice Committee supports our position that there should be as much openness as possible in relation to abandoned appeals arising from a reference from the SCCRC where there is a substantial public interest. Notwithstanding recent events, we are proposing a general framework that might have application in other cases in future. To be fair, we should remember that, in the 13 years that it has been in existence, the commission has referred to court only three cases where an appeal has been abandoned, one of which is of course the al-Megrahi case. Although it is ultimately a matter for the commission, we understand from the commission that, in the other two cases, disclosure of information is not thought likely to be appropriate. However, we simply do not know whether other cases in future will give rise to the considerations that have occurred in the al-Megrahi case. As our response to the stage 1 report makes clear, we consider that our framework for disclosure of information is robust and that, as it has not been narrowly designed simply for the circumstances of the al-Megrahi case, it can be applied in a range of relevant cases. We cannot speculate on such matters but at least we will have a framework to address any such case that might arise. It is worth pausing to remind ourselves why the framework was thought necessary in the first place. In the normal course of events, the material in the commission’s statement of reasons in the al-Megrahi case could have been tested in court. However, as members will be aware, Mr al-Megrahi chose to drop his appeal in February 2009. Given the exceptional level of wider public interest in the al-Megrahi case, we have consistently done all that we can within the devolved powers of the Scottish Parliament to facilitate the commission’s release of the statement of reasons. During stage 1, the question of how the commission could comply with data protection laws to help enable publication of the statement of reasons in the al-Megrahi case was discussed. Although events might have rendered the question moot in the case of Mr al-Megrahi, it would be helpful to explain how data protection will apply in the consideration of disclosure of information in future cases.

It was not up to us to consult the information commissioner, because these matters have to be dealt with by the SCCRC. We have always sought to facilitate everything necessary for the commission to deal with such issues, but the commission itself is required to instigate them. As Mr Chisholm will be well aware, neither I nor the First Minister—nor, indeed, any other member of Government—had ever seen the statement of reasons, and I can only assume that, as the SCCRC has indicated, what it said in what has been published was correct. We have gone out of our way to facilitate and assist the commission; indeed, I believe that the Information Commissioner’s Office has met the SCCRC. We have certainly sought to facilitate such an approach. As an Administration, we should always seek to facilitate matters, which is what we have done, but ultimately these are matters for the commission. I have already paid tribute to the assistance of the Lord Chancellor south of the border and pay tribute now to the information commissioner. People have been working together to ensure that we address these issues. Following a constructive meeting in March between officials from the SCCRC, the Information Commissioner’s Office, the Scottish Government and the United Kingdom Government, the SCCRC is considering whether it would be able to comply with data protection requirements in publishing sensitive personal data contained in the statement of reasons on the basis that such processing could be said to be necessary for the administration of justice. As such, the commission could comply with a necessary data protection condition for publishing such information. It is ultimately a matter for the commission to be satisfied that it can comply with data protection legislation. Notwithstanding recent events, it is carefully considering those matters. We are committed to ensuring that the framework is as robust as it can be in enabling the commission to consider disclosing information. In particular, we are considering the point that was raised with the Justice Committee concerning information that is subject to legal professional privilege and whether further provision is necessary in that area. We brought the bill forward quickly to ensure that appropriate action is taken to address concerns that have been expressed in two important areas of our justice system. If it is approved today at stage 1, we will continue to work with members and the Parliament through the rest of the parliamentary scrutiny process to ensure that it fully meets our policy aims. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill.

I note Mr McLetchie’s great support for prisons as an institution. Can he remind me how many prisons were constructed in Scotland in the 18 years of Conservative Government? Was it zero?

I believe that it was.

Is the member not aware that Mr al-Megrahi received significant legal advice? Some of that will be known to Mr Macdonald, given the nature of whom the advice came from. I cannot understand why Mr al-Megrahi would be in any doubt about the difference between a prisoner transfer agreement and compassionate release.

The debate has been quite good and wide ranging, given its complexity. A variety of significant speeches that were of great merit have been made. Some were more of a legal treatise, such as that from the Justice Committee’s convener, who narrated the position by referring to Messrs Black, Brown and Red. As would be expected given his background and ability, Rod Campbell gave an eloquent contribution of a legal nature. We have also heard from members who are neither part of the Justice Committee nor legally qualified. Mary Fee made a significant contribution that shows that the matter is being dealt with appropriately and adequately, as would be expected with Government legislation. Some counter-arguments have been made. It has been argued that the bill is not large enough and that we should address sentencing as a whole. If we did that, we would still be in a consultation process. Calls have been made to separate the parts of the bill. It is accepted that there are two particular parts, but we must bear it in mind that legislative time is at a premium. If we had introduced two separate bills, we might not have had the same amount of time to deal with them and might have had to extend the time for that, which might have meant that other equally desirable legislation fell. Important but perhaps tangential matters have been raised. We are having the debate on the day after we saw Lord Bracadale speak on television in the case of HMA v David Gilroy, so we recognise the willingness of the Scottish Court Service under the Lord President to be as open as possible. That move was welcomed as a way of making the process more understandable to the public, but we recognise that there must be limitations. Malcolm Chisholm and Graeme Pearson raised matters that are not necessarily particular to the bill, although it was appropriate to raise them. We are happy to look at Graeme Pearson’s point, on which Dennis Robertson commented. The point is more one for the Scottish Court Service, but we would be happy to discuss it with Graeme Pearson. As we move towards producing a victims and witnesses bill, we must consider how we can build on developments such as that which involved Lord Bracadale. Such matters involve a balance, and we have heard about a counterbalance. Malcolm Chisholm talked about the difficulties that a constituent of his has faced. I am happy to engage with him on that. As he said, the question is ultimately for the Lord President and the Scottish Court Service, but we can work together on it. There is no doubt that stage 2 amendments will have to be lodged. We are happy to look at that. We have always said that, if people think that a better and simpler way exists, we will be happy to use it. Some members of the legal profession have criticised our proposals as inadequate. I have no doubt that, when a fee note is rendered and they consider matters, they might be prepared to put forward alternatives. As I say, the door is open and we are happy to take comments on board. However, as I said in my opening speech, no alternative proposals have been made so far. That takes us on to why we are where we are with part 1. We must deal with victims and recognise the judiciary’s important role. In relation to victims, I must assure the public that, although sentences have been reduced, prisoners will not be released early and will be subject to parole requirements for public safety. The situation was of deep concern. As members—including, in particular, Colin Keir, Dennis Robertson and John Finnie—said, we are talking about horrendous crimes. Petch and Foye perpetrated appalling crimes, and there has been great public concern. The issue might be viewed as more theoretical than practical, because I expect that the Parole Board would not have released them, but it was of significant concern and was commented on by politicians from all political parties, so it was appropriate that we took steps to address it. We must support the judiciary, as has been said. The court referred the issue to us and the Lord Justice General made it clear that a legislative fix would be required. The matter divided the Scottish courts. As we heard from Christine Grahame and others, the Petch and Foye case was decided by a majority of five to two. The judiciary were split on what was correct and what should be done, but something must be done. As David McLetchie and John Finnie said, orders for lifelong restriction and non-mandatory life sentences are not given out routinely. There have been only about 75 since the powers were introduced. However, I have made it clear that when a judge feels that an order for lifelong restriction is necessary or a life sentence appropriate—even for a crime that would not usually carry such a tariff—they will have the full support of this Government, because we are dealing with people who can be extremely dangerous and destructive to our communities. As Jenny Marra said, when the intention behind the giving of an order for lifelong restriction or a non-mandatory life sentence is undermined, we must act to protect the integrity of the system. The measures in part 1 are being introduced to protect victims, to allay their understandable concerns and to support the judiciary by giving them the right to invoke orders for lifelong restriction and give non-mandatory life sentences. We hope that those will not be used routinely—that does not happen at present—but they will require to be used. Given that it takes a great deal of courage and, no doubt, thought, wisdom and reflection on the part of members of the judiciary to make such decisions, we must ensure that, when they choose to invoke their right, we enable them to do so. I make it clear to Mr McLetchie and Mr Robertson that part 2 of the bill was drafted on a very general basis. Although it is clear that we are specifically talking about Mr al-Megrahi, because he is the only name in the frame—if I can put it that way—the legislation has been drafted in such a way as to allow it to be used in any circumstance that may arise in future. This is the third such situation that has arisen since the creation of the SCCRC, but the disclosure of information does not appear to be a relevant issue in the other two. I cannot specify the circumstances that might result in similar situations having to be addressed, but I can give members an absolute assurance that the bill is robust enough to deal with such situations in future. If there is a requirement for stage 2 amendments, we will be happy to look at the issues and address them. I think that we will address some issues related to data protection in that way. On the broader data protection issues, I make it clear that we obviously had to act appropriately. The Megrahi case was a matter of great public concern, but we ensured that we drafted the bill broadly to deal with general matters. Given that neither the First Minister nor, more important, I have ever seen the statement of reasons, we could not say what would be subject to data protection requirements or what would or would not require to be redacted. It is fair to say that the SCCRC still has to consider specific issues and that some material will have to be redacted. Indeed, irrespective of data protection issues, owing to public safety considerations there will have to be confidentiality measures to protect witnesses. We have acted appropriately and the provisions in part 2 will be robust enough to deal with any unforeseen circumstances that may arise. Yet again, Mr Macdonald took the opportunity to criticise the Government and, in particular, my stance on Mr al-Megrahi. I am prepared to answer for that decision. Mr Macdonald might care to reflect on the fact that it is neither myself nor the First Minister who is currently being pursued in a court action for having rendered somebody back to Libya. I stand responsible for having released Mr al-Megrahi under the compassionate release process. I saw him board a plane in Glasgow. However, I am certainly not responsible for having rendered anybody through any security services, on my say-so or that of anybody else. To be fair to Mr McLetchie, I know that he will write to me about the number of prisons built by the Conservatives in 18 years. I look forward to getting confirmation that, during 18 years of Tory rule, despite the fact that the Conservatives seem to think that prison works—rather than the record number of police officers that we delivered—they built no prisons. Mr McLetchie chose to disparage Henry McLeish and Dame Elish Angiolini. All I can say is that one is a former First Minister and the other is a former Lord Advocate: both have served their country and their offices well, and the record of the work that they contributed is much appreciated. Thankfully, we will not have to deal with any Tories in either of those offices. I am happy to move the bill, as it will serve Scotland well. [Laughter.]

Data on the average length of time and dosage for a course of methadone is not held centrally and never has been since methadone prescribing commenced. To address that, the Scottish Government has invested in Scotland’s first drugs misuse database, which will be linked to other relevant databases such as the prescriptions database. From 2012 to 2014, the databases will start to tell us more about the types of treatment that are offered as well as their duration for each individual client. The Information Services Division of the national health service does, however, publish comprehensive information on methadone prescriptions annually. That information includes the total number of prescriptions, the total number of daily doses per 1,000 population and the costs and fees associated with methadone.

That question relates to “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem”, which was delivered in the previous session of Parliament with cross-party support. We introduced it because we realised the great difficulties and challenges that exist and the need to address many of the matters to which Graeme Pearson correctly refers. It is accepted that there is a role for methadone. The decision to use it is a clinical one, but far too many people have been put on it, which comes at a great cost to the taxpayer and does great damage to those people and others. We need to allow the individual to work collectively. There is a role for organisations that take individuals from their communities to deal with the issues. However, we must remember that, ultimately, people have to go back to the community, which is why many programmes operate there. We have to challenge people’s attitudes, change their views and ensure that they remain off drugs when they are in the community and not simply when they are outwith it.

We face a significant problem with drug addiction in our prisons, which we have partly addressed in two ways. One is through the McLeish commission, because we need to ensure that we address the underlying issues that result in people offending. We are trying to deal with matters other than those that arise in prison. When people are in prison, the issue has to be dealt with by clinicians. We correctly take the view that the health service in the prison system should be part of the general national health service. That ensures that, when people leave prison, they have a place to go to. We seek joined-up working and thinking among those who face the challenges of dealing with prisoners. Many prisoners who are on methadone have to be in prison because of the nature of the offences that they have committed. We need to ensure that they are dealt with on a clinical basis. When they leave prison, we can continue to prescribe methadone, although we hope that we will have worked with them to try to get them off drugs. That is why the Scottish Prison Service tries to ensure that those who seek to come off drugs are given that opportunity.

It will be for the Scottish police authority and the new chief constable to determine how the service is organised once they are appointed. However, there is considerable scope for support functions to be located throughout Scotland, and I am keen for jobs not to be concentrated in the central belt. Our proposals create a framework that encourages resources to be located across Scotland to best meet the needs of all our communities.

It is not for me to interfere with the operational independence of the chief constable or the board. I am aware of the expertise and specialisms that exist in the police service in Scotland in a variety of places. It is recognised that a great deal of good work emanates from the north, as from elsewhere. I can only reiterate that the Government expects such functions to be located in a variety of places, but that will be decided by the new chief constable, whoever he or she is, in conjunction with the new police authority.

Absolutely. I am aware that Dave Thompson has pursued the issue doggedly for some time. I give him the same assurance as I gave Unison when I addressed its conference last week, which is that we expect support jobs not to be concentrated in the central belt but to be located across Scotland.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with police forces and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland on a range of matters, including the development and upgrade of emergency service communication equipment.

Absolutely—I reassure the member on that. It was a privilege to meet those who are involved in mountain rescue in central Scotland. I am aware that many such people are serving police officers who do mountain rescue in their spare time. Mountain rescue is a separate matter, but its funding is an important aspect of ensuring safety in Scotland. That does not apply just to those who are out on the hills in the Highlands, as a great deal of the work involves the central belt. I give the member that assurance.

We believe that scrutiny should be effective and proportionate. Responsibility for financial oversight lies with police and fire boards, with the Accounts Commission overseeing that expenditure. The boards of the new single services will be appointed for their skills and expertise, including financial expertise. Their expenditure will also be scrutinised by the Auditor General and their accounts will be laid before the Scottish Parliament.

Any changes to the committee would be a matter for the Parliament, rather than for me, in my role as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, or for the justice department. As the member has mentioned, there are difficulties in the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service. We are grateful for the on-going good work that is being done at a local level by Stephen Torrie, who is our senior officer. He has gone in to ensure that we protect the integrity of the service that is there to cover all requirements in the north. The appropriate role of the Public Audit Committee with regard to the issue of auditing is one that I am sure members will be happy to debate in the chamber.

Obviously, these matters are being dealt with. I will be giving evidence at the Justice Committee on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. We are working on the basis that the proposals will provide the necessary financial savings and the best police and fire and rescue services, and that they will improve and expand the level of scrutiny and governance at a local level. The arrangements will be a pyramid structure, with the base in our local communities. The structure will include a chief fire officer and a chief constable, and will recognise the role that Parliament will have in relation to the fire service, which was raised by Mary Scanlon, and the police service, which was raised by Graeme Pearson. I am more than happy to engage on those matters, because it is important that the current level of governance and scrutiny should be enhanced.

The Scottish Government will, in 2013-14, review the support that it provides for civil contingencies work to the Grampian strategic co-ordinating group, of which Grampian Police is a key partner, as well as to the other seven SCGs in Scotland, in the light of police and fire reform. The Scottish Government will continue to engage with SCG partner agencies to ensure that the essential elements and strengths of successful multi-agency planning and response are maintained and to build consensus around an optimum future resilience model.

Those are ultimately matters for the chief constable. I met the chief constable of Grampian Police recently, and we are aware of those matters. There is a formula to address the specific challenges that Grampian Police faces, including the offshore aspects to which Nanette Milne referred and those relating to Balmoral. Such challenges are faced by other jurisdictions, such as Lothian and Borders, which has Holyrood palace and other challenges in its area. Such issues are being discussed as we move towards a single police service to ensure that we achieve the best possible position in that regard. We will ensure that the support and skills are available for meeting challenges such as the monarch being at Balmoral. We will ensure that there is no waste of resources in that regard whenever she moves down into the Lothian and Borders jurisdiction. In general, we will ensure that we get best value from the police and that they continue to provide an outstanding service.

The short answer is that we are happy to leave it as it has been operating. Whether that will be appropriate when we move to a single force, given that the SCGs are predicated on the force boundaries, is something that we are happy to consider. We want to get the optimum size and number in Scotland. The Government does not have a fixed view on that and will engage with the agencies concerned, such as the new single police and fire services and the local authorities, which are key partners. We could end up maintaining the current figure of eight SCGs, albeit that one would cover almost 50 per cent of Scotland, or there could be alternative structures. I assure the member that we are not rushing into anything and that we are happy to debate the matter with him. Equally, I would be more than happy to discuss it as we proceed. However, it is fair to say that we want to ensure that we get the best possible civil contingencies and that we will discuss the structure in due course.

Police officers who have a complaint made against them, whether it alleges criminality or misconduct, may be subject to the procedures set out in the Police (Conduct) (Scotland) Regulations 1996 or the Police (Conduct) (Senior Officers) (Scotland) Regulations 1999. If an officer is not satisfied with a decision that is made at a misconduct hearing or with the manner in which the procedures were carried out under the conduct regulations, they can appeal first to the chief constable and then to the police appeals tribunal.

That matter would be addressed by the chief constable rather than by me. Such things are dealt with as part of the employer-employee relationship, in which we would not seek to interfere. I am happy to enter into discussions and write to Linda Fabiani on that issue. However, it seems that the matter would be raised first with the chief constable’s office, and the individual officer would—depending on their rank—presumably be represented by the Scottish Police Federation or the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents. If any misconduct issues arose beyond that, it would at present be open to the chief constable to have another force investigate them, and in due course it will be for the commissioner to do so. We also have the Solicitor General for Scotland, who is sitting across from me, and any allegations of criminality can be referred to the Crown, which will be able to deal with them. It is, after all, the Crown and not I that can direct police investigations.

There are no specific guidelines for police on how to treat children when a parent is arrested. Such guidance would be a matter for the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. Each case varies, but when a parent is arrested several different agencies, including social services and the police, often meet to ensure that the needs of the child are met. The welfare of the child is of paramount importance.

Fundamentally, such matters are for the police to deal with. As we go through police and fire reform, we are at pains to make it clear that there will be no operational interference by a minister, whether that is me or a successor of any political hue. The police need to ensure that they have guidance that can be issued in training at Tulliallan for those who are coming into the service and on an on-going basis. Each and every case is different. A situation in which a police officer arrests a man who is beating his wife in the presence of their child is vastly different from a situation in which a police officer comes through the door with a drug arrest warrant or deals with someone who is shoplifting and has their child with them. There are a variety of situations, and we need to provide guidelines for the police while recognising that police officers must use their discretion, subject to the training and guidance that they are given. Sometimes matters are fairly clear cut and common sense dictates what should be done, but other situations—such as an assault to which the child is a witness—can be problematic. I assure Mary Fee that I will discuss the issue with John Geates when I meet him next at Tulliallan. I will ensure that the matter is passed to ACPOS to be addressed, but fundamentally we must trust in the good sense and judgment of our police officers in doing what is necessary. In some instances in which a parent is arrested, it is in the child’s best interests for the parent to be detained.

The Scottish Prison Service’s most recent set of key performance statistics was published in its annual report in July 2011. The next annual report and accounts is due for publication during the summer. Despite the pressures associated with record population levels during 2011 to 2012, the SPS continues to perform well against all its key performance indicators.

I look forward to meeting Dr Colin McConnell next week. I think that he is due to come in for a cup of coffee. I look forward to him giving me his insight into what is necessary. There are some things that we clearly accept are necessary under the key performance indicators, but I give John Wilson a clear indication that I want to hear Dr McConnell’s views. Dr McConnell has served as a prison officer and a governor in Scotland, he has served south of the border and, most recently, he was in charge of the prison service in Northern Ireland. He comes with an outstanding curriculum vitae and I am sure that he will provide outstanding service. I look forward to working with, and learning from, him and I am open minded as to what actions he thinks that we should take.

I thank Alison McInnes and my other Liberal Democrat colleagues for highlighting reoffending. I welcome their shared commitment to tackling this difficult issue. As Alison McInnes eloquently narrated, reoffending creates victims, damages communities and wastes the potential of offenders themselves. It comes at a significant cost, it is a waste of talent and it damages our communities. It is something that we must tackle if we are to have the safer and stronger communities that we all want to have. I will try to say more on this if I have time, but the purpose of our amendment is not to detract in any way from the ethos of what Alison McInnes is proposing. Indeed, we are happy to look at matters, and I give her that undertaking. Prison will always be the right place for some offenders. Those who have committed the most serious crimes and who present the greatest threat to the public must always go to jail. However, it is the wrong place for many of those who are in our jails today—the low-level, repeat offenders. They are a nuisance in our communities and they are frequently destructive, but they are not necessarily a danger. They need alcohol and drug services and, as Alison McInnes pointed out, they need mentors to show them a better way of life and services that actively address their offending behaviour. Such services need to be available both within prisons, for those who are serving a custodial sentence, and in the community, for those who have been released and those who have been given a community sentence as a direct alternative. Since we came into government in 2007, we have been working to tackle reoffending, which is probably the single biggest challenge that we face. We introduced the presumption against prison sentences of less than three months and we were grateful for the support that the Liberal Democrats gave at that time. We introduced the presumption for the reason that Alison McInnes articulated in her speech—because such sentences simply do not work. Three quarters of those who are given a custodial sentence of six months or less reoffend within two years, whereas two thirds of those who are given a tough community sentence do not. Given the cost of such custodial sentences, they are simply not economic, and moreover they do not work. They simply produce the churn and cycle of reoffending that harms so many communities. On that basis, we created the community payback order, which is an effective alternative to short-term prison sentences. We are rolling out nationwide the award-winning whole system approach for young people who offend, and we have improved the information that those who sentence offenders require in order to impose the most appropriate sentence for the individual and the community in which they reside. Alongside those measures, we have invested in the prison service and, of course, in work to reduce reoffending. Since 2007, we have invested £368 million in the prison infrastructure. As Alison McInnes pointed out, this week sees the first prisoners move into the new, state-of-the-art Low Moss prison, which has been delivered on time and on budget. It is run by the Scottish Prison Service and its staff. Offenders in the prison will be expected to work or to be involved in other purposeful activity for 35 hours a week. When offenders are expected to be working or to be engaged in another useful activity, power in their cells will be switched off. Prison staff will work with those who are in custody for the first time and those who are persistent offenders to help them to stop offending. In the spending review, we announced a reducing reoffending change fund of £7.5 million. We intend to use the fund to bring about changes so that services that are effective in reducing reoffending are supported sustainably, are expanded and are embedded in mainstream provision. I do not know the precise detail of the matter that Alison McInnes referred to, but I am happy to look at it. We recognise that much of the work in this area is provided by the third sector, whether by Routes Out of Prostitution, the agency that she referred to, Sacro or others. They provide an outstanding service. As I said, I welcome the fact that the Liberal Democrats have a shared commitment to tackling reoffending. I agree that we need to be open to looking at all fresh approaches to funding in this area, whether social impact bonds, public-social partnerships or other options. We are working actively with partners, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, voluntary organisations and others with relevant expertise, to develop options for a new system of community justice funding. As the First Minister has said, we do not claim to be the fount of all wisdom. We recognise that not everything can be delivered by community justice authorities, local authorities, social work departments or even the SPS. The involvement of other agencies is required. I put on record our gratitude to faith groups, which contribute greatly on a voluntary basis. The result of all that work is that reoffending has been falling—one-year reconviction rates are at their lowest in 11 years. That is a tribute to the hard work of the people who work with offenders every day and the measures that we have taken. We are looking to build on those achievements, which is why we have set up the commission on women offenders, which is chaired by Dame Elish Angiolini. The commission is due to report in the next few weeks. I look forward to receiving its recommendations and am hopeful that we can achieve cross-party support in implementing them. In addition, we are entering a new phase of our programme to reduce reoffending. It will build on the work in phase 1, to ensure that good practice is embedded everywhere and that services that work to reduce reoffending are available across Scotland. At the start of this Government’s first term in office, Henry McLeish’s Scottish Prisons Commission starkly set out the choice that the Government had to make. With the support of the Liberal Democrats, we chose to build a system of effective community justice. Reoffending has fallen, but we believe that it can fall further. Let me be clear that the Government is as committed in our second term as we were in our first to reducing reoffending. I welcome the Liberal Democrats’ motion. I am happy to give an undertaking to look at the matters that Alison McInnes raised and to get back to her. I believe that, together, we can continue to make progress, and I look forward to continuing to receive cross-party support when we receive the Angiolini report. I move amendment S4M-02337.1, to leave out from “; believes” to end and insert: “, and welcomes that the Scottish Government will explore the potential of innovative approaches to funding, including the piloting of Social Impact Bonds and public social partnerships, to support preventative spend measures.”

Justice debates in the chamber are frequently rumbustious and confrontational, and it is fair to say that, sometimes, they generate more heat than light. However, this has been a remarkably consensual debate. I pay tribute to the Liberal Democrats for bringing the issue to the chamber and to Alison McInnes for setting the tenor of the debate, in which there has been cross-party consensus. Whether it is what Mary Fee said about the specific needs of children or what Dennis Robertson said about the underlying causes of a lack of self-worth among individuals, we recognise that there is an issue. I hope that the Liberals accept that our amendment was lodged not as a wrecking amendment, but in the spirit of seeking to work together.

As Roderick Campbell eloquently said, we must build on the evidence. The only scheme of which we are aware is in Peterborough and I am happy to look at it, although it is fair to say—especially in a justice debate—that the jury is out. I give the member a commitment to look at the scheme with an open mind. I do not want to give a commitment on the timescale, but I am happy to look at the scheme. Given that it was started by Labour and supported by the coalition, we take no ideological view of it; we will look at what has worked, which is why we will also consider the concept of public-social partnerships. The fundamental ethos of the debate has been about recognising the good reasons for tackling reoffending. There are financial challenges and questions about how best to use our public funds, as the cost of keeping someone in prison is significant and the cost of constructing prisons is even greater. However, as members have pointed out, there is also a moral obligation to deal with people with fundamental problems, whether with dyslexia and literacy, which Graeme Pearson and other members mentioned, or with drugs and alcohol, which Christine Grahame mentioned. We have a moral duty to help people who face challenges, although it is accepted by members around the chamber—perhaps more by some than by others—that prison will always be the right place for some people. Those who pose a danger to our communities must go there, and there must be imprisonment for serious offending. In other cases, however, we must consider other ways. This is a common cause and there are good schemes out there, which have been commented on. The 218 centre was mentioned, first by Christine Grahame and then by Dr Richard Simpson. I visited the centre a few weeks back and had a cup of coffee with 15 or 18 of the women there. It was quite challenging but very thought provoking. I look forward to Elish Angiolini’s report but, having not seen it, I am not in a position to comment on it. Nevertheless, the Government looks forward to building on it. I have no doubt that Elish Angiolini, Dr Linda de Caestecker and Sheriff Danny Scullion will have given great thought to it. That may mean building on the 218 centre, as I cannot believe that they would take anything other than the same supportive view of it. When I visited the centre, I was told that Elish Angiolini had been there in her role as chair of the commission. There is a need to reduce reoffending and, as Roderick Campbell said, the reducing reoffending change fund is about working together to do what we can. Some of the work must be in other portfolios, as it is not just prison officers, prison governors and criminal justice social workers who have a role. There is recognition from members around the chamber of the outstanding contribution that the third sector makes—whether through Sacro, the 218 centre or Turning Point, all of which play a great role. Equally, we must make common cause across portfolios and we seek to do that at a governmental level. Some of the problems are to do with the lack of educational or work opportunities for individuals, and there are health issues, such as low-level mental ill health, for example. We must tackle those problems. We know what works in reducing reoffending and getting people back on the straight and narrow. They need a home to go to and some contact with family, whether it be mum, a granny, an auntie or whatever. They need someone who takes an interest in them when they are in prison and when they come out. There should also be, I would hope, some opportunity for employment and, if not, something participatory and constructive that they can do during the day. We have to put in more resources for those things. Questions have been asked and we must check against delivery on literacy, for example. The SPS is putting in place appropriate monitoring of that. I am grateful to Alison McInnes for raising the issue. I hope that the Liberal Democrats will accept the spirit of the amendment. I am more than happy to undertake to look at the good work that is being tried in Peterborough. If it works and can be replicated here, we will be more than happy to use it. In the interim, whether we are talking about public-social partnerships or the on-going good work that is being done the length and breadth of Scotland, it has the Government’s full support.

The Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 amended the licensing regime for public entertainment in the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to remove the automatic exemption for free-to-enter events. The amendment, which removes the previous anomaly whereby large-scale free raves did not require a licence, will come into effect on 1 April 2012. Local authorities have complete discretion over which types of entertainment they wish to license. Highland Council has confirmed that its existing resolution already exempts free-to-enter events and that it will review which events require a licence. Similarly, Glasgow City Council and the City of Edinburgh Council are reviewing their resolutions. I have written to all licensing conveners setting out the issues.

We are more than happy to work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to review matters. Fundamentally, we want to ensure that local authorities, which are best placed to know which events should be dealt with and which should be exempt, have discretion. It has always been the intention to ensure that relatively small-scale events that are not a risk should not be charged. That approach is replicated in Highland Council and the City of Edinburgh Council. Equally, for events such as the recent one in Kelvingrove park, local authorities should have the opportunity to take the appropriate action to ensure public safety.

On 31 December 2011, there were 6,957 police support staff across Scotland. Operational decisions about levels of police support staff are a matter for chief constables, the Scottish Police Services Authority and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency.

Absolutely. When I went to the Unison conference earlier this week, I confirmed that we welcome the contribution that is made to policing in Scotland not simply by those who have the office of constable and wear a uniform or otherwise work as a member of the constabulary but by those who do a variety of other tasks that make the life of a policeman easier or are of such a specialist nature that police officers cannot be expected to do them. As we move to ensure that Scotland remains safe from crime and we continue to build on the 35-year low in crime, we have to move towards a single service and, in doing so, we have to ensure that there is no duplication. However, we have given a commitment to Unison that there will be no compulsory redundancies.

I once again put on record my sympathy for the relatives of all those who were lost in the Lockerbie atrocity—whether they were Americans or people of many other nationalities murdered in the air, or Scots lost on the ground. The anguish remains with them constantly. I have been asked by the Opposition to make a statement to Parliament on the matter once again, and I am willing to do so. The Government and I have always sought to be as open and transparent as we can be on all matters that relate to Lockerbie. The need for the statement relates to claims that were made in a book that was written by a former researcher with Mr al-Megrahi’s legal team. Those claims are wrong. Minutes of meetings that related to Mr al-Megrahi were made at the time and have been published, except where permission was not given by other Governments. A minute of my meeting with Libyan representatives is one of them. Unlike the claims of recent days, those minutes are not hearsay, but are an accurate record that was made at the time. That minute has been in the public domain since September 2009. It is quite clear, and it refutes the assertions that have been made. Those records are made by impartial civil servants to ensure that there is a proper historical record of important discussions. In addition to the minute that was kept, let me be quite clear that Scottish Government officials were present throughout my meeting with Mr al-Obeidi, and at no time did I or any other member of the Scottish Government suggest to Mr al-Obeidi, to anyone connected with the Libyan Government, or indeed to Mr al-Megrahi himself that abandoning his appeal against conviction would in any way aid or affect his application for compassionate release. Let us remember what the two different processes were. One process was an application under the prisoner transfer agreement, made by the Gaddafi regime. That required an end to any appeal proceedings before a transfer could happen. The second process was an application for compassionate release made by Mr al-Megrahi himself, to which no such condition applied. We vigorously opposed the prisoner transfer agreement that was negotiated by the then United Kingdom Government with the Gaddafi regime, not least because it represented interference in the Scottish legal process. Between June 2007 and September 2008, we wrote to the UK Government no fewer than eight times setting out our position. I considered but rejected the application for prisoner transfer that was made in respect of Mr al-Megrahi, and I granted a request for compassionate release that he submitted, as I believed that it adhered to the laws and values that we hold in Scotland. I did so on the evidence that was before me from the Parole Board for Scotland, the prison governor and the director of health and care in the Scottish Prison Service. The Scottish Government had no interest whatsoever in Mr al-Megrahi’s appeal being abandoned, and I had no involvement in Mr al-Megrahi’s decision to drop his appeal against conviction. That was entirely a matter for him and his legal team. However, one thing that is now clear from the new book is that, as detailed on page 352, Mr al-Megrahi signed a provisional undertaking to abandon his appeal on 23 March 2009. It is therefore clear that he was considering dropping his appeal several months before either of the two applications was put before me. At the time Mr al-Megrahi had no way of knowing what my decision would be, either on compassionate release or on the prisoner transfer agreement. However, he knew that a prisoner transfer application would have been refused had there been any on-going legal proceedings. The author of the book, John Ashton, accepted on BBC radio yesterday that the claim in the book is hearsay. The Government has shown consistently that we want to be as open and transparent as we can be on all aspects surrounding the al-Megrahi case. That is why we have introduced the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill to aid publication of the statement of reasons. An assertion by the author is that we, the Scottish Government, do not want the statement of reasons to be published. Nothing could be further from the truth. The bill, introduced by this Scottish Government, will enable the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission to decide whether it is appropriate to disclose information in cases that it has investigated when a subsequent appeal has been abandoned. The bill helps to leave the commission as the decision maker with regard to whether it publishes its report on the al-Megrahi case. Under the bill, the commission must decide whether, in the whole circumstances, it is appropriate to disclose its statement of reasons. The commission will want to consider a range of factors when deciding whether it is appropriate to disclose information. One key factor is likely to be how much of the statement of reasons is already in the public domain. With the publication of the book and the broadcast of television documentaries containing what apparently may well be significant material from the statement of reasons, that could be an important factor that the commission may want to consider when it decides whether it is appropriate to disclose information that it holds. As members know, we are limited within the powers of the Parliament as to how far our legislation can go in freeing up the commission to disclose information. Data protection, which is a reserved matter, is a key obstacle to disclosure. I first spoke to Kenneth Clarke on this issue back in September 2010. Since our bill was introduced, I have already written to him on the issue three times. We are now faced with publication of material that is apparently from the statement of reasons. That means that the case for an exception to be made to data protection rules is now overwhelming, but that is for the UK Government to act upon. That is why I have today written again to Kenneth Clarke urging that the UK Government now makes a decision for an exception to be made to the normal statutory data protection rules for this unique case. That will help to ensure that the wider public interest can be served and that the road to publishing the statement of reasons is further cleared. Let no one be in any doubt: we want the statement of reasons published and we are doing all that we can, within the powers of this Parliament, for that to happen. Mr al-Megrahi was convicted in a court and that is the only place where his guilt or innocence should be determined. We recognise that some have concerns regarding the wider issues relating to the atrocity. The wide-ranging and international nature of the issues involved means that there is every likelihood of issues arising that are not devolved, which would require either a joint inquiry with, or a separate inquiry by, the UK Government. We remain ready to co-operate on an inquiry. Members will want to know whether there is a mechanism for an appeal still to be heard, even posthumously, and I confirm to the Parliament that there is. It would involve an application being made for a further reference by the SCCRC, the commission deciding to make such a reference and the High Court accepting it. Those, of course, are not matters for me as Cabinet Secretary for Justice to decide upon. They are decisions for others to make, but it is important that the Parliament is aware of the position. As I sought neither the abandonment nor the continuation of Mr al-Megrahi’s appeal, it is not for me to seek or oppose a potential appeal, posthumous or otherwise. It is, correctly, a matter for others, and I would have every confidence in the Scottish criminal justice system were there to be another appeal. I would be entirely comfortable with that. We want the commission’s report to be in the public domain to help to ensure that public confidence in our justice system is retained. The Government is doing all that it can to bring about disclosure of the statement of reasons and I urge all members to support those efforts by supporting our bill and our efforts to get the UK Government to make an exception to data protection rules.

No. Mr Macdonald is quite right that there were two separate meetings. There was a meeting with Mr al-Megrahi in Greenock, at which he was supported and represented by his lawyer, a member of the legal profession who is probably better known to some of Mr Macdonald’s colleagues than to me. He was present throughout. At that stage, no application for compassionate release had been submitted; the discussion was simply on the issue of the prisoner transfer agreement. At the meeting with Mr al-Obeidi, both matters were touched on, but I make it quite clear that it was never suggested to Mr al-Megrahi directly or to a third party that the appeal required to be dropped. It was simply made clear that under the terms of the prisoner transfer agreement, which was entered into by a Labour Government south of the border with Colonel Gaddafi’s regime, a prisoner transfer could not be considered while any proceedings were on-going. That was a matter of legal fact, which was put to him.

There are two aspects here. One is whether any factor was involved in the release of Mr al-Megrahi other than the criteria for compassionate release, on which my decision was based. It is clearly the position that no other factor was involved. As I made clear in 2009, we did not consider any other matters, whether economic, political or diplomatic, despite the criticism that we received. It is clear that the United Kingdom Labour Government was openly conniving while Labour representatives were openly criticising me. The same applied to the Conservatives. I make it clear to Mr McLetchie that we refused the suggestions from various Tory members. I remind him that Daniel Kawczynski, a Tory member, wrote to me on 14 August 2009 to suggest that Mr al-Megrahi should be used as a bargaining chip in negotiations. I refused that suggestion. On 17 July 2009, the Tory peer and former Tory minister Lord Trefgarne wrote to me to say that speed was of the essence in returning Mr al-Megrahi to Libya for reasons of business interests. I made it quite clear that we would not broker economic, political or diplomatic matters, and that the decisions that we made were subject to the laws of Scotland and the values of its people.

Let me deal with the question about medical reports. First, the only medical report on which I based my decision was that from Dr Fraser, the director of health and social care in the SPS. That report has been made available, and doubtless Mr McLetchie has read it. It is already in the public domain and has been so since September 2009. Members will be aware that medical records are subject to the common-law duty of confidentiality, and we are bound by that as we are bound by other legislation.

I have always made clear that I stand by the decision that was made by the Scottish court and upheld by the Scottish appeal court. It is for others to decide whether they wish to pursue matters through an appeal, as has been detailed, or to request a further inquiry. We have made it clear as a Government that the restrictions on our jurisdiction mean that any appeal or inquiry in Scotland would be limited. We would be dealing with reserved matters, so they would have to be dealt with either through more than one inquiry or in conjunction with the United Kingdom. We have said that we will happily co-operate with any inquiry, but it would be for others to pursue that. I return to my statement, in which I made it clear that it is not for me—and it never was—to decide whether proceedings are carried out. I simply abide by the laws of Scotland.

We are always happy to publish whatever is necessary in the interests of transparency, and we do so. I can hypothesise on the current position of the assistant commissioner, but the thoughts of others—whatever they are or were—with regard to the abandonment or lodging of further appeals are not under my control. We have made it clear that we do not accept the assistant commissioner’s statement that, simply by making a change to a piece of subordinate legislation, we can change matters through primary legislation. We must be cognisant of the restrictions on us even more so in subordinate legislation than in primary legislation. I pointed out in my exchange with Ms Marra in committee that, if it was so easy to change such matters through subordinate legislation, I—and no doubt others in the Scottish Government—would have made it clear that we were not going to enter into illegal wars, impoverish the poor and a whole variety of other things. If only life were so simple.

It is for other Governments to explain their actions throughout. There has been a great deal of hypocrisy, particularly with regard to Mr McLetchie. However, it would be unfair and remiss of me not to remind Lewis Macdonald and others on the Labour benches that they sat there and berated my decision to release Mr al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds when the UK Labour Government was conniving and conspiring to have Mr al-Megrahi returned to Libya whether on compassionate grounds or under a prisoner transfer agreement. I cannot decide the actions of other Governments; I can comment only on my actions and the actions of the Scottish Government, and on this decision we have been quite clear.

We have sought to publish everything that we can, except where that has been precluded either by medical confidentiality or by the clearly expressed wishes of other Governments. Mr Pearson asks why I went to see Mr al-Megrahi in Greenock prison. Let me make it quite clear: I went to see him at his request. Why? I had to see him on both the prisoner transfer agreement and his application for release on compassionate grounds. The primary matter was that he had submitted an application under the prisoner transfer agreement. As I pointed out, this Government consistently opposed that but it was driven through by a Labour Government down at Westminster. The agreement applied only to the only prisoner of Libyan nationality that we have ever had in Scotland, and it was clear when the UK Government entered into the prisoner transfer agreement that it related to Mr al-Megrahi. Our request to have him specifically taken out of the agreement was refused by the UK Government. The prisoner transfer agreement was different in that an application could be submitted not just by the individual, but by the Government concerned. The Government concerned had submitted an application—the Libyans submitted the application—and I was required to ensure that the prisoner had an opportunity to be heard, because there could be scenarios in which an application for a transfer was made by a Government but the individual did not wish that to happen. I offered Mr al-Megrahi the opportunity to make representations and to be heard; he requested the right to make those representations. He wished to make them formally to me so, accordingly, I went to see him in Greenock prison. I did so because the legislation that had been introduced by the UK Government required me to take into account his views on an application on his transfer back to Libya. More important, had I refused to go, the likelihood is that I would have faced being judicially reviewed by his legal team.

Yes. The prisoner transfer agreement required an end to the appeal before transfer, but there was no such requirement for release on compassionate grounds. The criteria for release on compassionate grounds were the evidence that was put before me by the Parole Board, the prison governor and the director of health and social care. Release on compassionate grounds would have been granted.

Matters in respect of the Crown Office are for the Lord Advocate. I have had discussions, because I am aware that the Lord Advocate has made it clear that this is an on-going inquiry. No one has ever suggested that Mr al-Megrahi acted alone. For that reason, matters are on-going, with inquiries through the Crown Office and by Scottish police. It would not be appropriate or correct for me to comment on other matters, other than to say that I have the utmost faith in the Lord Advocate.

We cannot require the statement of reasons to be published; what we can do is provide a framework in which the commission can put forward the statement of reasons. We tried that initially through the subordinate legislation route. Consent was not forthcoming from a variety of parties, and the commission requested additional powers. For that reason, we introduced the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill, which will give the commission a framework in which to consider a variety of matters, such as the Official Secrets Act 1989 and human rights considerations. As I said, all the actions of the Government are predicated on enabling the commission to be in a position to publish.

I absolutely give that assurance.

My understanding is that Mr al-Megrahi has not consented to release of the statement, which is one of the reasons why we require to proceed with the bill.

It is not for me to be responsible for what the commission publishes, but it is clear that data protection is likely to be a significant impediment. For that reason I entered into discussions with Kenneth Clarke and—as I have said on other occasions in the Parliament—I have been grateful to him for the spirit in which he has considered matters. However, over recent days, with books appearing and documentaries forthcoming, it is important that we have a balanced position out there. It is therefore important that the statement of reasons be published. All that I can do is provide a framework that I hope will enable the commission to be in a position to publish, but it is for the commission to make the decision, when it has considered all the criteria that are set out in the bill.

I welcome today’s debate on trafficking in human beings and I acknowledge the interest that other members have in the subject. We are here to debate one of the most abhorrent and evil practices of which mankind is capable—the trafficking of human beings as commodities, for the purpose of subjecting those individuals to suffer a form of exploitation, or in some cases several, in order to allow the perpetrators to profit from their misery. The exploitation that the victims experience includes forced labour, domestic servitude and prostitution. I understand that, in England and Wales recently, victims for exploitation by way of organ removal have been recovered. As a Government, we aim to ensure that people live their lives free from crime, disorder and danger. In that context, we place a high priority on combating trafficking. Trafficking and the subsequent exploitation that its victims suffer create and perpetuate human misery, and we as a society should not tolerate that abhorrent crime. We know and accept that trafficking is happening here in Scotland. That is confirmed by the national referral mechanism statistics that are available for Scotland, which show that 228 referrals were made from April 2009 to 10 February 2012. Of those, 126 cases were confirmed as victims. However, given the crime’s covert nature, it has been difficult to quantify the scale of the problem. Scottish Government funding enabled the Scottish intelligence co-ordination unit of the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency to be set up to assess the nature and extent of human trafficking in Scotland and the organised criminal gangs that are involved. The recently published SCDEA human trafficking intelligence assessment acknowledges the difficulties in quantifying the scale of the problem, but I understand that the SCDEA has set up separate trafficking strategic and tactical groups, which will look at the issue. Collectively, we need to move on from looking to prove the scale of the issue to accepting that it exists and concentrating our efforts where they count most—on the front line, pursuing the traffickers and supporting victims. As for the nature of the problem, the debate has tended to concentrate on exploitation by way of prostitution. That remains an important focus, but I fear that that narrow approach does the issue a disservice. From the latest statistics that are available, trafficking for forced labour appears to be the most prevalent form of exploitation in Scotland. As the Equal Opportunities Committee said in its report in 2010, it is time that we shift the focus on to exploitation rather than any particular form of it. We welcome the recent reports on trafficking in Scotland that the Equality and Human Rights Commission and Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People have produced. They have added to our knowledge of the subject and helped to raise awareness of this hideous crime. The EHRC report acknowledged “evidence of much good work at all levels in government, enforcement, prosecution, and, vitally, victim support”. Both reports contain a range of suggested improvements and numerous recommendations and conclusions for various organisations, including the Scottish Government. I can say straight away that the Scottish Government accepts the principle of almost all the recommendations that are directed to us. I will set out our initial thinking about our response in key areas. In closing, the Minister for Children and Young People will say more about child trafficking. I hope that we will hear a constructive debate that helps to inform the Government’s more formal response to both reports. The main common theme throughout all those reports is that the Government should demonstrate leadership in tackling trafficking in human beings. We think that we do so already, but we are always prepared to consider suggestions on how we can do better, because we acknowledge that we require to do better, as do all the agencies that work with us. I therefore plan to bring together a wide range of stakeholders in the coming months to help to map out a new strategic direction for how we can work together to tackle trafficking in Scotland. That will refresh and reinvigorate our approach and help us to put in place actions to address the various recommendations for improvement that have been made. There are aspects of human trafficking, in particular immigration, that are currently reserved to the United Kingdom Government, but I expect it to play a constructive role in our approach to tackle the issues in Scotland. Much of the focus on human trafficking to date has been on enforcement, and that will continue to be an important strand of our work. The additional funding that has been made available to the SCDEA to provide a dedicated expert resource to build the intelligence that is necessary to support and improve human trafficking investigation has ensured that resources are now in place. However, it is not always serious and organised criminal gangs that are involved in the crime of trafficking. Therefore, combating trafficking remains core police business and the SCDEA works closely with all Scottish forces to identify and address those involved in trafficking. The security of our sea crossings is vital. We take the policing of our ports seriously. Members may recall that we made clear to the Home Secretary and the UK Border Agency chief executive our concerns over the decision by the UKBA to withdraw UKBA officers from the port of Stranraer. However, in November, at Cairnryan, I met David Ford, who is the Northern Ireland Minister of Justice, Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary, the Police Service of Northern Ireland, and the UKBA, and I understand that Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary and the UKBA are now working closely together on a joint plan to make the crossings more secure and to deter criminal activity. That meeting was followed up with trilateral discussions at Stormont castle between myself, David Ford and Alan Shatter, who is the Minister for Justice and Equality in the Republic of Ireland. That shows that we are seeking to co-operate with agencies not only within Scotland and the UK but across a variety of countries, because we know that this trade is international. In October 2011, the police-led operation factor, which involved Scottish police, the Police Service of Northern Ireland, the Crown Office and victim support agencies resulted in the first prosecutions for the offence of trafficking, with the two offenders being sentenced to 44 months and 18 months respectively. That said, I acknowledge that the number of prosecutions remains low compared with the number of victims being identified in Scotland, and this is an area that we will continue to work with partners to develop and improve. Support to victims is also a prominent element in our approach. The Scottish Government has funded two agencies—Migrant Helpline and the trafficking awareness-raising alliance, or TARA, project—to support suspected victims of trafficking. The arrangements for supporting victims have grown over time and are still evolving. The EHRC report recommends that a service standard should be developed for supporting victims of human trafficking. I support that recommendation, and the Government has commissioned research to help inform our consideration of future care standards. We will also review our approach to the commissioning of support services, to ensure that we make progress on that important recommendation.

I am happy to get in touch with the member about that. As far as I know, we have maintained the funding. Whether it has expanded beyond Glasgow, I am not yet able to say. However, I accept the point that Mr Chisholm makes, which he made as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee before. The problem is not located in only one geographical area of Scotland, and we must ensure that victims are dealt with wherever they are. I assure the member that I will respond to him in more detail. He can rest assured that we are seeking to ensure that, wherever victims are and however and for whatever reason they have been trafficked, they are given the care and support to which they are entitled. The first external link that a victim comes into contact with may be healthcare professionals. To support staff in that role, the NHS Scotland gender-based violence programme, which is funded by the Scottish Government, has developed guidance on trafficking, and it will provide training and learning resources to raise awareness of the issue and how to provide an appropriate response. I want to touch on the EHRC’s recommendation for stand-alone trafficking legislation in Scotland. I do not rule out the idea of bringing together all aspects of human trafficking legislation under one umbrella, but we need to be aware that parliamentary time is precious and that that proposal will have to be considered alongside a wide range of other potential priorities for legislation. However, one issue that can be explored now is the possibility of introducing a statutory human trafficking criminal aggravation, which the Lord Advocate suggested. That would allow the trafficking aspect to be put before the courts where it is evidentially more appropriate to prosecute for other offences, such as labour exploitation. That could be an important tool in improving the number of convictions for trafficking in Scotland.

I cannot do that off the top of my head. However, I assure Ms Marra that we will provide that information in summing up if we can; if not, we will write to her. I reiterate that the forces of law enforcement, whether the Crown under the direction of the Lord Advocate or the police led by the SCDEA, take human trafficking very seriously, and they are doing everything that they can to ensure that there are prosecutions in this country and in Northern Ireland. It is clear that a recent successful prosecution in Northern Ireland for trafficking related to people of Scottish ethnicity. There is therefore co-operation between myself and the justice department in Northern Ireland and between the Scottish police and the PSNI. We believe that the use of an aggravation could be important in increasing the number of convictions for trafficking in Scotland. I should add that, following the changes that were made in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, our assessment is that we are already broadly compliant with the European Union trafficking directive. As I said earlier, we are open to suggestions from all sides. The issue unites the chamber, as nobody can possibly support the exploitation and trafficking of human beings, other than those who do so deliberately to profit from it. For that reason, we are happy to work with other members in the same way that Scottish officials are prepared to work with others in other jurisdictions in whatever capacity. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the reports issued by the Equality and Human Rights Commission and Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People about trafficking in human beings; acknowledges the work undertaken to date by law enforcement agencies to tackle criminals engaged in human trafficking; commends the work of statutory and third sector bodies that have worked to raise awareness of human trafficking in Scotland and offer support to victims of this abhorrent crime, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s intention to host a summit with key delivery partners to refresh the strategic direction for policy and delivery in this important area.

I am in regular contact with the Fire Brigades Union as we consider the impact of public sector pension announcements by Westminster and the serious effect that they may have on the pay and families of courageous and dedicated firefighters throughout Scotland.

We are in regular discussions with the FBU. However, the difficulty is that the United Kingdom Government’s position seems to be a moveable feast. We have made it quite clear that this is nothing but a blatant cash grab. Under duress—I refer to the financial actions threatened by Westminster—we have had to do various things, but we are working with the FBU to protect its members and their families from the outrageous actions of the coalition Government south of the border.

That information is not held centrally. Police recorded crime figures are based on an aggregate data return from each of the eight police forces, which does not include information on victims or their ethnic group.

Siobhan McMahon raises an interesting and important question. The information is not recorded because it is not straightforward. The recording category of “other ethnic white” would include many in the Gypsy Traveller community, but it also includes many from an eastern European background. We are happy to look at such matters. The Gypsy Traveller community incorporates not just Scottish and Irish Travellers but Gypsies and the Roma community. The fundamental point that Ms McMahon raises is not so much about the importance of recording crime, although we view that as important and the police and the prosecution take it on board, as about the discrimination that—sadly—exists against the travelling community, whether they are ethnic Scottish and Irish Travellers or are from the Roma community and have come in with east European immigration. The Government takes action to provide support through Article 12 in Scotland, the Minority Ethnic Carers of Older People Project and the Scottish Traveller education programme. I am happy to discuss matters and engage further with Ms McMahon and those who represent the Gypsy Traveller community. I assure Ms McMahon that we take any prejudice against the Gypsy Traveller community seriously. Such matters are incorporated in the Race Relations Act 1976 and we recognise our obligations under other portfolios to look after the community and protect its interests. Whether people are from the travelling community or are different from others in our community, they are still citizens of this land and they are entitled to the dignity, respect and treatment that everybody else receives.

The internal structure and staffing of the police service of Scotland will be determined by the chief constable and the Scottish police authority.

We take the matter seriously as a Government. Fundamentally, the question is for the current services. The Government has made clear its decision not to approve permanent appointments at assistant chief constable rank and above, which will ensure that we do not have a surplus of senior officers on day one. It would be appropriate for chief constables to consider the implications of promotions now for the new service’s operational effectiveness. We understand that the eight fire and rescue boards have already put in place arrangements to avoid such issues in the fire and rescue service. Promotions might be appropriate in some areas because of the service that is given and the area’s needs and requirements but, as we move towards a new service, police boards and chief constables should take cognisance of the issue, as has happened in relation to the very senior ranks. I thank the member for raising the issue and I will ensure that that is fed back to HMIC.

The Scottish Government has introduced to Parliament a bill to establish a single police service. It provides for the appointment of the chief constable by the Scottish police authority. Subject to the passage of the bill and the completion of the public appointments that it provides for, the chief constable could be appointed by the end of this year.

It is a matter of balance. We are aware that many authorities wish the chief constable to be appointed as soon as possible, and we have great sympathy with that view. There are two matters to consider. First, we have given an indication to Parliament, which I think has been accepted, that the chief constable should not be appointed by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, whether that is me or anyone else. On that basis, we require to go through the formal protocols that will allow us to establish the Scottish police authority and to ensure that, thereafter, it takes action to select the appropriate person, whoever he or she may be. There are also practical matters to consider. Until the police service of Scotland is established and in situ, whether on 1 April 2013 or at some other time, we must ensure the running of the police, with which the eight chief constables are currently charged. As I mentioned in response to John Finnie, we must ensure that we encourage them to work effectively and that, collectively, we take action to that end. We are seeking to work towards a position in which we can have the chief constable in place by the end of this year. We think that it is important that that decision should be made openly and transparently, and that it should not be made by a political person such as me. That means that we must wait for the establishment of the Scottish police authority.

As far as the North Sea is concerned, such matters have fallen within the jurisdiction of the chief constable of Grampian Police and Grampian authority. When it comes to broader matters of resilience, not simply the police but other agencies are involved. Particular local authorities have been involved in such discussions, as Ms McInnes will probably be aware, given the implications for Scottish island communities of an oil spillage or similar event. Such matters are clearly operational matters that must be dealt with by the appropriate level of authority, locally and nationally. Even as we move towards a single service, the likelihood is that an oil spillage or some other catastrophe would have to be dealt with by the divisional commander. Good work is being done in this area by Chief Constable Smith, who is working with others, including Deputy Chief Constable Neil Richardson from Strathclyde Police, so I can assure the member that such matters are being considered. Presently, they are dealt with on an operational basis by the police and other agencies, including local authorities and the Maritime and Coastguard Agency. They will ensure that the particular challenges that we face as a country with a coastline such as ours will be dealt with and that there will be no diminution of service as we move towards a single service.

I pay great tribute to the service that the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland has given. I noticed that he was in the Parliament to meet Mr Macdonald—I am sure that they had an interesting and informative chat. There will be a slight role change because of the requirement to deal with matters that would previously have been dealt with by other services. I welcome the service of John McNeill. The good work that he and his staff in Hamilton have carried out will have to be added to, but I look forward to him—or his successor, if that is the situation—continuing to provide outstanding service and meeting the new challenges that will have to be faced to ensure that justice is not only done but seen to be done. Those who have some doubts can be assured that matters will be resolved not simply internally, but by an external body.

The Government introduced a bill to Parliament on 16 January to establish a single police service for Scotland.

Ultimately, it will be for the Scottish police authority and the chief constable, once they are appointed, to determine how the service is organised. However, we believe that there is considerable scope for support functions to be located throughout Scotland, and I am keen that jobs are not concentrated in the central belt. The proposals that we have in the legislation provide a framework that will encourage resources to be located across Scotland to best meet the needs of all our communities. There are opportunities for them to be located in the north, and I know that Mr Thompson has campaigned for that. Equally, following my visit to speak to the chief constable of Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary and many of his officers, I know that requests will be made from that area. I give the member an assurance that it seems appropriate to this Administration that many of the matters that he raises should be dealt with outwith one centralised pot in the central belt, as they are capable of being dealt with elsewhere. The issue should, perhaps, have been dealt with before now. I understand that, in the current situation, in which there are eight services, the payroll for Lothian and Borders Police is dealt with in Birmingham. It seems to me that it might be better for there to be one payroll service for the police in Scotland and for it to be located somewhere more appropriate than Birmingham.

We see merit in that. Presently, the British Transport Police has to work closely with our constabularies—with Lothian and Borders Police in Waverley station in Edinburgh; with Strathclyde Police at Central and Queen Street stations in Glasgow; and with Northern Constabulary in the north of Scotland. I have written to the secretary of state to open a dialogue about the matter. To her credit, she has indicated a willingness to look at it. It is not something that we anticipate would be done immediately on the establishment of a single Scottish police service. However, as we move towards the establishment of that service, and at a time when issues around aviation and ports such as Cairnryan are dealt with by the Scottish police, it appears to us that there is logic to the suggestion that the current functions that are carried out in Scotland by the British Transport Police—to whose members, from Assistant Chief Constable David McCall down, I pay tribute—would have a better linkage with the single Scottish police service rather than with a body whose functions are, to all intents and purposes, headquartered in Birmingham, when not in London.

We are considering whether legislative changes are required to provide the courts with wider sentencing discretion to deal with people who commit offences after having been released from prison under early release provisions.

I thank Ms McKelvie for raising that matter, which has also been raised with me by the families of some victims, and which the Crown and I have clearly indicated that we are happy to consider. It is not a straightforward matter. It relates to legislation that predates not only my accession to office but the establishment of this Parliament. It is important to note that any offender who commits an imprisonable offence having been released under early release statute from a custodial sentence for a previous offence will spend longer in prison as a result. Courts currently have the power to impose a further sentence on an offender where an offence has been committed while the offender is still serving a previous sentence, but there are restrictions on the way in which that further sentence can be imposed. A further sentence cannot be imposed to run consecutively where a person has already been released in respect of the previous sentence. We want the courts to have the necessary powers to be able to deal with the offender and to provide the appropriate sentence for that offender in the circumstances, and not to be unnecessarily constrained. I am happy to assure Ms McKelvie, as the Lord Advocate and I have assured the—tragically—recently bereaved families of victims that we will look at this matter. It is a complex area of law, but we recognise that it needs to be looked at, and we will do so.

Independent custody visiting, which is carried out by volunteers on a non-statutory basis, plays an important role in checking the treatment of persons held in custody in police stations and the conditions in which they are held. Placing independent custody visiting on a statutory basis will fulfil the obligations of Scottish ministers to the optional protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, or OPCAT. The position is different from that of prisons, where Her Majesty’s inspectorate of prisons for Scotland already has a statutory duty of inspection. HMIP meets the requirements of OPCAT and is a designated national preventative mechanism. Under one system, we must still meet the OPCAT requirements; under the other, those requirements are already met.

I agreed with most of what Mr Harvie was saying until he got to the final part of his question. We accept that there is an issue. I am aware of the Mr Harvie’s motion, which was debated as a Conservative motion. I welcome the Conservatives’ commitment to prison reform and look forward to David McLetchie’s sympathetic ear for the Angiolini commission. As a Government, we take the view that prison visiting committees are no longer fit for purpose in the 21st century, given that they were established in the Victorian age. We believe that the needs of prisoners as regards advocacy are best dealt with by a more professional body, and that is why we are looking to go out to tender on that. We are happy to take on board Mr Harvie’s point about the requirements for monitoring and to look at how we deal with that area, whether we expand HMIP’s role to incorporate other aspects or work in conjunction with local authorities or community justice authorities. I say to Mr Harvie and Ms McInnes that we are happy to discuss with stakeholders and political parties how we build on the requirements that we already meet in relation to OPCAT and HMIP. For example, how do we provide a local aspect? Should that tie in with custody cells in police stations? As per the Conservative debate on Mr Harvie’s motion, I am happy to give him an undertaking that we will look at how we build on what we already have and provide understandable and legitimate assurances about how we meet the monitoring requirements in Scotland in the 21st century.

Officials of the Scottish Government meet the Scottish Court Service regularly. I met officials from the Scottish Court Service most recently on 11 January.

Those are hypothetical questions. I am happy to say that proposals require to go before the Parliament. I will be required to appear before the Parliament, and the Justice Committee and Opposition spokesmen will no doubt expect full information. The principal case must be put by the Lord President and will come to me. A proposal must be robust and sustainable; it must also be open to investigation, critique and, indeed, ultimate refusal by the Parliament. I assure the member that we are happy to discuss how information should come forward; I happily concede the principle of ensuring that the information is there.

The Scottish Prison Service offers a range of alcohol-related interventions to prisoners with alcohol problems, to support their recovery and address offending behaviour. In the period 1 April 2010 to 31 March 2011, 8827 prisoners completed an alcohol-related course: 8155 prisoners completed alcohol interventions on a one-to-one basis or in a group-work setting—such interventions were delivered by enhanced addiction casework services; and 672 prisoners completed an alcohol-related prisoner programme.

The national health service has taken over the health service in the Scottish Prison Service and we look forward to it implementing matters. The Scottish Prison Service will co-operate fully with the NHS. More than 50 per cent of people who perpetrate a murder are under the influence of alcohol, and more than 75 per cent of offenders in Polmont young offenders institution indicated that the root cause of their offending was alcohol. I ask Jenny Marra to reflect on those statistics and I hope that she will fully support the Government as the Deputy First Minister proceeds with the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill.

Will the member give way?

Let me first put on record my thanks to Annabel Goldie for the constructive manner in which she has articulated her case on the radio and in the chamber. While we disagree on various matters, including the legal advice, we are more than happy to enter into discussion with her and other parties. We have already put on record the fact that we will be entering into discussions with stakeholders about how we ensure that we continue to provide the services that are necessary for prisoners and that those services are fit for purpose in the 21st century. I echo her by taking this opportunity to put on record my thanks to all those who have worked as volunteers in prison visiting committees for their service over the years. I appreciate their efforts and the dedication that led them to work in this field. Visiting committees were first created for Scottish penal establishments in 1877. Obviously, our prisons during the Victorian age were very different places from prisons in the 21st century. Times have changed and it is right that support for prisoners also changes. Prison visiting committees were originally intended to serve two key purposes: first, to resolve complaints and issues from prisoners; and, secondly, to provide independent monitoring of prisons. We undertook a consultation exercise on the first of those purposes last year, seeking views about the current role of the prison visiting committee system.

The consultation that was carried out was meant to be limited, which is why we are carrying out further consultation as we are statutorily required to do, although we also seek to do it as a virtue. I will be happy to engage with Richard Simpson on that. We recognise that there are specific problems in women’s prisons and I look forward to working with Richard Simpson and Annabel Goldie when we receive the report of the Angiolini commission. It is welcome that we are united in the chamber in ensuring that we address the difficulties that prisoners face and in looking for a solution. I look forward to a more constructive debate in Parliament in future years—I welcome the fact that Dr Simpson is nodding—to address the particular problems that afflict those who are in female prisons. In addition to carrying out that written consultation, we met several prisoner focus groups. The majority of prisoners to whom we spoke were not aware of visiting committees and the fact that they could resolve complaints and issues.

That proposal is in the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill because the visiting committees for police cells are not currently compliant with the optional protocol to the convention against torture—OPCAT. They are not on a statutory basis and we are putting them on a statutory basis. The same does not apply to prison visiting committees. In respect of prisoners, we have Her Majesty’s inspectorate of prisons for Scotland and we are subject to challenges under the European convention on human rights—a matter that sometimes vexes the Conservatives, although I welcome the transformation there—with legal aid and litigation lawyers. The difference is the statutory basis. The recent HMP Barlinnie inspection report by HM inspectorate of prisons told us that, in 2010-11, only 14 prisoners asked to see a visiting committee member. Given the fact that, in 2011, Barlinnie had more than 6,400 admissions, that strongly supports the view that visiting committees are not well known among prisoners and that prisoners make little use of them. There is an unmet need.

I have to make some progress. The second purpose of visiting committees—to provide independent monitoring—also needed to be revisited. Prisons today are more accountable, transparent and open than they were in 1877. Nowadays, the Scottish Prison Service, headed by the chief executive, is fully accountable for all that goes on within prison walls. HMIP carries out a full programme of routine and follow-up inspections, and a range of service providers regularly visit and work in prisons. We know that there are two things that we need to do. First, we must independently monitor prisons. Secondly, we must provide a service that supports prisoners with complex needs, such as those who abuse alcohol or drugs or who have mental health problems. The time is right to ask some questions. Are we providing the right service to meet the complex needs of prisoners today? Are visiting committees still the best way of meeting those needs?

I am afraid to say that I do not have the time. Do visiting committees have the right set of skills to meet the challenges or do we instead need to develop a service that brings increased expertise? We need to safeguard prisoners who are vulnerable and discriminated against; empower prisoners who need a stronger voice; enable prisoners to gain access to information and whatever help they need; and represent prisoners who are unable to represent themselves. I want a service that has a professional and effective approach to helping prisoners to make decisions and take control of their lives, that will modernise our approach to supporting offenders and that will complement all that we are doing. A further public consultation will start in May. We will use that opportunity to seek a broad range of views on what a new service fit for purpose in the 21st century might look like. I am happy to engage with representatives of Opposition parties on that work and look forward to reflecting on the issues and ideas that are raised in the consultation. My officials will continue to work in collaboration with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other partners to help to shape thinking about how we modernise our approach and services to meet prisoners’ needs.

I look forward to the consultation. I do not believe that a status quo that was established in the 1870s is credible in the 21st century. We need an advocacy service that provides for prisoners’ needs but we are happy to work with members and people elsewhere to ensure that we deal with needs and wants, that we are compliant and that we meet prisoners’ rights through independent monitoring. I move amendment S4M-01878.1, to leave out from “notes with concern” to end and insert: “recognises the dedication and commitment of volunteer members of prison visiting committees but considers that, since the role and remit of the committees were designed in the 19th century, it is necessary now to develop an appropriate service fit for the 21st century; further notes that complaints by prisoners are now dealt with by the Scottish Prison Service (SPS) in line with best practice as set out by the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman’s Complaints Standards Authority; notes that, on monitoring, the chief executive of the SPS is accountable to the Scottish Ministers for compliance with legislation on the management and treatment of prisoners and that inspection of prisons is being delivered efficiently and effectively by HM Inspectorate of Prisons; further notes that research has identified that prisoners need a dedicated advocacy service that could provide them with independent advice and support; notes that the Scottish Government is considering how to build on the role performed presently by visiting committees by introducing a dedicated independent prisoner advocacy service to support prisoners in ways that match modern needs, and notes that the Scottish Government intends to carry out a further public consultation on these proposals in 2012 and will discuss the proposed timetable with stakeholders in developing the best way forward.”

Is the member not aware of the support for the Government’s position of providing an advocacy service from Tom Halpin, the chief executive of Sacro, which is precisely the organisation that deals with the care and resettlement of offenders and interacts with them? Does the member agree that Mr Halpin, who was on the radio along with Ms Goldie, has knowledge and should be listened to?

Let me kill a canard that Jenny Marra and Graeme Pearson have put forward. Visiting committees are collectively treated as one, so it is not about clearing the landscape by culling numerous bodies, as has been suggested. I welcome the tone of the debate. Members have acknowledged that there is an issue and that the Government has made a commitment to engage constructively. I look forward to hearing from Mr McLetchie, because on 4 December he said: “It seems too many prisoners are wasting valuable staff time by making complaints about anything and everything.” I look forward to hearing from a reconstructed Tory party and, as we move towards having Elish Angiolini’s report, I look forward to constructive commitments from members of all parties on how we will deal with the rights of the most vulnerable prisoners. Many members, in particular Margaret Burgess, flagged up the problems that we face. Prisons have moved on—prison visiting committees were set up in 1871, not 1877, but I do not want to argue semantic points. Prisons have changed dramatically and there is unmet need. Some 50 per cent of prisoners do not even know of the existence of visiting committees and 50 per cent do not know what the committees do. As John Finnie said, there were two requests in Aberdeen and there were seven in Inverness. Out of 6,400 admissions to Barlinnie prison, 14 prisoners asked to see the visiting committee in 2010-11 and in the previous year the number was 29.

I will let the member in shortly. There is unmet need, which we must address. That is to be welcomed. As members said, matters can be dealt with in a variety of ways, because there are two issues: monitoring and advocacy. I welcome the acknowledgement that advocacy services are required. Advocacy services cannot properly be provided by visiting committees, which do not have the resources, the knowledge, the skills or the expertise to do that. The people on visiting committees are good people who care immensely and do many good individual actions, but they are not trained or qualified, which is why we need a specialist advocacy service. There is an argument about monitoring, which we must consider.

It is clear that under the status quo the system is not functioning properly, as the visiting committees themselves accept. We must address the matter. I have undertaken to consider not just the statutory consultation but the spirit of the debate. We require a specialist advocacy service. I acknowledge that there are issues to do with monitoring, and I am happy to enter into not just debate but discussion with Mr Harvie and other members. On the issue that Mr Harvie raised in his speech, police cell visiting is not on a statutory basis, which is why it is in the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. The OPCAT issue is clear. We are OPCAT compliant not because we have visiting committees but because of an array of other matters. As Mr McLetchie knows, the Government is subject to the ECHR and we have an independent inspector of prisons who deals with such matters and who has staff who are not simply a secretariat, but people who carry out investigations. Not only does the inspector carry out set and routine inspections of the prison service, but he can and does make spot checks—one at Cornton Vale has been mentioned. We also have the Scottish Human Rights Commission, which has been mentioned, and we have legal aid and lawyers. As Miss Goldie will know, challenges to this and previous Governments relating to prisoners’ rights have been of great concern. The cost to the Government in relation to slopping out and other matters did not arise because of challenges that were brought by visiting committees; it arose through challenges that were based on the ECHR and which in many instances were brought by legal-aided lawyers or by lawyers who were working speculatively. Therefore, the Government is held to account by those who pursue prisoners’ rights. As I said, that comes at great cost. On that basis, we are already OPCAT compliant. I recognise the arguments that the role of HM inspectorate of prisons is different and distinct from that of visiting committees. On that basis, I am more than happy to enter into debate and discussion to consider how we can ensure that we are compliant on monitoring.

On those matters, I will enter discussion with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. COSLA has not expressed opposition to the proposal, but I will again discuss the issue with it. With prison visiting committees and police and fire committees, we must ensure that matters continue to run. In summary, the status quo is not tenable, given that the system was set up in 1871 and particularly given the unmet need that Margaret Burgess, among others, mentioned. We must have an advocacy service, but there are understandable and legitimate concerns about monitoring. I give an assurance that the Government will discuss that with members of Parliament and other stakeholders. I look forward to a similar commitment across the chamber when we deal with other matters, such as the Angiolini report.

Is David McLetchie not aware of the statement that was issued by Rod MacCowan of the Prison Governors Association, who says, “Nevertheless, VCs were established in the 19th century”, and who goes on to say that “much has changed” and then to welcome the proposed changes? Bill McKinlay, the respected former prison governor of Barlinnie, who recently retired, talked about “the passing of time” and went on to say that we need “A truly independent advocacy service expressly for the use and benefit of all prisoners but especially directed toward the most vulnerable”. Does Mr McLetchie not wish to listen to the practitioners?

The new service is being designed to enhance prisoners’ access to services in custody and the community that will contribute to reducing their reoffending. We want those who will deliver the service to have a good knowledge and understanding of the community justice system and be able to support prisoners as they move through the system. As well as looking to improve offender outcomes, we will ensure that there is no detriment to the overall service provision if the Parliament agrees to disband the visiting committees.

I appreciate the member’s points. As she says, 50 per cent of prisoners do not know of the existence of visiting committees. As was pointed out in the debate, only two people sought their services in Aberdeen; there were only seven requests in Inverness; and, out of 6,400 admissions to Barlinnie last year, only 14 people requested their services. There are two issues. First, how do we provide an advocacy service? We think that that is better dealt with through the provision of more specialist resources in that more complex area. Secondly, both Margaret McDougall and others raise a valid point about independent monitoring. We are happy to enter into discussion and debate about that. However, let us be clear: we must operate under the European convention on human rights until such time as David Cameron changes that fact, and we are subject to challenges. We have an independent inspectorate of prisons, we have a Scottish Human Rights Commission and, as we all know, the Government is frequently litigated against by people pursuing prisoners’ rights who are not members of visiting committees but lawyers. Nevertheless, we will ensure that the doubt that people have about monitoring is addressed, and we will enter into debate and discussion.

We have spoken several times with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London regarding Mr Dale. Our thoughts are with Mr Dale’s family, and we urge those involved to release Mr Dale and return him to his family as soon as possible.

I can give Elaine Murray and her constituents—Mr Dale’s family and friends—that assurance. My colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs spoke to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office last week. These are deeply sensitive matters, and the FCO, those on the ground in Pakistan and the International Committee of the Red Cross are involved. I can assure Elaine Murray that all those involved have experience and a track record, and that those on site are doing what they can, but I appreciate the strain on the family.

Any proposals for the closure of court locations would be for the Scottish Court Service in the first instance and would be subject to public consultation and, ultimately, parliamentary approval. No decisions have been made at this stage. Through the making justice work programme, the Scottish Government has had recent discussions with the Scottish Court Service regarding future court structures. I met Eric McQueen, the executive director for field services, on 15 December, to be briefed on the court service’s initial review of the options for future court structures. In addition, Scottish Government officials sit on the future court structures project board, which met most recently on 14 December.

The Lord President confirmed in his evidence to the Justice Committee on 1 November that consideration of the issue is at “the very early stages”. He went on to say: “Implementation is some distance down the line.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 1 November 2011; c 391.] No final decisions on closures of sheriff and justice of the peace courts could be taken without local consultation and, ultimately, the Parliament’s approval. We should take the Lord President, who is our most senior judge, at his word. We should accept that all matters are being looked at, given the financial difficulties in the service and indeed in every organisation north of the border because of the cuts from south of the border. Some people down south might see fit to ignore the advice of the Lord President, but elected representatives here should take our most senior judge’s word—if not necessarily as gospel—as having been given honestly and truthfully.

The Scottish Police Service will bring charges against any individual, company or organisation that is involved in laundering money and will actively target the assets of criminals and criminal organisations who engage in serious and organised crime in Scotland. The Scottish money laundering unit, which is based in the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, is responsible for conducting money laundering investigations. The SMLU is the single point of contact for the Scottish Police Service in the administration of suspicious activity reports, which are disclosed by financial institutions, accountants, lawyers and other members of the regulated sector. Mr Harvie will be aware that we have brought forward proposals to strengthen the law in relation to land and property fraud through the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill, which will create an offence of intentionally or recklessly making a false or misleading statement to the keeper of the Registers of Scotland or intentionally or recklessly failing to supply material information.

I am more than happy to have such a discussion. Work is going on in the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism’s department with regard to the remit of the bill. In my department, the serious organised crime taskforce and others are looking at the issue. The matter causes us concern and I agree with the member that action must be taken. I give an assurance that the Administration will, with the forces of law enforcement and Registers of Scotland, ensure that wherever possible we minimise the possibility of people being involved in criminality or fraud.

We have set out our proposals for governance and accountability in the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, which I am delighted to say has been brought to Parliament for its consideration this week. The bill will provide for clear and effective governance, strengthening the connection between police services and communities and involving the Parliament and many more elected members across Scotland.

With regard to VAT, Mr Pearson will know from his experience on the Justice Committee and his vast experience in a previous life that VAT was a source of concern at the Scottish Police Services Authority. Currently, a single Scottish police and fire service will have a VAT liability. We have written to the Treasury about that and we await a reply. Frankly, it seems ridiculous that a public sector organisation that does such valuable work should lose money through the actions of the Treasury. On other aspects, we are more than happy to engage with staff. Indeed, I met police officers and civilian staff down at Galashiels when we launched the bill. Fundamental matters to do with the balance between civilian and uniformed staff are ultimately ones for the current chief constables and the future chief constable.

The Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland will get additional functions that will allow it to investigate serious incidents and other matters involving the police, which will include those in which there is an indication that a criminal offence has been committed. The Crown Office will still direct those investigations, whereas the others will be carried out at the request of the chief constable or the Scottish police authority. Allegations and complaints about senior officers may also be investigated by the commissioner at the request of the authority. In addition, the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland will be able to investigate incidents that have not been referred to it, where it is in the public interest for it to do so. It will decide whether the public interest test is satisfied. As a consequence, the body will get a new name that reflects its new and expanded role—it will become the police investigations and review commissioner.

The latest recorded figures from 2011 show that 58 campus police officers were deployed across Scotland to cover 63 secondary schools. Those figures are being audited and we expect them to have increased. Campus officers help to provide consistent and positive interaction between young people, the police and the community. Decisions on whether to deploy officers to secondary schools are matters for police forces in discussion with local authorities.

I agree with the member about the benefits of campus officers. I spoke to the campus officer at Gracemount high school in my constituency on Monday. Fine payments that are received in Scotland are remitted to HM Treasury. A proportion of those receipts is returned to Scotland as part of the Scottish block grant. Nevertheless, the current arrangements constrain the Scottish Government’s ability to link fine income to measures to reduce crime or support victims. The Scottish Government has put in place measures to seize the proceeds of crime to support community activities, and we will continue to explore all options for fine payments to stay in Scotland. We will certainly continue to support the good work that campus officers do.

It is too soon to evaluate the success of those campaigns, but the stark reality is that we have seen hundreds of individuals who are prepared to take a gamble on other people’s lives by getting behind the wheel of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. Those actions are reckless, totally unacceptable and put lives at risk. During the campaign, a total of 478 drivers were caught driving while over the legal alcohol limit—the figure is 12 per cent higher than last year. Some of those drivers may now have their vehicles seized as a result of the extension of the vehicle forfeiture scheme. The consequences of drink driving can be severe and sometimes tragic. People can lose their licences, risk imprisonment, a criminal record and substantial fines, and may also lose their vehicles for good. Strathclyde Police has launched its latest domestic abuse campaign, which focuses on urging victims of domestic abuse to report incidents, particularly when children are involved. The violence reduction unit and Children 1st launched their letter to Santa campaign, which encouraged anyone who was concerned about a child experiencing violence in the home to contact parentline Scotland. It is as yet too soon to evaluate the success of those particular campaigns.

That is, fundamentally, an operational matter for the police. I do not know as much about the electronic tagging scheme as I do about the bottle marking schemes, which have been used by every force in Scotland and have been part of a concerted campaign to deal with the problems of underage drinking and with those who seek to exploit their right to sell alcohol by allowing it to fall into the hands of underage drinkers. I would be more than happy to encourage police forces to consider ways of building on the existing non-electronic bottle marking scheme as part of our campaign to deal with the problems that we face as a result of the abuse of alcohol.

Yes, I do. The member raises an appropriate point. There is a problem with people driving under the influence not only of alcohol but of drugs. Those matters and the powers relating to the law of drink driving are reserved to Westminster. However, we are aware that, on 4 January 2012, the Department for Transport announced that it is establishing an expert panel to consider the technical aspects—I think that that is what the member is referring to. Although the issues are reserved and are not within our domain or control at present, the issue that the member raises is certainly one on which we are more than happy to work and co-operate with Westminster, as it has to be addressed. Just like those who drive under the influence of alcohol, those who drive under the influence of drugs put lives at risk.

As set out in our manifesto, we remain committed to ending automatic early release once the criteria that were set by the McLeish commission are met.

As I said, that is part of our manifesto, but we are required to meet the criteria that the McLeish commission set out. We should never forget that automatic early release was introduced by the Conservatives. They frequently raise the issue, but they always forget that it was they who brought it in. McLeish made it quite clear that three aspects would have to be addressed: the problems that the courts would face; the problems that the social work departments would face; and, especially, the problems that the prisons would face—at present, there are difficulties with prisoner numbers. The Government’s commitment is to implement not just our desire, but the recommendations of the McLeish commission. We are required to meet the criteria that it set out, and it would be useful if, at some stage, the Conservatives in Scotland showed more sympathy for the direction of travel that we and Ken Clarke, the Lord Chancellor south of the border, have taken. It appears that, whether on Europe or on justice policy, Ken Clarke is the bête noire of the Scottish Conservatives.

The McLeish commission made it clear that there could be difficulties not simply for the Scottish Prison Service, in terms of prisoner numbers, but for the courts, in terms of the requirements for the judiciary and the shrieval bench, and for social work departments. We must ensure that the requirements are met across the board. We remain committed to that, and our commitment was echoed by the McLeish commission, which included not just a former First Minister but people of great talent and expertise from across the social and economic framework. We must ensure that the criteria that they laid out are met.

The costs will vary depending on the number of people who are in prison. The Government requires to do what it is doing, which is to ensure that the prison estate is fit for purpose, whether in dealing with the consequences—in due course—of ending automatic unconditional early release or simply in meeting the criteria. The Government will bring HM Prison Low Moss on stream next year, and construction is beginning of HMP Grampian to alleviate the pressure at Craiginches, which the member will know well. We are taking the appropriate steps to ensure that the prison estate is fit for purpose. Those two projects are just part of a longer term strategy to deal with the needs and requirements of the Prison Service across the board.

The UK Government replied to my letter on data protection on 13 December. It has asked for further information on the type of personal data that is included in the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission’s statement of reasons in the al-Megrahi case. I have responded and provided contact details to enable direct discussion to take place between the UK Government and the commission on the issues surrounding data protection.

There are two aspects to the answer. First, I am rather surprised by the tenor of Mr Scott’s question. As he correctly said, we have published our letter. It has always been the Government’s view that we would be as up front and transparent as we could be on al-Megrahi. We have not published the response from Her Majesty’s Government because it is for that Government to give its consent so that we can publish it. As soon as I receive that consent, I will be more than happy to publish the response. I should say that I am not casting any aspersions about the delay; it is perhaps rather soon to expect Ken Clarke to have dealt with the issue. However, Mr Scott should have realised that it is not for me to publish a letter from HM Government without its consent. That is where matters stand. Secondly, the data protection issues are fundamentally a matter for the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission. We have made it clear that we are trying to broker discussions, and I am grateful to Ken Clarke for his willingness to engage so that officials from his department can meet the commission. Mr Scott should realise that only the commission is privy to the information. It is not known by me or any other member of the Scottish Government. Accordingly, the discussions require to take place between Her Majesty’s Government and the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission.

We are meeting our commitment to do all that we can to enable the release of information. However, we cannot legislate on reserved matters, which is why we have asked the UK Government to disapply data protection legislation so that the commission is further freed from other statutory obstacles in deciding whether to disclose information. As a Government, we have always sought to act transparently. It is for other Governments to take their decisions and answer for why they refuse to make some information available or why they take action in court to restrict the availability of information.

The recruitment of police officers is an operational matter for chief constables.

I am grateful to the member for raising the issue. I can confirm that the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland is reviewing the standard entrance test and considering a number of ways of ensuring that it correctly assesses potential police officers’ ability to cope with the demands of probationary training. ACPOS is considering the accreditation of prior learning, including academic qualifications from outside Scotland, but it is also taking an holistic approach, looking at the use of assessment centres and situational judgment tests to allow applicants who do not have academic qualifications to join the service.

The Scottish Government is continuing to deliver on its target to maintain 1,000 extra police in communities across Scotland, and we are seeing the results. Since 2006-07, there has been a 23 per cent reduction in total recorded crime, including a 19 per cent reduction in violent crime. Reoffending rates are at an 11-year low and there has been a significant rise in the clear-up rate for violent crime, from 67 to 72 per cent. At the same time, there has been a decrease in the risk of being a victim of crime in Scotland, with the result that the risk is now significantly lower in Scotland than it is in England and Wales. None of that is a coincidence. Our investment in police officers is making Scotland’s communities safer.

As the member well knows, there has been a long discussion on the matter between the Scottish Government and the Treasury, and the matter is on-going. As he knows from his experience in the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, the matter was dealt with and VAT was imposed on the SPSA. We felt that that was wrong, and we continue to lobby for a change. Our view is that significant savings can be made from having a single service, irrespective of the VAT position, but it seems ridiculous that VAT is foisted on a fundamental and vital public service in Scotland. I assure the member that, in exactly the same way as I fought his corner when he was at the SCDEA, I will continue to fight the corner of the Scottish police service. There is something fundamentally wrong, and it is for HM Treasury to review it.

I wrote to all visiting committee members recently to thank them for their hard work and dedication. As I wrote in my letter of 5 December to the convener of the Justice Committee, we stand to deliver better outcomes by replacing the current structure of 16 prison visiting committees with a new dedicated independent advocacy service for prisoners.

The requirement to protect prisoners and review on-going matters in the prison estate is why we have Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons. Brigadier Monro does an outstanding job, as his predecessors did, and I pay tribute to him. In a small country, we need to ask how many organisations we need to deal with a single matter. We do not currently provide an advocacy service to support the needs and welfare of prisoners, but I and the Scottish Prison Service believe that it is necessary to have one in order to tackle reoffending. We are discussing the matter with procurement, and it will go out to tender. Whether it goes to Sacro, Apex Scotland or some other organisation can be reviewed and discussed, but we will certainly seek to work with partners who already work in the sphere. I put on the record that the proposal is not about making a cost saving. The cost of running the visiting committees is less than the cost of running an advocacy service. However, we have a responsibility to protect prisoners—Her Majesty’s inspectorate of prisons, the European convention on human rights and a host of other matters are relevant in that regard—and we must do what is necessary to break the cycle of reoffending for people who have learning difficulties, those who are inarticulate and so on. We believe that an advocacy service will be fundamentally better placed to do that, which is why we are putting one in place. It is not about the money; it is about doing the right thing.

I believe that it will. As I said, I envisage that the dedicated independent advocacy service will support hard-to-reach prisoners and prisoner groups, mentor and support prisoners appropriately and professionally, and improve prisoner links with the community. It will replace a service that was established before many of our current checks and balances were in place and it will avoid duplicating the work of HMIP. It will also enable third-sector organisations to work together to provide services, rather than compete against each other. As I said, this is not about financial savings; it is about doing what will best provide for the needs and wants of hard-to-reach prisoners, who all too often become caught in a cycle of reoffending. If it works, it will be a good thing.

As I said to Nanette Milne last week, I will happily reflect on that. However, fundamentally, these matters are dealt with by Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons, who also carries out unannounced visits. Equally, as the Government knows to its cost, we pay for challenges by lawyers who seek to defend the rights of prisoners and raise requirements around the ECHR. We think that one body should cover that.

There were no recorded homicides in Tayside in 2010-11, but figures show that, across Scotland, nearly 80 per cent of those who were accused of homicide were reported to have been drunk and/or on drugs when the homicide was committed. Most homicides were committed indoors by someone known to the victim. Those figures confirm what we know—that bargain-basement booze can have a fatal price. We will not shirk from taking tough action on alcohol abuse, and we cannot allow such mindless violence, which has devastating consequences for families and communities throughout Scotland, to continue.

That is fundamentally a matter for my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy, but she has made it clear that we are intent on doing that, and matters are progressing. From a justice perspective, I simply reiterate that it is clear that the curse of home drinking has resulted in those murders. Alcohol abuse is taking place, and people are likely to be murdered in their premises or somebody else’s private dwelling-house by people whom they know, who are under the influence of alcohol. Things have to change, and having a minimum price is a significant part of addressing that.

The Government intends to introduce a bill to Parliament early in the new year to establish single police and fire services. We have begun preparations for transition to the new police service, working with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and other partners. I expect a decision on the location of the headquarters to be an early outcome of that work.

I have no doubt that that would be a boost to the local area and I accept the challenges that exist in Pitt Street. Some progress has been made in moving forensics out, and we must also take cognisance of the new Gartcosh campus. There will have to be specific arrangements for the city of Glasgow and the west of Scotland. However, those matters are best dealt with by the new authority once it is established, in conjunction with the new chief constable, whoever he or she may be.

We regularly meet the police and judicial services throughout the country, including the Grampian area, to discuss a range of issues. I last met Grampian Police on 31 August. My officials last met the chief constable of Grampian Police on 7 December.

Obviously, police cells are fundamentally a matter for the chief constable and the police board. I recognise that there are particular difficulties in the city of Aberdeen, especially as we move towards the opening of HMP Grampian. I am more than happy to meet the member or other parties—as I do regularly—to discuss what solutions may be available.

I met representatives from the prison visiting committees an hour ago. I did them the courtesy of meeting them and indicating that I will consider and reflect on the issue. We are in a time of limited resources. There is a problem with those who go into and out of prison on a revolving-door basis. We require to monitor prisoners and safeguard their rights. That is done in a variety of ways, which range from the work of the chief inspector of prisons through to the Parliament’s requirement to comply with the European convention on human rights. We also require to meet the needs of prisoners, and there is a specific need to ensure that an advocacy service is available for that purpose. I can say to Nanette Milne exactly what I said to the representatives from the prison visiting committees: I will reflect on the issue, but I believe that an advocacy service is essential.

Winter preparedness is an on-going process rather than a one-off event. As Scotland experienced its first severe winter weather of the year last week, I commend all those involved in the preparation and response. I am satisfied that the measures put in place were effective, although we will continue to learn lessons and improve. Over the past year, public, voluntary and private sector organisations have worked with the Scottish Government to identify and learn from the lessons of last winter and have conducted exercises together to deal with a range of severe conditions. On 26 October, the Scottish Government led a debate on winter resilience, during which a wide range of members voiced their support for the findings of the winter weather review group and for the Scottish Government’s major ready for winter initiative. Although disruption can never be ruled out, particularly when the weather reaches damaging levels, I am content that arrangements have been put in place all across the country to ensure that Scotland is as prepared for winter as it can be.

Absolutely. I know that my colleague the Minister for Housing and Transport has raised that issue. Clearly, there were reasons why there were particular difficulties last year as a result of the severe snow, which closed roads and impacted on pavements. Equally, as the member correctly points out, local authorities have an obligation to deal with the issue and many authorities have been investing in equipment that was previously lacking. I know, anecdotally, that steps have been taken in the city of Edinburgh to ensure that matters are dealt with by the local authority, by other organisations charged with responsibility and by citizens who are prepared to look after both themselves and their neighbours. I take the point on board and will raise it with my colleague the Minister for Housing and Transport.

As with all questions regarding the operation of the Scottish Prison Service, I have asked John Ewing, the chief executive, to consider this question and he has advised the following. The Scottish Prison Service is committed to delivering effective sex offender treatment programmes to those prisoners who can benefit and are willing to engage at the appropriate time in their sentences. Funding for such programmes is included in annual prison budgets to meet the anticipated demand and can be increased if demand exceeds expectations. In 2011, 96 prisoners have completed sex offender programmes at a cost of approximately £5,250 per prisoner.

Yes. That is a valid question. It should be pointed out that the pilot project, good lives, which was delivered in Peterhead prison, has now been evaluated and is scheduled to roll out in HMP Edinburgh in January 2012. Following that, it is anticipated that it will roll out in all other SPS establishments that currently deliver sex offender programmes. The groundbreaking—if I can put it that way—sexual offender treatment programme, or STOP, that existed in Peterhead has been built on and improved by the good lives project. However, Graeme Pearson makes the valid point that we have to ensure that there is efficacy in what we deliver. We are dealing with deeply challenging people and it is important to bear in mind that the good lives project will come to naught if we do not ensure that the work is continued after people are released from prison, as many sex offenders will be. I assure the member that I will discuss with the chief executive of the SPS the point that we are trying to ensure that the new programme is as good as it can be and that we continue to monitor, evaluate and try to treat people in the community once they are released.

I put on record my thanks to the Opposition spokespeople for agreeing the tenor of the motion. That shows that the status quo is not tenable; we have to make significant changes to the law of Scotland. I do not think that there is any point in arguing over why we are here or apportioning any blame at this juncture; it is a matter of recognising that there has to be change, which is why we instructed Lord Carloway to carry out his review. It is important that we should go forward in an open and constructive manner, not only here, but outwith the parliamentary chamber. Some of the changes are fundamental and are causing great debate. Therefore, it is important that we debate the substance of matters on the basis of what is the right legal reform for our communities, and not on the basis of party dogma. I assure the Opposition spokespeople that that is the position that the Government intends to take, and I am grateful for the reciprocity that we see in the agreement on the motion. Today we mark the start of an historic reform. Lord Carloway’s report on criminal procedure, which was published on 17 November, promises to remould our system for the investigation and prosecution of crime. I am grateful to Lord Carloway and his team for the report, which was produced in just under a year. I know that he consulted extensively, travelling throughout Scotland and beyond in order to research the issues and test opinion. It is 13 months since I introduced emergency legislation to this Parliament, on the day of the United Kingdom Supreme Court’s decision in Cadder v Her Majesty’s Advocate. That decision, which overruled the decision of Scotland’s highest criminal appeal court, effectively changed decades of police practice when questioning suspects. It required us to ensure a clear right of access to a lawyer and adequate time to arrange advice before questioning, and to protect historical convictions. I recall the debate when we sat late into the evening to discuss the emergency legislation. I made it clear then that we had to act swiftly, but I promised that the bill and related matters of law and practice would be extensively reviewed. The steps taken before and after Cadder have stood us in good stead and I am grateful for the committed response of police, prosecutors and defence lawyers, not least in the successful operation of the new duty scheme for legal advice. However, those steps could only take us so far. The time had come for the criminal justice process to be reassessed from start to finish. The work of the Thomson committee in the 1970s has dictated Scots criminal procedure for the past 30 years, and I expect Lord Carloway’s report to have a similar impact in framing our system for decades to come. The Carloway report is extensive and detailed, and it needs our full consideration. I do not propose to outline now exactly what course I think should be taken, as I want to hear the views of members and of the wider community, and I reiterate the offer that I made earlier in private meetings with Opposition spokespeople to continue in that manner. Although the proposed change to corroboration—on which the headlines have focused, perhaps understandably—should not obscure the many other important changes that have been proposed, it would clearly be a momentous reform. As Lord Carloway stated, within Europe at least, Scots criminal law appears to be unique in requiring corroborated evidence for virtually every crime. An accused person cannot be convicted unless each of the key parts of the crime can be shown to have happened by evidence from two separate sources. Let us consider a case in which the only evidence was a compelling and credible account by the alleged victim. Such a case would never reach a Scottish court, but it could reach a court in England, France or Germany, where a jury or judge would assess its merits. The traditional view is that corroboration is a distinctive and exacting standard that ensures that convictions are rigorously proved and which prevents wrongful convictions. Lord Carloway challenges both those points. As well as concluding that there is nothing to suggest that corroboration reduces miscarriages of justice, he questions its value—he notes that instead of focusing on the quality of evidence, corroboration simply involves looking at how much there is. The review has unearthed striking research. In 268 of the 458 cases that were dropped in 2010 on the basis of insufficient evidence, there would have been a reasonable prospect of conviction if there had not been a requirement for corroboration. That is only a snapshot, but it is an important snapshot. Another headline change is the proposed replacement of our current system of detention before arrest so that all suspects are arrested on reasonable suspicion. That reflects the impact of Cadder. It should also—for the first time—permit questioning to occur after charge, provided that it has been authorised by a sheriff. The proposal to allow the police to liberate suspects for up to 28 days on a special undertaking allows for full investigations to be carried out, while recognising the principle of liberty. Balance is obviously important. Lord Carloway recommends that the maximum detention period in the new system should be 12 hours, and that the police should carry out a review after the first six hours. Lord Carloway restates the requirement for suspects to obtain legal advice from a solicitor before and during questioning. He accepts that suspects may decline the right to a lawyer but recommends protections for child and vulnerable adult suspects, whereby the agreement of an adult would be required. That is another important caveat. Lord Carloway supports the need for the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission to consider certainty in looking at historical convictions, although he recommends the removal of the High Court’s gatekeeper role in rejecting cases on certainty grounds. He also seeks to reform rights of appeal by creating a general right and removing such archaic concepts as bills of advocation. Costs are, of course, a vital consideration when proposals of such magnitude are examined. We will conduct a detailed analysis, but the report identifies both costs and savings. There may be more cases and there may be a need for weekend courts, but the use of police bail should reduce the number of people who are remanded to await trial and, in some cases, there should be a reduction in the number of witnesses—for example, some of the expert witnesses who are required for corroboration may no longer be needed. Innovations in technology should also help. Having been at the launch of the national ballistics intelligence service, I can say that the requirement for corroboration currently means that two police officers require to go down south simply to pick up a piece of evidence. Many would question whether that is necessary. Even if corroboration is viewed as fundamental—as it is by many—the inconvenience caused by, for example, the requirement for corroboration even when someone is simply collecting a piece of evidence means that there is a clear need to consider the issue. We cannot ignore potential costs, but this is about the best structure for our legal system and modernising it for the future, which should prevent future human rights challenges. Some people think that the changes risk eroding the ancient distinctions of the Scots legal tradition. It has been alleged that our system will become indistinguishable from the English system or systems on the continent. That is not so. The type of landmark change envisaged has happened to Scots law before and Scots law has survived and indeed grown. It has withstood the creation of appeals against conviction in 1926, the removal of corroboration in civil cases in 1988 and the abolition of the feudal system in 2004. Those innovations were seismic at the time but have become a commonplace reality today. These are distinctive proposals for change for our jurisdiction. Every legal system must evolve to take account of changes to society and ever-improving standards in human rights. The European convention on human rights is not a set of basic rules forever frozen on 3 September 1953; it evolves with each decision from the court in Strasbourg and we have no option but to follow it. I doubt that a decision such as that in Salduz would have been handed down by the court in the 1960s or 70s. I say that not to criticise the convention but to acknowledge that the law must always be ready to change with society. Lord Carloway’s report provides us with an opportunity to reassess and rebuild the most essential elements of how we investigate and prosecute crime. No one knows at what point corroboration—a principle that stems from the laws of Emperor Justinian and ultimately the Bible—entered our law. As Lord Carloway eloquently set out, it is a principle that we have retained but which others have discarded. Corroboration is a distinctive—probably the distinctive—feature of our criminal law, but Lord Carloway’s clear contention is that its time has passed. He reaches the following damning verdict: “It is an archaic rule that has no place in a modern legal system”. That quote will reverberate for quite some time. At the very least, I expect it to be reproduced in every criminal law exam paper in every Scottish law school for years to come, closely followed by the single word “discuss”. Discuss it is exactly what we will do. I see Lord Carloway’s recommendations as a package and as paving a clear path to reform, but we must consider them fully. I want to hear the views of those who disagree in whole or in part with Lord Carloway. Members of the legal community will be directly affected by the changes. I need to hear their thoughts and concerns about how they see these fundamental reforms working in practice, including how they might impact on other aspects of criminal law. For example, I know that many are opposed to the recommendation on corroboration. Some question the interaction with jury majorities or our three-verdict system. I also acknowledge Lord Carloway’s incisive comment that the reforms arise in an age of austerity. However, the report sets out a clear direction of travel and I see it as the foundation of a programme of substantial, historic reform. I will end as I started, by indicating that as a Government we want discussion and debate in the chamber because we are aware of the concerns that exist not simply among those who oppose the removal of corroboration but among those who support its removal and those who think that other tangential matters must be brought in if there is to be reform. The status quo is not tenable. We have to make changes and it is therefore important that we set the tone by showing, as we have done today, that this is about having a discussion and debate with the legal profession and with the general public. I assure members that, in moving the motion, I am open to taking on board the criticism that has been made and the improvement that has been suggested. There is no political dogma on the issue; we have to change. It is a privilege for us to be members of the Scottish Parliament, and we therefore must ensure that we get the reforms right, and that, in putting them forward, everybody in our communities has the opportunity to contribute. I move, That the Parliament welcomes Lord Carloway’s detailed and authoritative report on aspects of criminal procedure in Scotland; believes that his recommendations provide a historic basis on which to remodel the Scots criminal justice system; welcomes the report’s focus on delivering a system that will ensure the effective, efficient and fair investigation and prosecution of crime, and supports the Scottish Government’s intention to seek an early opportunity to legislate following an appropriate period of time for reflection, analysis and debate, which should involve detailed consideration of links to wider aspects of criminal procedure.

I start by thanking members for what has been a remarkably good debate. In a humorous aside, Humza Yousaf made reference to other debates sometimes having more heat than light and to what happens in individual speeches—thankfully without naming any members. Each contribution today has been remarkably thoughtful. People have taken time to consider matters. We have seen both divides and agreements with strange alliances—Christine Grahame supporting David McLetchie, and Hugh Henry agreeing with Stewart Maxwell. That is appropriate because what we are discussing is fundamental. In the final speech in the open debate, John Finnie used the phrase “public confidence”. Whatever decisions we come to, we must ensure that there is public confidence. As we are in this privileged position, it is important that we should debate the issues. There have been a remarkable number of outstanding contributions, which have given me and the department food for thought. There are deep challenges. David McLetchie referred to the wisdom of Solomon; these are matters that will have to be thought through, as there are a remarkable number of points on which we have not come to a final conclusion. It may be that members divide not on party lines but on how they see matters. That will be to the credit of the Parliament and will help us to reach the right decisions. I thank Lord Carloway, who has done a remarkably good piece of work in a short but appropriate period of time. He has looked at the matters from the first point of arrest through to the final appeal, which is as it should be. He has looked at matters across the board and he has made it clear that it is open to us to accept some recommendations and decline others. As a Government, we take the view that the report provides a template that we can build on. Equally, it is something that we will discuss and debate as we have done today. I will comment first on the timescale, because it has been raised by many members across the chamber—Alison McInnes in particular. Let me say that I am not minded to have a royal commission. As Mr McLetchie noted, there is on-going work to ensure that we are ECHR proof. We are reviewing our law and looking at that matter.

I thank Alison McInnes for that clarification. Notwithstanding it and the idea that a commission could be restricted to looking at corroboration, I believe that we should deal with the issues more expeditiously. However, I am conscious of the old phrase “Legislate at haste and repent at leisure”. That point has been made by Christine Grahame, James Kelly, David McLetchie, Alison McInnes and others, so it is appropriate that we take our time to get things right. Lord Carloway has carried out an investigation and he has consulted, but there are clearly matters that cause considerable concern—not least corroboration. We intend to go out to further consultation, probably in the spring, to ensure that we take on board all the views not simply on the fundamental aspects mentioned by Lord Carloway but on other matters that have been raised that are tangential, incidental or, indeed, fundamental to those raised by Lord Carloway. Those, too, can be brought in and looked at.

We have already heard comments on juries and the not proven verdict. We take the view that we want to consult on Lord Carloway’s report; it will be for others to ensure that they feed in what they think should be looked at as well. We will not be exclusive. It would be wrong of me to set out now a table of what matters will be in the consultation, as there are probably others that have not yet been commented on. I assure the member that, as a Government, we will look at the issue on an open basis. We will consult on Lord Carloway’s report but, equally, we have to ensure that matters that relate to it and which people raise with us will be dealt with. As I said, we will be open on that. One major issue that has been touched on today is the requirement for corroboration. It was mentioned by almost every member who spoke. I agreed with the terms used by David McLetchie. It is an important aspect of our system, it has made our system distinct and it is something that is referred to. Equally, it is important that we should not put corroboration on a pedestal and that we should be prepared to recognise that it has changed. Even in the lifetime of the Parliament there have been changes in case law and there have been changes to legal knowledge even in my brief tenure. Corroboration is not what it was. Lord Carloway mentioned that it came from Romano-canonical law—the only time that I have heard that term before was many decades ago when I studied Scots law and other legal systems. Corroboration came in at a time when someone could hang for the commission of an offence. As Mr Pearson commented, the world has moved on. First, we have ameliorated corroboration, for example in relation to the Moorov doctrine and special knowledge. There is an array of legal technicalities in which corroboration moves away from the mistaken belief to which Roderick Campbell referred that there have to be two eye-witnesses. As Graeme Pearson said, things have changed significantly. We have a better educated judiciary, DNA and forensic science. Legal advice and lawyers are available to people. However, despite the changes in the law and the system, I still think that we have to look at the issue extremely cautiously, as Mr McLetchie, Mr Kelly and Christine Grahame said. I welcome Lord Carloway’s report. I am broadly sympathetic to it, but we have to drill down and see where its recommendations take us. As Roderick Campbell and John Finnie mentioned, the time has come to end the fairly arbitrary differentiation between arrest and detention. This is an opportunity for the first arrest to be made on the basis of reasonable suspicion—not on a whim or fancy—with the checks and balances that have been brought in by Cadder and Salduz. Humza Yousaf raised the issue of how we deal with vulnerable adults and youngsters. The issue was also mentioned in closing speeches. It is appropriate that Lord Carloway should ensure that we specify for that. There is something amiss there, and we have to ensure that those who are vulnerable are protected. Weekend courts were raised. That is work in progress. The making justice work programme is considering the issue. It is perhaps in alliance with Lord Carloway’s recommendations, but we are looking at it separately. The Scottish Law Commission will report in March on evidence of similar fact. It is the third strand of the fallout from the World’s End case that we have been dealing with. We have introduced the Crown right of appeal and double jeopardy and we have undertaken to look at evidence of similar fact. I have been sympathetic to arguments on the issue in the past, but I will wait to see what the Law Commission recommends. The ACPOS manual addresses safety, and a working group is looking at the issue, so it is being dealt with. Other issues were raised—I dealt with some of those in response to Christine Grahame’s intervention—such as whether there should be a move toward a minimum number of jurors being required for a verdict. We are happy for that to be discussed, along with Lord Carloway’s review. The same applies to the not proven verdict, which was raised by Colin Keir. The issue has been raised outwith the chamber, and it would have been surprising if it was not mentioned here. Lord Carloway has made it clear that he does not think that the issue is necessarily fundamental to his position, although, as John Finnie mentioned, it does raise the issue of public confidence. We will be more than happy to look at it as part of the package. I welcome the debate and I am grateful to Lord Carloway for his recommendations, on which we will pause and reflect. We cannot go forward lightly, which is why I am grateful that Parliament has treated the recommendations in such a dignified manner today. The debate has dealt with issues that unite people across political parties and divide people within them. We have to change, but we have to get right the pace of that change. I am happy to discuss that with Opposition spokespeople as we go along. It seems to me that it would be appropriate to consult in the springtime. That should give us months to reflect. There is no immediate space in the legislative timetable, so we would not be looking at introducing legislation until this time next year or the early part of 2013 at the very earliest. I welcome the contributions that have been made and am grateful for the support that all members have given in dealing with a difficult matter that is fundamental to the rights of not just victims of accusations of crimes but victims of crimes.

We are committed to building or renovating new prisons. HMP Low Moss will come on stream in March 2012 and later that year construction will start on HMP Grampian, which will ease overcrowding in the short to medium term. The Scottish Government has also introduced a range of reforms that we believe will reduce prison overcrowding, including the introduction of the community payback order, a new approach to young people who offend—the whole system approach—and a presumption against short sentences. Those reforms will take time to have an impact on the prison population, but we are confident that they will do so.

I am in discussion with the Lord President on those matters. There are cost implications. Work is on-going to make High Court decisions clearer and more available across the judicial spectrum and publicly. We are committed to a sentencing council, which the Parliament voted for. I believe that it will be of benefit to the whole justice system. In the interim, matters have been taken up by the courts themselves to ensure we get greater clarity and consistency. In a time of financial austerity, taking the time to ensure that resources are used appropriately and taking appropriate steps to ensure that we improve matters is a balanced and appropriate approach.

I meet the Scottish Prison Service’s chief executive monthly to discuss matters relating to the operation of Scotland’s prisons—we most recently met on 3 November. In addition, I have regular meetings and conversations with other senior members of SPS staff on a variety of prison-related issues.

The staff and the governor at HMP Gateside in Greenock have given exemplary service, but the prison is ageing. That is why the SPS has acquired a site and secured planning permission to construct a new prison to replace HMP Gateside. However, before work can commence, preparatory work is required, including the demolition of the school on the site, once it has relocated. The SPS’s spending plans for 2013-14 and 2014-15 include the commencement of the construction of HMP Inverclyde. That shows the direction of travel. We obviously monitor progress and discuss the matter with the local authority, which clearly has an interest with regard to the school. That is as specific as we can be.

Yes. Remand prisoners are one reason why we have a significant increase in prisoner numbers. The other aspect is women prisoners. With regard to women prisoners, we have set up a commission under Dame Elish Angiolini to investigate the issue. Remand is a more complicated issue, but we are looking at it. One aspect is the understandable and correct tightening of the Crown’s approach to those charged with a crime of violence. It may be that Labour is now suggesting a looser approach, but the Government is not in favour of that. Given that Labour previously called for an even tighter approach—indeed, it called for mandatory sentencing—I would have thought that the suggestion that the situation is devastating and drastic, which it is, is something that Labour should have considered when it still championed mandatory sentencing.

First, I concur with Mr Pearson that the staff at Barlinnie prison are exceptional. The governor is outstanding, as was his predecessor, Bill McKinlay. The staff do a good job in difficult and pressing circumstances. I have regular discussions with the chief executive of the SPS and with other staff. I think that it is accepted that, at some stage, Barlinnie requires to change. However, as I have argued at the Justice Committee, I can build any number of prisons that any Opposition member wishes—some have argued for a new Cornton Vale and some for a new Barlinnie—but it is incumbent on them to tell us what projects they wish to cut, whether they be in transport, housing, education or health. At present, we recognise the priority. Our priority is to open Low Moss and to prepare for HMP Grampian, where planning is proceeding and a contract has been issued. We accept the challenges that Cornton Vale and Barlinnie face. The SPS is considering, thinking through and planning on those matters.

On 9 September, we published the consultation paper, “Keeping Scotland Safe and Strong: A Consultation on Reforming Police and Fire and Rescue Services in Scotland”, which set out the Scottish Government’s commitment to maintaining recourse to an independent body for dissatisfied complainants. It stated our belief that an independent body should undertake investigations into serious criminal allegations and incidents involving the police. The paper invited views on a number of options for meeting those commitments. The consultation closed on 2 November. We are now carefully considering the responses before reaching a decision about how complaints will be handled when we have a single police service.

Alison McInnes outlines a fundamental principle that is made clear in the consultation document. There are various options. One is to consider expanding the powers of HM inspectorate of constabulary. Another is to expand the role and remit of the Police Complaints Commissioner. I will make an announcement on that shortly. I am going through the submissions that we have received. However, I can say that I recently met the Police Complaints Commissioner and many of his staff, who do an outstanding job. I will outline my position once we have properly considered the views of those who have taken the time to make submissions. I take on board and am sympathetic to Alison McInnes’s comments.

There are two issues. The division of labour—if I can put it that way—between serving officers and backroom staff is an operational matter for the chief constable, who will be held to account by the board. I put it on record yet again that we have an outstanding police family, including those who hold the office of constable and those who serve in a variety of ways, such as technical staff. It would be appropriate if Mr Kelly came to Parliament with the proper information. The Reform Scotland paper did not take into account staff employed by the Scottish Police Services Authority and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, so his scaremongering is without foundation. Reform Scotland has acknowledged that its paper was erroneous.

The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 allows the Scottish Government to seize illegal gains from organised crime and—uniquely, through the highly successful cashback for communities initiative—to invest bad money in community programmes, facilities and activities, largely for young people, to the ultimate benefit of Scottish communities affected by crime and antisocial behaviour. The key factors that we take into account are that projects must deliver improved facilities and build better, safer, healthier communities—outcomes that simply would not have existed otherwise. That gives our young people positive, purposeful and constructive opportunities to contribute to Scottish society.

As I said in last week’s debate, the funding should be allocated across Scotland. Frankly, although some areas of Scotland are much worse hit by criminality and offending than others are, every area should have the opportunity for its youngsters to achieve their full potential. It is for that reason that I was delighted to go to a cashback initiative yesterday in Brechin and will be delighted to go to an event on Sunday for the roll-out of a 3G pitch in Haddington. Neither of those communities is without its challenges but, to be fair, neither would be viewed as a hard-pressed, deprived urban area. It is important that what Mr McDonald suggested is carried out. Children and young people in communities such as those to which I referred are as entitled to have the opportunity to be all that they can be as those in other communities are. That is why we will not impose a postcode lottery on cashback funding. Every youngster will have the opportunity to achieve their full potential.

Maximum penalties up to life imprisonment are available for drug dealers on conviction. In addition, the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 allows us to deprive criminals at all levels of cash and assets gained through their criminal activity, including stripping drug dealers of their ill-gotten gains. Earlier this year, we made changes to the proceeds of crime legislation to make it easier for law enforcement agencies to recover criminal profits from all levels of criminals, including street-level drug dealers. We support all efforts by the police, the prosecutors, the courts and the law enforcement agencies to use the full power and force of the law to crack down on drug dealers and help make our communities safer.

Mr Henry, as a former justice minister, will be aware that I cannot comment on a specific case. However, if he writes to me I will have the matter investigated and, if needs be, I would be delighted to meet with him and his constituents. I can assure him that we will investigate the matter thoroughly, because we take such matters most seriously. I will do him and his constituents the courtesy of ensuring that there is a full and important investigation.

The Scottish Law Commission is considering this issue as a part of its project on similar fact evidence and the Moorov doctrine. The commission expects to present a final report to ministers in early 2012, at which point we will closely consider any recommendations. This is the final part of the substantial reference that I made to the commission in November 2007. I have always been broadly supportive of reform in this area and referred the subject to the commission as an essential part of ensuring that our laws of evidence are fit for purpose.

I thank Mr Maxwell for raising again an issue that he has raised with me over a considerable period. I do not want to comment on individual cases or on different jurisdictions that have different systems. Suffice it to say that the matter was remitted to the Scottish Law Commission because it raises legitimate public concern. Mr Maxwell has articulated that concern very ably today, as have others. The community in Scotland has cause for concern when it sees other jurisdictions deal with matters in a way that our jurisdiction is deprived of using. I will not pre-empt the Scottish Law Commission’s consideration of the issue; as I said in answer to the principal question, I remain firmly supportive that it should consider the matter, and I will do it the justice of awaiting its response. However, it is correct to raise the issue and I think that there is a great deal of public sympathy for the point that Mr Maxwell made.

The Scottish Prison Service does not routinely receive information about whether prisoners had previously been looked-after children. However, the 2011 prisoner survey contained, for the first time, a question about prisoners who had previously been in care. Responses to the survey are being collated and the findings will be published in December 2011. I will provide the member with the information that prisoners gave to the SPS.

Absolutely. Although we do not have any raw data—even the data that we have, which I will happily share with the member and others, will be dependent on the information given by individual prisoners—I do not think that it is rocket science to recognise that a significant percentage of Scottish prisoners have been children in care, which is clearly disturbing. We must address prisoners’ offending, but equally it is imperative, and not simply on a moral basis, that we ensure that those who have been dependent and deprived in many ways do not become involved in the criminal justice system. As Joan McAlpine suggests, there is a clear cost saving. If we can prevent these young people from spiralling into the criminal justice system, the criminal justice budget will be reduced significantly. I undertake that we will provide Joan McAlpine with the information. We recognise that there is something manifestly wrong and that not just the justice department but every department in Government and local government is required to try to tackle that problem, which starts with children being neglected, dependent or whatever else and results in their becoming part of the problems in the criminal justice system.

Given that the justice budget and funding for the police have been increased by 20 per cent over recent years, how much more does the member suggest that they should be increased by? Which budget should be raided to pay for that?

Is the member aware of the rebuttal of those figures by the Lord Advocate, who indicated that there are more lawyers and fewer reports and that the number of unmarked cases that are over four weeks old is significantly down? Does she dispute that?

Will the member give way?

Is the member suggesting that we should break the tripartite agreement that chief constables are not interfered with by the justice secretary, of whatever political hue, and are held to account by the police board? Is the member suggesting that that should be changed? Is the function that she raises not a matter for the police board?

Will the member take an intervention?

Keeping communities safe has been at the heart of the Government’s work since we took office in 2007 and we have delivered real improvements. However, it is acknowledged and accepted that there are still too many tragic cases and too many families are damaged by violence and crime, so I am clear that there is no room for complacency about the need for more improvement. We are working hard to keep communities safe and build on the progress that we have made since 2007. However, it is clear from reading the Labour Party’s motion for the debate and listening to Johann Lamont that the Labour Party is unwilling to acknowledge how much progress has been made since the Government came to office. Indeed, listening to Ms Lamont, one would think that no progress had been made at all. Let me take the opportunity to remind the Parliament how things have improved since Labour left office. We have increased the number of police officers in our communities by more than 1,000. Let us not forget that Labour did not go into the election in 2007 seeking to increase police numbers at all. Despite the cuts that have been imposed on us by the UK Government, we are seeing the benefit of our investment. Recorded crime is at its lowest level since 1976 and is down by nearly a quarter since 2007. We have the lowest recorded crime in 35 years. The clear-up rate for all recorded crimes is at its highest level in more than 30 years. Reoffending rates are at an 11-year low. We acknowledge that violent crime is still too severe in Scotland, although we know the great propensity for violent crime to be fuelled by alcohol, and let us remember who in the Parliament is failing to support the Government in taking action on that. However, levels of violent crime are almost 20 per cent lower than in 2007, and I hazard a guess that, had we got minimum pricing, they would probably be lower still. We know that knife crime is a significant problem in Scotland, but since the Government took office, it has gone down by 38 per cent. The number of homicides is down by almost 35 per cent and gun crime is down by almost half. Ms Lamont mentioned victims, so let me mention that the risk of being a victim of crime is lower than in England and Wales and people are significantly more positive about the crime rate in their local area. Fear of crime is down as well. None of that is a coincidence. We believe that it is down to the 1,000 additional officers. If Ms Lamont wishes to argue for fewer, or for a return to the halcyon days of 2006-07, she should tell us what she thinks the number of police officers in Scotland should be. The Labour Party has also raised the issue of the Crown Office marking cases within time limits. I have spoken to the Lord Advocate and I know that no cases will be time barred and that the Lord Advocate continues to give priority to staffing within the service to tackle serious crime.

I do not want to lecture Mr Kelly, but Lord Hamilton chairs the Scottish Court Service and the Lord Advocate is in charge of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. They are two entirely separate organisations. The day we merge them is the day we undermine the integrity of the system and jeopardise the notion of a balanced and fair trial. I would have thought that that would have been evident even to James Kelly. We are absolutely committed to reducing violent crime in Scotland. The level in 2009-10 was the lowest since 1984, and the latest statistics show that the level is nearly a fifth lower than it was in 2006-07. However, as I have already said, there is no room for complacency. We are taking action to reduce violence across Scotland, and that remains a key priority for us. There are also fewer people carrying knives and the number of crimes of handling an offensive weapon is at its lowest level in a decade—even though that decade included the halcyon days of Ms Lamont’s reign. Those who are caught carrying a knife are facing the longest prison sentences in a decade. We believe that the key to tackling knife crime is a combination of tough enforcement on the streets, backed by early intervention and education. The no knives, better lives campaign has been a real success during its pilot phase. It has contributed to significant drops in the number of people carrying knives in Inverclyde and Renfrewshire. That is why we have doubled the funding for that important education initiative to allow us to roll out the tactics to six new areas and fund a fresh push of activity in existing areas. I am glad that many local authorities welcome that, even if Labour does not. The approach is supported across the justice community and, as the evidence shows, our approach of tough enforcement and education is working, and it should be supported across this chamber. We are also taking action to reform our police and fire services to ensure that front-line services are protected. Reform will remove unnecessary and costly duplication across the eight police forces, freeing up resources for local communities. We are doing all that while protecting front-line jobs. While we are being confronted with the unprecedented cuts from Westminster, we should be uniting in Scotland to stand against the attack that is being led from down south on our front-line services. It is therefore disappointing that Labour has chosen not to use its debating slot to support our police officers in their demand to keep and protect their pensions. We, as a Parliament, should be standing shoulder to shoulder with those on the front line and supporting them in their fight against those who are undermining the relationship, based on consensus, that the Government has been building. In the election in May, the people decided that Labour was not fit for government. Right now, as the First Minister has said, it is not fit for opposition. I move amendment S4M-01285.3, to leave out from “with concern” to end and insert: “that Scottish communities have become safer since the current Scottish administration first came to office; notes that crime in Scotland is now at its lowest level in 35 years, that the clear-up rate for all recorded crimes is at its highest level for over 30 years and that the risk of being a victim of crime in Scotland is lower than in England and Wales; notes that, since 2007, violent crime is down by almost a fifth, the number of homicides is down by almost 35%, gun crime is down by almost half and people are significantly more positive about the crime rate in their local area; notes the significant investment made in frontline policing since 2007, with police officer numbers reaching record highs during the last parliamentary session; welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to maintaining numbers at 1,000 more than the level that they inherited from the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat administration, and recognises that significant investments and improvements across the justice sector have been delivered in the face of budget cuts from the UK Government and that, while police officer numbers are predicted to fall by more than 16,000 in England and Wales, the Scottish Government is committed to prioritising frontline policing to ensure that Scottish communities remain safe places to live and work.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member aware that the Lord Advocate has made it quite clear that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service had 513 lawyers in June this year, which compares with 446 in the halcyon days of Labour-Liberal rule in June 2007? That is a significant increase.

Given that they are not proposing any increase in the budget, how many fewer police officers are Jenny Marra and the Labour Party suggesting there should be?

It was disingenuous of Johann Lamont to come here and deny that Labour has an unrelenting diet of negativity and then to proceed to give a diet of negativity, which was supported in almost every Labour speech thereafter. We face the challenge of huge budget cuts from Westminster. Notwithstanding that, we have delivered a 20 per cent increase in the police budget since we came to power in 2007. Police officer numbers have been maintained, we have preserved their salaries and we have made it clear that we will not implement the recommendations of the Winsor report, yet the coalition Government down south proposes to attack police pensions and the pensions of police support staff. What a tragedy that rather than come here to support the Government in the job that we are doing to protect hard-working front-line officials, Labour members come here and undermine us. The enemy is down in London, but they choose to snipe away. They do not support us and they give us a diet of negativity.

I am simply saying that it is Westminster that is cutting the budget. It was started by a Labour Government and has been accelerated by the coalition Government. It is Westminster that is attacking staff pensions. We would not know that or think about it if we listened to Labour members. Along with dealing with their diet of negativity, the Labour members should get their facts right. We heard comments, which were supported by Alison McInnes, suggesting that the Crown Office budget is down, when in fact that budget will be £108.7 million in 2014-15, which is up from £108.2 million this year. We are investing, notwithstanding the Westminster cuts, but we do not hear about those cuts from Labour members and nor do we get credit for the increase in that budget. As Annabelle Ewing pointed out, the number of lawyers is up and the number of reported cases is down, but what did we get from James Kelly?

Just a minute. Let me point something out. James Kelly mentioned Lord Hamilton. Mr Kelly has an obligation to debate constructively when he comes to the chamber. He knows that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is an entirely different entity from the Scottish Court Service. If we merged the two, we would undermine the whole basis of our legal system. It was not only a diet of negativity: it was, to be frank, a diet of ignorance.

As Annabelle Ewing referred to and as I said, in June this year the COPFS had 513 lawyers whereas in June 2007 it had 446. The current number is significantly more than the Labour legacy. Labour members went on to undermine the tripartite agreement in Scotland. We are moving from having several police services to a single service. Justice secretaries of whatever political hue do not interfere or give directions to police chief constables.

I will not, at the moment. Miss Marra apparently wants me to direct chief constables. I remind her—as I reminded Mr Kelly—of the separation of powers. In Scotland, we have a tripartite arrangement under which chief constables are held to account by the police boards. The points that Miss Marra raised should be raised with the police board in Tayside, although I do not know whether she has done that. If she is suggesting that I should hold the chief constable to account, that would be a revelatory matter that would undermine the integrity and independence of chief constables. If Labour wishes to argue that with a single police service the justice secretary should give directions on police numbers and other matters, I am open to considering amendments on that.

I look forward to seeing a Labour amendment that says that the justice secretary is to direct policing in Scotland. That will cause great concern to people outwith the Parliament, but when Labour does that, I will say, “Take it further.” In the interim, Miss Marra perhaps has an obligation when she comes to the chamber to understand the structure of policing in this country. If Labour members want to reduce the number of police officers because they do not want to increase the budget, it is for them to tell us that. We are proud of our record of delivery and of the officers in our communities who have given us a 35-year low in recorded crime. Labour members should tell us how many fewer police officers they want on the streets. Johann Lamont spoke about cashback for communities. We put additional resources into areas of multiple deprivation, but the Government does not accept the idea that money from the scheme should go only to those areas. Just this week, I received an invitation to visit a cashback for communities project in Haddington that is supported by sportscotland and the local authority. Haddington is a very nice town and community, although it has its challenges and problems. It is not an area of multiple deprivation. It is not represented by me; it is represented by Iain Gray. If I can manage to—I have a constituency church engagement—I will be delighted to go along and say how delighted we were to contribute £100,000 to support the good work that is being done by Haddington Athletic Football Club, Haddington Rugby Football Club and the community. I will tell them that Labour did not want them to get that money. Whatever warm words Iain Gray might have uttered to them, he did not mean them, because Labour does not want any nice areas to get any money. What a shameful position for Labour to take. I will make it quite clear in Haddington that Labour did not want that £100,000 cashback for communities money to go to Haddington Athletic. This country is getting safer. We are making progress, but we do not underestimate the challenges. Labour’s continual diet of negativity—which involves it sniping away at this Government, which is trying to steer us through turbulent times—while ignoring the problems that have been caused by the coalition Government down in London, will see it being rejected yet again by the people of Scotland.

This is the same matter that arose with Ms Marra. As we move towards a single service, does Labour propose to vary the tripartite arrangement? If so, does Labour suggest that the justice secretary should direct, or does it propose that the board should hold the chief constable to account?

Selling alcohol is not a right and those who wish to profit from its sale should expect to go through a rigorous licensing process. The Scottish Government believes that the current system, whereby applications for a licence to sell alcohol under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 are assessed by licensing boards, is the best way to do that. However, the Government is aware of concerns about the current system of licensing fees and I am happy to announce that we intend to commission an independent review of the system of alcohol licensing fees to inform our thinking on how we can best address such concerns. Further details will follow.

I am aware of how Mr Fergusson has pursued this matter, which has a great deal of legitimacy. We are addressing licensing fees because we are aware that there is a distortion. There are areas in which industrial sales of alcohol take place and areas in which there are limited sales, but the system causes great financial difficulties. The basis of the fees has been rateable value. We inherited that system from the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, but some matters cause great difficulties. We have seen difficulties relating to golf clubs, social clubs and even airports, such as in Benbecula or elsewhere, where the rateable value has distorted matters. I can give the member the assurance that we recognise that there is a problem and that it would be much fairer if the feeing was based on sales and turnover rather than simply on rateable value. We are undertaking the review to try to address an anomaly that we accept exists, and I hope that the member accepts the answer in the spirit in which it is given. The review will be independent, and we are seeking to get greater justice into the basis of feeing.

We have always been aware that licensing matters cannot simply be dealt with individually. The purpose of minimum feeing is to ensure that discounting is dealt with, and we brought action on multiple sales, which I think was supported by Dr Simpson and his colleagues, because of the problems that are caused by them. We are trying to address the issues that we face in Scotland from alcohol overconsumption and abuse. The Scottish Grocers Federation has correctly raised a problem, but it would be fair to say that retailers that are selling alcohol at a deeply discounted rate should look to their own behaviour rather than criticise the law. It is for that reason that we require minimum pricing to work in conjunction with the action that has correctly been taken to deal with two-for-ones and other offers that were, frankly, unacceptable.

The SPS currently records all instances of children visiting a family member in custody if they have been registered as a visitor by the prisoner. However, the SPS depends on prisoners volunteering information about the number of children they have and registering them as visitors. In such circumstances, it is difficult to see how the setting of targets for child visits would be possible.

I believe that the social work department has sufficient resource. We must consider first principles. There is a great deal of hypocrisy from Labour on this issue. In the previous session—I acknowledge that Mary Fee was not a member at that time—my colleague Aileen Campbell moved an amendment that would have required the judiciary to take children into account when imposing a sentence. That was opposed vehemently by the Labour Party. It seems rather rich that Labour should be concerned about the rights of children once their parents are incarcerated and not at the time of sentencing. Secondly, one of the major respects in which children factor into this area involves women offenders and, in particular, the difficulties that are caused by short sentences—another matter on which the Labour Party displayed opposition in the previous session and continues to do so to this day. When Elish Angiolini announces her report on the rights of women offenders, I hope that the Labour Party will support what the report says about the interests of children, who are particularly affected by the issue of women prisoners.

Scotland has a unique legal tradition that is many centuries old and proudly independent. The existence of distinctive Scots law predates the treaty of union by centuries. The old Scots Parliament made laws for Scotland and those laws were applied in Scotland’s courts long before 1707. The distinctiveness of Scots law has been at the heart of our national identity and civic society, and we have a duty to preserve and uphold it. I know that that view is widely held. It is critically important that we maintain the identity and the substance of Scots law. They are the foundations on which our legal institutions stand and are part of our civic democracy. That identity and that independence were constitutionally guaranteed by the treaty of union in 1707, and they have been cherished and preserved for centuries since then. With that in mind, I am delighted to welcome the report that has been prepared by the independent review group led by Lord McCluskey. Once again, I welcome him and his colleague Sheriff Charles Stoddart to the chamber, and I want to pay tribute to the individual members of the group. Lord John McCluskey is a central figure in the history of Scottish constitutional change. He was Solicitor General for Scotland when the first devolution proposals came before the Westminster Parliament in the 1970s, and he presided as a High Court judge for 16 years over some of the most significant cases in Scottish legal history. Sir Gerald Gordon was a sheriff for nearly 25 years and a temporary judge at the High Court until June 2004. He was professor of Scots law and head of the department of criminal law and criminology at the University of Edinburgh. He has been an advocate and procurator fiscal depute, and he was a member of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission from its inception in 1999. Sheriff Charles Stoddart was the first director of judicial studies for the Judicial Studies Committee for Scotland and a well-respected sheriff. Professor Neil Walker is regius professor of public law and the law of nature and nations at the University of Edinburgh, and an internationally renowned expert on constitutional theory. The group’s report is objective, measured and informed by an unparalleled level of expertise. The advice provides a sound and sensible basis for progressing matters. The analysis that the group has produced is considered. It recognises the need for change and puts forward measured and achievable suggestions on how we can bring about that change. In taking on the task, the group was clear that the review would operate within the current constitutional situation. That is not the constitutional situation that the First Minister and I seek, but it is the one that we find ourselves with and require to address. The Scottish Government’s position on constitutional change is well known. It goes without saying that we are preparing Scotland to be a modern, independent nation. However, this debate is not about constitutional change; rather, it is about ensuring that the integrity of the Scottish legal system is preserved. People must take any threat to Scotland’s historic legal tradition seriously, whether they support independence, devolution or the status quo. Until 1999, the High Court of Justiciary sat in its rightful place at the apex of the Scottish criminal justice system. I accept that devolution was not intended to change that, but the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom Supreme Court has developed in the intervening years, and that has had effects in ways that were not foreseen when I was being lectured by Sheriff Stoddart and Sir Gerald Gordon. I simply seek to suggest ways in which the situation can be remedied, whereby the High Court has the final say on Scots criminal matters and the UK Supreme Court assumes a role as a proper constitutional court and is certainly not a further court of general appeal. That is a perfectly normal state of affairs in any modern European democracy where there is a clear distinction between the proper role of the criminal courts and the function of a specialist court that is tasked specifically with the role of interpreting and defining convention rights. The courts should not compete with but complement each other. The review group made a number of arguments. First, the UK Supreme Court should be limited in jurisdiction, ruling only on the application of convention rights and not on any remedy offered in recompense for breach of those rights. Secondly, an appeal to the UK Supreme Court should be competent to proceed only when a point of general public importance is judged to be raised. Thirdly, provisions for appealing to the UK Supreme Court should not be limited to acts of the Lord Advocate but should be extended to all acts of public bodies, including the Scottish ministers. On the first point, we agree that the UK Supreme Court should not rule on remedy. Under the current arrangements, we would be prepared to accept that it has a role in interpreting the European convention on human rights and handing down its interpretation. However, actively to suggest remedies for breaches is to take a step too far. The role of the court should rest with giving authoritative rulings on compliance. We also agree on the second point. It is simply not acceptable that the High Court of Justiciary in Scotland does not have the same powers as its counterparts in England and Wales when it comes to certifying a case for consideration by the UK Supreme Court. That is a strange anomaly, which must be remedied. We agree on the third point, too. The Human Rights Act 1998 already captures the acts of public bodies, and the recognition of that is simply the putting into effect of what currently happens, through the office of the Lord Advocate. It would make sense and be more transparent to recognise the situation in relation to criminal proceedings, rather than trying to fit such acts into the term “an act of the Lord Advocate”. It is far better that the system should be clear, particularly to the public, who do not have the luxury of immersing themselves in the finer detail of criminal procedure.

I would have hoped that, on a matter of huge constitutional importance that is fundamental to the integrity of Scots criminal law, the member’s intervention would have added to matters rather than detracting from the dignity and majesty of these proceedings. There are pressures in the courts system. We will debate them, and doubtless they will be discussed and argued about in the Parliament. However, Ms Lamont offered no perspective on the matter that we are debating. Does she think that this debate is irrelevant? Is it not worthy of her consideration? Cannot she ask a question that relates to the fundamental matter in hand, which is the integrity of Scottish criminal law and how we deal with the UK Supreme Court? I do not seek to diminish the challenges that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service faces, but I would have thought that the member would have made a contribution that was worthy of a debate in which we are honoured by the attendance of Lord McCluskey and Sheriff Charles Stoddart. The review group’s recommendation remedies the situation that was introduced by the Scotland Act 1998, which Lord McCluskey described recently in the House of Lords as “constitutionally inept”. There are other points with which we agree. It seems sensible to allow the UK Supreme Court to reformulate the questions, albeit within properly defined parameters. We would be relaxed about the retention of the powers of the Lord Advocate and the Advocate General to refer cases if they felt that there was a point of general public importance. I note that there are others who agree with the McCluskey group recommendations, including the Lord President, who has written to the Scotland Bill Committee indicating that Scotland’s most senior judges are in agreement with the report, particularly on the point of certification. In an important debate about matters involving the Lord Advocate and the Advocate General, which includes comments from the Lord President, it would be worthy of members to contribute constructively to achieve the necessary outcome of preserving the integrity of the judicial system in Scotland. I say to those who argue against certification simply that Scotland has an independent legal system. As I said at the outset, it was preserved by the treaty of union and predates the treaty of union. It has been a fundamental part of the democratic and civic structures in our society that have grown up in parallel with, but distinct from, those south of the border and we imperil it at our own danger. We must trust the High Court of Justiciary to consider the merits of cases and rule accordingly, just as the courts of appeal in the other constituent parts of the UK are trusted. In that way, both the High Court and the UK Supreme Court will be able to fulfil their respective functions. In seeking to take concrete actions to address those issues, I will write today to the Scotland Bill Committee of this Parliament in advance of its evidence session on Tuesday. I will also write to the Advocate General and the Secretary of State for Scotland with a copy of draft illustrative provisions that are designed to implement the McCluskey group’s recommendations. I look forward to holding further discussions with the Advocate General and others as we seek to agree on a solution that is in the best interests of Scotland. In the meantime, I urge the Parliament to endorse the conclusions of the review group’s report and call on others to recognise that they offer the best path to safeguarding the integrity of our historic independent legal system. This is not necessarily the position that the Government would take in an independent Scotland. However, while we remain in a devolved Scotland, it is fundamental that we preserve the integrity of that which was meant to be protected, and was specified as being protected, in the treaty of union. For that reason, this is an important debate and should be treated as such by all members. It was because of the importance of the subject that Lord McCluskey and his colleagues—given their eminence and seniority in law in Scotland—were asked to consider it. Now that they have produced a report that is supported not only by me—as might be expected, putting my faith in the great and the good—but by the Lord President, the most senior judge in Scotland, speaking not only personally but on behalf of the senior judges of Scotland, it is important that the Scottish Parliament listens and acts. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the conclusions of the review group chaired by Lord McCluskey on the examination of the relationship between the High Court of Justiciary and the Supreme Court in criminal cases; welcomes the review group’s comments about the historical independence of the Scottish legal system and its conclusion that this position should be maintained by restoring the High Court to its rightful place at the apex of that system; further welcomes the review group’s suggestion of a certification procedure granted by the High Court of Justiciary for criminal cases; notes the review group’s view that the UK Supreme Court should have a limited jurisdiction, ruling solely on the point of law relating to convention rights arising in criminal cases, and calls on the UK Government to work with the Scottish Government to deliver a solution through the Scotland Bill that reflects the recommendations of the review and preserves the integrity of Scots criminal law.

Does the member recognise that the Lord President’s letter says: “the High Court should be brought into line with the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) and the Court of Appeal of Northern Ireland by the requirement of certification by these intermediate appeal courts as a precondition of any criminal case being taken to the UK Supreme Court”? Does what our most senior judge has written on behalf of himself and his colleagues not carry significant weight in legal terms?

The member seems to be suggesting that, south of the border, the UK Supreme Court is the final court of appeal on criminal matters. Given that it is accepted even by the Advocate General that it is not meant to be, the justification for certification in Scotland is even greater than it is south of the border and it is therefore no wonder that, in response to comments by his fellow judges, the Lord President has written seeking certification.

Is the member not aware that there is a Scotland Bill going through down in London that has clauses that deal fundamentally with Scots law? Does he not think that that is a matter on which we should comment? Is it not for that reason that Lord McCluskey has brought forward his report? Is it not the case that unless Parliament takes a position on the matter and Lord McCluskey comments on it, decisions may be taken south of the border regarding the Scotland Bill that will have huge ramifications for the integrity of Scots law? Or does that matter not apply?

In February, I announced a doubling of funding for 2011-12 to roll out that innovative youth campaign, which has seen a 35 per cent reduction in knife carrying in the pilot area of Inverclyde and a 29 per cent reduction in Renfrewshire. After a successful pilot in Inverclyde, no knives, better lives was rolled out to north Edinburgh, Glasgow, Clackmannanshire, West Dunbartonshire and Renfrewshire throughout 2010-11. The initiative has continued in those areas, and we have been in discussion with a number of local authorities about the possibility of extending it. I will announce the new areas next month.

Yes. I enjoyed that visit and I thought that Renfrewshire Youth Voice was an outstanding organisation. I was grateful for the support that was provided by St Mirren Football Club and others, which demonstrated the partnership working that no knives, better lives and other violence reduction programmes seek to build on. The substantial 29 per cent reduction in knife carrying in Renfrewshire is significant and has probably saved lives. I assure the member that we will continue in that direction of travel.

Discussions are continuing between Government officials and local partner agencies. I have said that I will make an announcement next month, at which stage timescales will be set out. It would be inappropriate for me to pre-empt next month’s announcement on the matter.

The Government’s consultation on reform of the police service sets out proposals for ensuring the proper governance and accountability of a single Scottish police service. We propose to establish a Scottish police authority that will govern the service and hold the chief constable to account. That will ensure a clear separation between Scottish ministers and the chief constable. The Scottish Government will not be able to give instructions to the chief constable of the service. The chief constable will be responsible for managing and leading the service. The Lord Advocate will continue to have sole responsibility for the independent direction and control of criminal investigations, and the chief constable will continue to be accountable to the Lord Advocate on those matters. At local level, reform will strengthen the connection between services and communities by establishing a new, formal relationship between each of Scotland’s 32 councils and a designated local commander, which will result in many more local elected members being involved in the democratic oversight of policing in their area.

We have been considering a variety of models. I visited Northern Ireland recently and we have had input from the Garda Síochána in the Republic of Ireland. We also held an international policing conference, which included representatives from, for example, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. At the end of the day, we need to do what is right and appropriate for Scotland. The member mentioned a number of matters. We must ensure local and national accountability. We must also factor in the separation of powers and the Lord Advocate’s appropriate role in investigations. It is also appropriate that the Parliament has a role. We have not set out to follow any particular model from any other jurisdiction. Good practice exists around the world, and we want to engage in considering how to get the best method of accountability and governance for the Scottish police service, which has served us well and will continue to serve us outstandingly. That is why we are having the consultation.

Reform will strengthen the connection between the services and communities by creating a new formal relationship between each of Scotland’s 32 councils and a designated local senior officer, with significant delegated authority for services in the area. Each council will be able to shape and influence a local police plan and a local fire and rescue plan and will be able to monitor and scrutinise performance against those plans. Councils will also be able to seek reports, answers and explanations from the senior officer. The creation of a single Scottish police service and a single fire and rescue service will also give all communities, urban and rural, more equal access to specialist support and national capacity—such as murder investigation teams, firearms teams and fire investigations teams—where and when they are needed.

There are legitimate concerns about governance and accountability—both of which Patrick Harvie mentioned—and about centralisation under the change in structures. We are adamant that the change will ensure that all areas benefit from the expertise that must be provided. For example, Dumfries and Galloway has only one whole-time fire station. Retained officers do an outstanding job and we are extremely grateful to them, but the challenges that we face—flooding, chemicals and an array of other matters—mean that we need to prepare for every eventuality. Although retained officers do an outstanding job protecting their communities and dealing with exceptional circumstances, we require a greater level of expertise that can be spread around the country. We look to maintain wherever we can the front-line services that are necessary. We will maintain the numbers of officers—particularly police officers—that we put into our communities. We will ensure that the expertise that is necessary for every eventuality is provided for, because we know that eventualities can strike not only urban areas but rural areas. I also assure the member that we will ensure accountability to the local community, which goes back to the points that I made to Mr Harvie.

Planning has been concluded for the transfer of healthcare services from the Scottish Prison Service to NHS Scotland. The transfer will take place on 1 November 2011.

I am aware of Dr Simpson’s particular interest in the subject and I am grateful for the manner in which he has put his question. A national memorandum of understanding is being set up; it will be published on the SPS website once it has been finalised. Further, local implementation groups have been set up in each health board area to ensure joint planning approaches to the transfer of services. There will be no immediate direct change in services for prisoners. As I understand it, there will be no memorandum of understanding at the local level. There is the national agreement and obviously matters are on-going at the local level, but I confirm to Dr Simpson that officials will be more than happy to provide any further information that he wishes to have, and I will be more than happy to hold discussions with him if he wishes.

The creation of a single police service will protect and improve local policing across Scotland by removing the inherent duplication across the current eight forces. A single service will also provide more equal access throughout Scotland to specialist policing support and national capacity, such as murder investigation teams and firearms teams, where and when they are needed.

The lead force for protection during royal visits is the Metropolitan Police, although at Balmoral they are assisted by Grampian Police. In future, the chief constable of the Scottish police service will determine how his or her resources are deployed across Scotland, but that will include working with the Metropolitan Police to support royal protection at Balmoral or elsewhere.

We are taking forward work to establish a Scottish sentencing council. Options and costs for the creation of a Scottish sentencing council are currently under consideration and a decision will be made in due course.

It is for the sentencing council to decide how best to meet its objectives, including how to promote greater understanding of sentencing practice in our courts. During the passage of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill during the previous parliamentary session, there was discussion that the council might wish to do that through raising awareness of how sentencers make their decisions, including the factors that they take into account. It is likely that the sentencing council will also wish to use its powers to submit sentencing guidelines on particular issues. Once approved for use by the appeal court, the intention is that the guidelines will be used to help improve consistency and transparency in sentencing decisions, thus helping to increase public understanding and confidence in our sentencing system.

The Government will continue to put in place the resources needed to maintain front-line policing. This year, despite the unprecedented cuts to Scotland’s budget from Westminster, the deal that we struck with local councils means that our commitment to keeping 1,000 additional officers in Scotland’s communities is being maintained. Looking forward, we will continue to provide the resources needed to maintain front-line policing, helped by police reform that will remove the unnecessary and unsustainable duplication that comes from doing things eight times over and will free up resources to protect and enhance front-line services.

The member makes a valid point, which is why we are keen to ensure that accountability is not only maintained but enhanced. As the member points out, in North Ayrshire currently two councillors out of 30 sit on a joint police board of 34. In a single service, we anticipate that there would be around six times that number, which would mean that, instead of two councillors each representing 68,000, we would have 12 councillors each representing 11,000 people. That will provide local members with far better opportunities to meet on policing, to put forward their points and to maintain the local accountability that is necessary in Scotland to ensure that the excellent police service that we have is maintained.

The Government has made real progress in building safer and stronger communities. Crime is now at a 35-year low and detection rates are improving, helped by the 1,000 additional police officers that we have put into communities. In the past decade, significant steps have been taken to improve fire safety. That success is under threat from cuts by the Westminster Government, but the Scottish Government will not sacrifice those hard-won gains. The reforms that I will set out give us the best possible chance of protecting what we value the most and of keeping Scotland safe and strong. The reform is made against the backdrop of those Westminster cuts, but it is also the right thing to do. With less money to spend, we need to ensure that there is no decline in the level of services that our communities receive. Any nation has to evolve and change if its services are to be fit for the future. The current structures date from 1975, which was before the internet, mobile phones and any number of measures that have allowed us to steadily reduce criminality. However, crime will always be with us and people will always want to feel safe in their daily lives, so we need a structure that suits the world as it is today. Yesterday, the First Minister set out the programme for government, which is an ambitious programme that has at its heart the creation of a new single Scottish police service and a new single fire and rescue service. The reasons for that course of action lie in the Christie commission report, which studied how our public services could be adapted to modern needs while retaining our social democratic values. The report and the ideas that lie behind it have been recognised across the public sector. The reforms will mean that we can protect and enhance police and fire and rescue services for all communities, urban and rural; sustain those services for the long term; and strengthen governance and accountability. That is ambitious, and we will depend on the professionalism, experience, knowledge and skills of the people in the services. I recognise the powerful message that has been sent out by Chief Constable Kevin Smith, who will lead the reform on behalf of the police service as the president of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. Yesterday, he said: “As the leaders of the service we are now firmly behind that decision and it is our responsibility, our duty, along with the Scottish Government, to make this work for the people of Scotland and the men and women of the Scottish Police Service.” I know that people in the services will, as Chief Constable Smith has done, rise to the challenge and shape and deliver new services of which we can be proud and which build on our existing strengths. In the police service, ACPOS, the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, the Scottish Police Federation, the Scottish Police Services Authority and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency are looking forward, not back, and are determined to work constructively with Government to deliver an effective and efficient new Scottish police service. In fire and rescue, all eight chief fire officers and the Fire Brigades Union are looking forward, not back. I know that the journey is at times challenging—change is always a tough call—but it is a journey that the whole of Scotland is on. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities faces the same challenges as the rest of us face in delivering good services with less money and it has its own concerns. I trust that, together, we can deliver the change as smoothly as possible. I welcome the constructive approach of all the agencies that are involved. The status quo is not sustainable. We cannot afford to keep doing things eight times over. To do nothing would mean going down the route that has been taken south of the border, where there is no alternative strategy, leading to massive reductions in police numbers and an attack on terms and conditions. The arguments for a regional model did not stack up. It would have been cumbersome and bureaucratic and would not have delivered the same benefits as a single service will—the worst of both worlds. That left the single service option as the best way forward. We have not taken the decision lightly. It was taken after sustained dialogue with stakeholders and partners in every part of Scotland; after thorough and sustained engagement with people at all levels in the services and with councils and the public; after thorough consideration of all the available evidence; after learning from what others have done, including through an international summit on policing; after a consultation that showed no clear consensus, but which showed strong support for reform; and after the electorate voted overwhelmingly in the Scottish Parliament elections in favour of reforming services. Over the summer, my colleague Roseanna Cunningham and I went around Scotland, visiting every police force and fire service and discussing the issues with officers and staff at all levels. We saw the diverse best of Scottish policing and fire and rescue, including local services, specialist support for responding to serious threats and genuine engagement with communities. Single services will safeguard and improve all of that. Some people have expressed legitimate concerns about single services, centralisation, governance and accountability, each of which will be addressed in our proposals. For a start, centralisation will not happen. We will improve local services and strengthen links with communities; reduce costs and overheads; eliminate duplication, ensuring things are done once, not eight times over; deliver some services in different, more effective and efficient ways; and provide what is needed and maintain the visible presence of services in every part of Scotland. On accountability, we will create a strong formal relationship between each of our 32 councils and the services. A designated local officer will have significant delegated authority to work with the council and other partners on shaping and delivering services. At present, only 146 of the 1,222 councillors in Scotland have a formal role in the governance of services and under our proposals that number will increase significantly as more elected members have a say. Local services will continue to be delivered within a flexible national framework. On national governance, legitimate concerns were expressed, particularly in relation to policing. However, there will be no political interference. We will ensure clear separation between ministers and the services by establishing new independent bodies to hold the chief constable and chief fire officer to account and, crucially, ministers will not be able to give instructions to the services on operational matters. The Lord Advocate will retain his crucial role in overseeing the investigation of crime and ensuring the independence and impartiality that we need in a democratic society. We depend on the people who work in the police and fire and rescue services in countless ways. They are one of our most important assets and we need to protect them. Existing staff and officers will move to the new organisations when they go live and terms and conditions will be protected at the point of transfer. Single services are the best option to ensure that our communities remain safe and strong. Last week, at a summit convened by the Scottish Government, we heard from six countries where single services work effectively and a seventh where a single service is imminent. This Government is ambitious for Scotland. If Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Northern Ireland and Norway can have successful single services, so can Scotland. Today, I am publishing a further consultation paper that sets out proposals for how the new single Scottish services will work in practice and which seeks views on the detailed legislative provisions that we will bring forward to Parliament. The reform of police and fire and rescue services means that we will be able to save £130 million a year while maintaining the visible presence in our communities that has resulted in crime rates at a 35-year low and fire deaths that are almost 50 per cent lower than they were a decade ago. I give a clear commitment today that we will refine those proposals and develop the detail with a range of partners, including local government, over the coming months. Reform is needed to maintain the excellent services that the people of Scotland receive from our police and fire and rescue services. Our proposals give us the best chance of protecting and improving the crucial community-based police and fire and rescue services that are so valued in and so essential to our communities. Our proposals will sustain local services, strengthen the connections between the services and the communities they serve, and enhance national governance. I note the broad support for single services across this Parliament and welcome the opportunity to answer any questions that members might have.

Obviously, the funding issues will be subject to comment by my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth in the spending review. However, the whole purpose of the proposal is that we think that it is essential that we introduce change, to preserve police numbers and to ensure that we preserve the integrity of the fire service in the face of these financial challenges. I welcome Labour’s support for single services. I know that it is long standing, and we have now got on to the same page. Johann Lamont raises the issue that the devil is in the detail. We have made clear today the direction of travel: there will be single services. However, we still have to drill down into the detail of some issues and flesh out the proposals. There are various options, which is why there is a further consultation on the detail. We will work in conjunction with partners in fire and rescue, in the police and in other political parties in the chamber and, indeed, in local government to ensure that we consider the options. For example, there are various options in relation to the national board of governance for the police authority. The board could be similar to the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland. Equally, the Scottish Police Federation has suggested that some members should be elected. We are happy to discuss the issue with all those partners and work out what we think is best. Similarly, responsibility for police complaints could go to Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland, or to an expanded and enhanced Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland. Again, we want the best possible solution. I give a commitment that the direction of travel is set for single services. However, some important matters still have to be described. We will discuss those matters with all partners, but decisions have to be made within a reasonably short timescale. The consultation will last for eight weeks, because we wish to bring in legislation that will get the proposal through next year. In terms of spending, the show has to stay on the road and, as I say, we will continue to fund the services. The reason why we are making these changes is because we know the financial challenges that we face. If we do not change, the alternative is the scenario south of the border, where 32,000 officers are to be lost—2,000 to 4,000 are to be lost in Greater Manchester—and there is an attack on the terms and conditions of rank-and-file police officers through the Winsor review. This Government will not do that.

Those matters will be dealt with. It is essential that we make the savings to get through the challenges that we face. That is the backdrop. We have always said that we must make a virtue of necessity. Change is necessary to avoid the scenario that is being played out south of the border, but equally, in making change, we should get the best possible structures. I do not think that anyone would suggest that the political fix of 1975, whereby 49.5 per cent of the Scottish population are in one particular police or fire service area, is the ideal scenario, so we will change that arrangement and ensure that the savings are delivered. On accountability, I know how strongly the Tories feel about elected commissioners. We are not persuaded by that, and will not go down that route. I believe that the direction in which we are travelling will provide a greater level of accountability. Every local authority will have the opportunity to have its own police board or its own police and fire board if it so wishes. That is why our proposal is of great interest to Councillor Parker down in the Borders. We have also had discussions with Orkney Islands Council. At present, Orkney Islands Council has two councillors on the northern joint police board, who go to the police headquarters once a year. Under the new governance structures, every councillor in Orkney will sit on the police board. The divisional commander will come to the council to provide councillors with explanations. Rather than have a situation in which police boards are not—with the exception of Strathclyde police authority—particularly well funded or resourced, councils will be able to fund and provide the backdrop and bureaucracy that will allow them to do their job. Our proposal will provide better accountability than exists at present.

Yes. Some councillors have suggested that some councils may wish to share their boards. That is a matter for them. We are saying that the building block in the proposed legislation will be each constituent local authority. I give the member that guarantee. How local authorities wish to operate thereafter is a matter for them—we will not direct them on that. I give the assurance that the pyramid structure for accountability will be based on 32 individual local authorities.

Some of those are operational matters, which ultimately will be for the chief constable and the chief fire officer—whoever they are—to determine, but I assure the member that his premise is quite correct: there is no requirement for a fandabidozi new headquarters to be built for the police or the fire service. Equally, there is clear acceptance that many of the jobs can be located anywhere in the country. I give him the assurance that we have discussed with the SPSA why it is in the best interests of Scotland and the service for some jobs to be spread around the country. I assure him that the opportunity that he seeks will be there—and will, I think, be taken—and that we will ensure that jobs in the police service and the fire and rescue service are not centralised in one place but are shared across the country, when that is appropriate.

Yes, I can give that guarantee. I do not think that I made it clear in my statement—I apologise for that—that I met Chief Constable Smith, the president of ACPOS and chief constable of Central Scotland Police, who will take the work forward. He will lead it with support from officials and will take advice from local government and political parties. The front-line expertise will come into play there. We recognise that there is a transitional cost. I assure James Kelly that it is factored in. I also assure him that, in working out the outline business case, we examined Treasury guidelines and followed all the criteria. The numbers have been crunched and, although we realise that there is a cost to get to where we need to be, the savings thereafter will be significant. At a time of economic austerity, £130 million per annum cannot be sniffed at.

Every local authority will have its own police or fire board. It will be for each council to decide whether it wishes to have separate police and fire boards or an independent police and fire board. For example, Orkney Islands Council has made it clear that it always sits as a unitary council and will not have sub-committees. The legislation will specify 32 local authority police and fire boards to which divisional commanders will be accountable and which will also be able to request the attendance of the chief constable or chief fire officer. Equally, to deal with governance and the separation of powers from the Government in St Andrew’s house and from me in particular, there will be a Scottish police authority, which will hire and fire the chief constable and hold them accountable.

I assure the member that I will. The work, particularly on the police, will be driven forward by Chief Constable Smith. It is now over to him and I am grateful to him for agreeing to lead it. Arrangements will be made in Central Scotland Police, as he will give his full time to the project. Matters will be dealt with similarly in relation to the fire and rescue service. As I said to Johann Lamont, there is a great deal of detail still to be specified, because a lot of it is operational. My statement was about setting the political direction of travel. We have to make decisions on other aspects, and there are a variety of choices on some matters. The Government does not have a set view on those. We will be happy to listen to the views of COSLA and Opposition parties on issues such as how police complaints should be investigated and dealt with or how the board of the Scottish police authority should be constituted. We look forward to consultation and discussion on those points. Ultimately, we will vote on them here.

First, the reforms will increase local authority accountability so that the police will be accountable in Orkney, not in Inverness, and in the Borders, not at Fettes Avenue. I believe that that enhances local accountability. Equally, we must recognise that the world in which the police and the fire and rescue service operate has changed, not only because of the internet. The fire and rescue service needs to be able to deal with a variety of catastrophic incidents, changes in climate and, indeed, terrorism—never mind the challenges that the police face with the internet and serious fraud. We must be capable of dealing with such challenges everywhere. At one stage, we deluded ourselves that terrorism never occurred in Scotland. Sadly, we experienced the Glasgow airport incident. There are some who sadly seem to think that terrorism might occur in Scotland but only somewhere along the M8 corridor. We cannot possibly give such an assurance, nor can we prepare only for that eventuality. We have to be able to deal with such incidents everywhere. Scotland cannot have only one whole-time fire station in Dumfries and Galloway and one in the north when we face challenges from, for example, flooding or chemicals or other issues. To make sure that every area of Scotland, urban and rural, north and south, is given a guarantee that it will get the best protection possible, we have to have a national service so that everyone gets the same benefits.

I recognise that there is a police and fire service family, which includes those who have the office of constable and have a warrant card, and those who wear the uniform and go into fires. We recognise the service that is given, whether it is given by people who look after the office and make a cup of tea or by those who provide specialist services that only they can provide. Such matters are ultimately for the chief constable or chief officer, but the Government has a policy of no compulsory redundancies, and that is how we expect the situation to remain.

Absolutely. That was the clear lesson from Konsta Korhonen whom I was privileged to hear at the conference that we had on international policing. As promoted by some, the regional model does not make savings or provide accountability or the necessary national service. It is only a halfway house. As was shown in Finland, if we go half the way, we will quickly have to go all the way. That is why the single service is best.

I cannot comment on future transitional funding at the moment because it is subject to the spending review. My Cabinet colleague John Swinney will comment on that. As Roseanna Cunningham has said, we discussed the issue with the fire service. I spoke to local and national FBU representatives when the Cabinet went to Kirkcaldy on its summer tour. We are aware of the difficulties of the Fife situation and are working with local authority partners to make sure that we preserve the integrity of the service in Fife and elsewhere.

Yes, I agree, and it is another reason why the proposed changes will be an improvement and give us the best possible police service. One of the arguments against moving to a regional model—indeed, one of the arguments against the current position—is that the police investigate complaints made against them. The investigation might be done by another force but it is done by the police. The new way will give us the opportunity to ensure an entirely independent investigation, subject to the caveat that we will not replicate the bureaucracy involved in how such investigations are carried out south of the border. I assure members that investigations will be entirely independent and could go through the PCCS or HMIC. We are more than happy to discuss the issue with members or anyone else, but I assure members that the independent investigatory service will be a significant improvement on what we have now.

Neither at the level of the local board nor, indeed, at the level of the national Scottish police authority will there be the possibility of interference in operational matters. That said, the boards have a critical role in holding both the chief constable and the local divisional commander to account. That will be done at the local level with democratically elected members. At the national board level, the matter of elected members is still to be decided, but the board will have the legitimacy and authority to hold the chief constable to account. However, its members will not be able to interfere in operational matters. That has always been the case in Scotland and it will remain the case.

I pay tribute to Lord Rodger of Earlsferry, who sadly died earlier this week, following a short illness. I am sure that members will wish to join me in acknowledging the outstanding contribution that he made to public life in Scotland over the course of a distinguished career, including as a judge and as Lord Advocate. The First Minister noted on Monday that Lord Rodger was held in the highest regard by all those who worked with him in public service. That is an assessment that I and, I am sure, many other members share. I turn now to the subject of today’s debate. Scotland has a unique legal tradition, which is many centuries old and is proudly independent. The existence of a distinctive Scots law predates the treaty of union by centuries. The old Scots Parliament was making laws for Scotland, and those laws were being applied in Scotland’s courts, long before 1707. The distinctiveness of Scots law has been at the heart of our national identity, and it is something that we have a duty to preserve and uphold. I know that that view is widely held—it is not a party-political point. It is critically important that we maintain the identity and the substance of Scots law—they are the foundations on which our legal institutions stand, and they are part of our civic democracy. That identity and independence was constitutionally guaranteed by the treaty of union and it has been cherished and preserved for centuries since. Until 1998, the High Court of Justiciary was at the apex of the Scottish criminal justice system. There was never any real intention that devolution would or should change that situation. The mechanisms that were built into the Scotland Act 1998 to deal with devolution issues were narrowly drawn and limited in intent, but in practice we have seen a steady encroachment since 1999. That has meant the emergence of a novel jurisdiction under which the United Kingdom Supreme Court, in which Scottish judges are in the minority, has come to exercise increasing influence over Scots law. As Ian Smart, a former president of the Law Society of Scotland, has said, “There is disquiet right across the legal profession that we have drifted into a situation where there is a second layer of appeal … The Court of Criminal Appeal is the final appeal court in Scottish criminal procedure. … Nobody intended that routine cases should be dealt with in the Supreme Court.” This is not about apportioning blame but about recognising the situation that has arisen.

I do not think that I mentioned frequency. What I said was that cases have gone to the Supreme Court and those cases have been of fundamental significance, as they include the Cadder case, which Mr Kelly and everyone else in the chamber knows. Indeed, 14,000 devolution minutes have been marked. There is significant input and the consequences and effects are manifest and radical. As the Court of Session judges noted in 2008 in responding to the Calman commission, the practical consequences of encroachment have included delays to trials and appeals and additional expense for all concerned. Indeed, Mr Kelly might well recall that the First Minister commented in the chamber that printing costs in one instance were in the region of £80,000 or £90,000 simply for the Crown. I am therefore in no doubt that there is a problem here that needs to be addressed. The evidence is overwhelming. Let me be clear: this is not a debate about our commitment to human rights. Scotland’s belief in the fundamental values that are reflected in the European convention on human rights is not in any doubt. Notwithstanding some of the comments that have been bandied about in the chamber, I am not aware of anyone who is elected or who sits in this chamber who does not support human rights being applied here in Scotland. Furthermore, this debate is not fuelled by our well-known desire for constitutional change because, although that is part of the ethos of the party that I represent, we equally have a duty to ensure that we preserve good order in our court systems.

We are trying to ensure that we get the appropriate balance. Strasbourg is the place where these matters are ultimately dealt with. I prefaced my comments by saying that I believe that everyone has accepted that the ultimate court of criminal appeal in Scotland should be the High Court of Justiciary. As I was going to say in relation to Lord McCluskey’s review, it is about how we strike the right balance between having the ECHR and the Strasbourg court, which apply both north and south of the border, and preserving the integrity of our centuries-old legal system, which has a duty to apply the criminal law. What we are discussing today is the self-evident fact that the existing devolution settlement requires structures that work and which avoid unforeseen and unintended negative impacts. The simple fact is that there are significant problems with those existing structures. That is why we have sought to promote public debate and why we have asked some of Scotland’s most eminent legal minds to examine the current difficulties and to provide their expert advice. We have had passionate and sometimes outspoken public debate in recent weeks, but it is now time to move that debate on to a considered examination of the options that are available. I am, therefore, pleased to welcome the first report prepared by the independent review group led by Lord McCluskey. I welcome him and his colleague Sheriff Charles Stoddart to the chamber. That eminent group draws on the vast experience and in-depth knowledge not only of Lord McCluskey but of Sir Gerald Gordon, Sheriff Charles Stoddart and Professor Neil Walker. It has been asked to work independently of Government, without fear or favour. What the group has given us in its first report is objective and measured, and has been informed by an unparalleled level of expertise. The report provides a sound and sensible basis for debate.

We should remember that we are talking about an interim report and that a final report will be produced later in the autumn. We should also remember that Lord McCluskey and his review group had the opportunity to look at representations that were made to the Advocate General for Scotland’s review group by the Law Society of Scotland and others, and that they have made it clear that they will be happy to take evidence subsequently. Therefore, it seems to me that an appropriate level of information was out in the public domain and was accessed by the review group. Many members believe that there comes a time when we need to cease having consultations and start providing solutions. That applies to other developments that are under way, but I certainly think that the interim report is based on sound evidence. It will be subject to further debate and discussion, which is the purpose of this morning’s debate. The group is clear in its view that Scots criminal proceedings have been “unexpectedly” brought under review in the Supreme Court. As the group observes in its report, because of the lack of parity of appeal mechanisms, the High Court of Justiciary “has been placed under a broader and, in the light of developing practice since 1998, a more intrusive jurisdiction than has been created for the rest of the UK in relation to … human rights issues in criminal cases.” It does not recommend ending the current jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. In providing that advice, the group recognises the “constitutional realities” of the current settlement, which I accept. We are where we are, even if it is not where we seek to get to ultimately. However, it is crystal clear that what emerges about existing arrangements is that the statutory basis in the Scotland Act 1998 is unsatisfactory; that the position of the High Court of Justiciary is anomalous and significantly weaker than that of equivalent courts elsewhere in the UK; that the proper role of the Supreme Court—if it is to continue to have a role in Scottish criminal cases—lies in defining and clarifying constitutional and human rights law; and that it is for the High Court to apply that law in practice, in the context of the individual cases that come before it. There is an urgent need to resolve those problems. The review group has already identified some potential solutions, including further amendments to the Scotland Bill, which now require more detailed development. It is clear from the report that the High Court should remain at the apex of the Scottish criminal justice system. There is a clear distinction between the role of the High Court and that of the Supreme Court. It is for the Supreme Court to rule on the most challenging and complex human rights questions, subject to the overarching jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, but it is the proper function of the High Court of Justiciary to apply the law of Scotland in accordance with rulings by the other two courts. Those are distinct and separate functions. The jurisdiction of the High Court is different from that of the Supreme Court or of the court in Strasbourg. None of them is in competition with the others. In fact, the work of all three courts should complement, not conflict. There is no question but that the High Court can be relied on to apply the law consistently with the determinations of the Supreme Court. It is every bit as capable of applying the law in accordance with the conclusions reached by the European Court of Human Rights. The challenge that we face lies in ensuring that the existing structures deliver the right results for criminal justice in Scotland and that they do not result in the unintended erosion of the role of the High Court or the distinctive character of Scots law. The suggestions by the review group in this first report help us to address the challenge, but they are not final conclusions. As I said earlier, I welcome Lord McCluskey’s undertaking to explore in further detail the issues that he has identified. Those are issues that will need to be satisfactorily addressed by the UK Government in the Scotland Bill when it reaches the House of Lords in the autumn. As Lord McCluskey highlights, the changes under debate engage reserved and devolved interests. For our part, we have already made it clear that there are elements of the Advocate General’s existing proposals that we welcome and support. However, the final shape of the bill must properly reflect the concerns—and the solutions—identified by Lord McCluskey. Those provisions will need to gain the confidence and support of this Parliament if they are to be credible and successful. Lord McCluskey’s group will continue its work over the summer. I look forward to the outcome of that work and to a further report from the group in due course. I also look forward to the opportunity for constructive dialogue with the UK Government. With that in mind, I believe that we should all be able to work together to take forward the review group’s recommendations and to see a package of proposals in the Scotland Bill that we can all support. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the interim report of the independent specialist group led by Lord McCluskey; believes that it provides a constructive and well-informed basis for further detailed consideration of the role of the UK Supreme Court in Scots criminal law, and looks forward to receiving the further advice and final report of the group in autumn 2011.

Does the member think that Cadder-type situations, which require the kind of emergency legislation that we had to introduce, are beneficial either to Scots law or to good order in this country?

Did the member take that view when we had to have emergency legislation in relation to Cadder? Does he think that we should just have viewed that as routine? Does he not recognise that some of the matters decided by the Supreme Court cause such significant issues that we have to deal with them as emergency legislation? Does he wish that situation to continue in the future?

Whose human rights are being protected in the AXA case? Should we not be protecting the human rights of those who suffer from pleural plaques and upholding the dignity of this Parliament, which correctly acted to protect them?

In the main, I welcome the contributions from members. I think that there has been widespread acceptance of the issue and welcome for Lord McCluskey’s report. In a mark of respect from around the chamber, members paid tribute to Lord Rodger. It is appropriate that Lord Rodger’s passing should be marked today by elected representatives and that we should put on record our gratitude for his contribution and our sadness at his passing. Whatever Mr McLetchie may care to say, we welcome the report. As he is aware, the perspective of the Scottish Government and the SNP is that Scotland should be an independent nation, as with other nations that are represented in Europe, in the Union and in other institutions such as the European court. The court is not, as Mr Lamont seemed to suggest, an EU institution. Ultimately, we seek to be an independent nation and to have the same rights and powers. While we welcome Lord McCluskey’s review, it is not the position that we necessarily seek for an independent Scotland. It is a constitutional issue that will be debated again in the chamber and ultimately decided by the people of Scotland in a referendum. However, in the interim we have to deal with the good governance and management of our legal system, and the protection of those matters that are fundamental to our civic society and democracy. We think that the present situation is the best that we can achieve in a devolved Scotland, so we are grateful for the review. I will come to the issue of whether there should have been any delay. First, I want to deal with a point raised by Graeme Pearson, who queried why we were debating the issue. This is a matter of fundamental public interest. Those of us who were members when we had to deal with emergency legislation because of Cadder and the situations that that gave rise to are aware that that was one of the drivers not just for the Advocate General’s review group, but for Lord McCluskey’s group. They are aware that circumstances continue to cause great difficulties. Indeed, there is a question from Christine Grahame at First Minister’s question time relating to the matters that trundle on from Cadder. Dr Simpson raised the issue of AXA. That is a case based not on human rights per se but on a challenge to the competence of this Parliament. However, such matters are of fundamental relevance to the people of Scotland, to the ability of this institution and indeed to the ability of those who work in Scotland to govern. We should not underestimate these things. I understand that the number of devolution minutes is not 14,000 but 11,700, but that figure is probably rising by the hour. This is a fundamental issue that has to be debated, which is why we are here today and why we asked Lord McCluskey and his team to consider the matter. Concerns have been expressed that the timescale for the review group’s work is too tight and that this is simply another case of the Government rushing to take action when a more leisurely period of reflection and inquiry might have served. However, we believe that the report itself is ample evidence that such concerns are unfounded. Lord McCluskey and his eminent colleagues have made it quite clear that there is a significant problem to address. Moreover, we believe that such major issues should be brought before Parliament. Indeed, as Stewart Maxwell has pointed out, the Presiding Officer has already suggested that such matters should be taken care of in advance rather than in arrears and in any case we think that when this kind of interim report is published we should consider it. Clearly, this process will continue. Lord McCluskey and the members of his group will be listening to the points that are made in this debate. I believe that Alison McInnes expressed concern in that respect but, as I have said, it has been made clear that further evidence can be taken. Of course, as others have pointed out, Lord McCluskey and his colleagues looked at the evidence that had already been taken. They did not just get together on a whim or fancy. Significant evidence had been submitted both to them and to the expert group and although some might disagree with some of Lord McCluskey’s directions of travel, no one, not even Amnesty International or the Scottish Human Rights Commission, has disputed that there was an issue that had to be discussed and debated. We welcome the current position and approach. Johann Lamont said that the situation regarding leave to appeal is not universally accepted. That is the case with some in the Scottish Human Rights Commission and elsewhere; however, even Brian McConnachie, who is vice-chairman of the Faculty of Advocates criminal bar association and someone who has been quite critical of the First Minister, said in The Times that, with regard to certification, it would be very difficult to argue that we should have something different here. Even those who might disagree with Lord McCluskey’s direction of travel or this Government’s desires recognise that this issue has to be addressed.

That is precisely why we are having this debate. Labour members cannot have it both ways; I do not think that they can criticise us for not providing an opportunity to discuss matters and then criticise us for having this debate at all. If we were not having this debate, the issues would not be brought out. I am sure that Lord McCluskey and his colleagues will consider these issues over the summer as they receive further evidence and representations, and it is a tribute to them that they have come along to listen to the debate. The points that have been raised will undoubtedly be borne in mind. A number of Opposition members have clearly taken some comfort from the suggestion that the report does not go in the direction that would be taken by a Government in an independent Scotland. However, we should recognise that the current direction of travel—that the current situation is untenable and that we have to make progress—is becoming the majority position and has certainly been endorsed by Lord McCluskey and his colleagues. David McLetchie seemed to be hiding behind the fact that there are clearly differences between Lord McCluskey’s review and the report of the Advocate General’s expert group. However, let me be quite clear: the review group report has taken explicit account of the work that the Advocate General’s advisers have carried out and, in doing so, has developed and moved beyond that analysis. The review group has identified what it has described as “a striking anomaly” in the current arrangement governing leave to appeal and I am sure that Johann Lamont will take that point on board. As the report makes clear, there is no evident reason why the High Court of Justiciary should be subject to a regime that is significantly different from that which applies in England and Wales and in Northern Ireland. Despite a clarity of insight that identified the root of the problems in the Scotland Bill, the Advocate General’s advisers did not pursue the full implications of their analysis. What was lacking from the advice on which the Advocate General based the amendments that were tabled to the Scotland Bill was a proper exploration of the discrepancy in which leave to appeal can be granted. Those are crucial points of detail. The review group’s work was robust and convincing, and it is practical in its application. The speeches from this morning’s debate tell me that I am not alone in thinking that, and I am confident and convinced that the further work that the group intends to do over the summer will produce further refinements to its advice, which will provide a sound, reliable basis on which more relevant legislative changes to the Scotland Bill than are currently on offer from the UK Government can be pursued. That is another point that Ms Lamont must take on board. Those matters do not exist in isolation from what is happening elsewhere. The Advocate General—as trumpeted by Mr McLetchie—is tabling amendments to the Scotland Bill. If it is perceived that those amendments are deficient—and that is clearly the case, judging from what Lord McCluskey and many others have said—we require to ensure that appropriate further amendments are tabled. If we were not having this debate, there would be a danger of not having appropriate time to consider, reflect and prepare amendments. The matter cannot be delayed. There will doubtless have to be further discussions, whether they are on the report that is before us or on the Scotland Bill as it goes through Parliament. These matters require to be dealt with, in any event. I point out to Mr McLetchie that, as Lord McCluskey said, the Faculty of Advocates and the Scottish Human Rights Commission said that they were not really satisfied with the position—I think that Lord McCluskey took that on board. That point is being addressed. We must be conscious that there is a difficulty, and that is why the review group was set up. I say to Alison McInnes that the group was set up with terms of reference that were prescribed not by us but by Lord McCluskey. The group was not tasked simply with determining the matter of final appeals in Scotland; it was to consider how the Scottish legal system should be protected and how it can work in the current devolved system of the United Kingdom. Alison McInnes raised the question of an audit of Scots criminal law. It has previously been examined by the Crown, but the First Minister has said that, in his view, that would not necessarily be a bad idea. In discussion with the Lord Advocate, and once we have seen Lord Carloway’s review, we will be happy to consider where we can take that idea. John Lamont seemed to suggest that we should appoint a further Scottish judge to the United Kingdom Supreme Court. As was pointed out by Stewart Maxwell, we do not have that right—that is a matter that goes through formal procedures, which are not the responsibility of the Government. It is only a convention that there should be two Scottish judges in the court—there is nothing in statute about it. In any event, it is our understanding that, when the court sat, it was a bench of seven. That covers the position that we find ourselves in. The situation is not one that anybody anticipated—whether at the time of the signing of the treaty of union or at the time of drawing up the Scotland Bill that set up this institution. It is not a question of apportioning blame on individuals about where we are; it is about realising that there is a fundamental concern. The Cadder position caused concern and, whatever Graeme Pearson might say about Salduz v Turkey, the matter had been considered by a High Court of seven judges in Scotland, and the position was accepted as being appropriate in Scots law and as being compliant. That started not under my Administration, but when there was a Liberal-Labour Administration. No justice secretary and no Lord Advocate under that previous Administration thought that the Scots judges were out of kilter. For those parties to criticise the Scottish judges for not acting, when they formed the Administration, is frankly unacceptable. There is an issue there. Scots law has to be given parity with jurisdictions elsewhere in the United Kingdom. That is accepted by the likes of Brian McConnachie, who is no supporter of either myself or, indeed, the First Minister. The Supreme Court has a role in a devolved Scotland, as we accept, until that is changed by the outcome of a referendum. It should be for the High Court of Justiciary ultimately to apply the law in Scotland. Matters can be considered and the law decided by the Supreme Court; the ultimate applier of it in Scotland has to be the High Court of Justiciary. That is what was meant when we signed up to the treaty of union. That is what was meant when we signed up to the Scotland Act 1998 and to forming this Parliament. That is what was meant when the Human Rights Act 1998 was passed and the Supreme Court was established. That is why there has to be change. That is why this matter has been brought before the chamber.

The Scottish Government brought forward the legislation enabling the appointment of fines enforcement officers and fully supports the Scottish Court Service’s robust approach to the enforcement of financial penalties. Payment rates are improving all the time as offenders realise that they cannot hide from their responsibility to pay their fines. In addition, we have commissioned an independent evaluation of the fines enforcement process to explore the effectiveness of the provisions and inform further developments in practice.

Operational responsibility for the collection of fiscal fines is a matter for the Scottish Court Service, which is an entirely separate body. As the Scottish Court Service has explained, collection rates for fines that are imposed vary, and the point refers to individuals. These are matters in which we have to strike a balance. There are those who might be described as dysfunctional and on whom it might be difficult to impose a fiscal fine. Equally, it would be perverse if they were to be put through a system that would not necessarily apply to others. As I said, there is a matter of balance. We must allow those at the front line in the court system to exercise discretion. The constable must exercise discretion in the first place, and the sheriff must exercise discretion with regard to the issuing of fiscal fines. They must consider the circumstances relating to the offence, the effect on the victim and the situation of the perpetrator. The current review will seek to improve matters. In discussion with the Scottish Court Service, we are always open to new and innovative measures, such as confiscating vehicles, as well as simply enforcing the fine.

The Scottish Government has no plans to legislate for the election rather than appointment of judges.

Yes. I am grateful for the tenor of Margo MacDonald’s reply. Earlier, the chamber united in its sympathy for the loss of Lord Rodger of Earlsferry, and I think that there is a measure of respect between ourselves and the judiciary.

I thank Margaret Mitchell for securing this debate and I thank members for their thoughtful and helpful contributions. It is probably remiss that the issue has not been debated in Parliament to date. That is not the fault of any individual. We have had the opportunity in Government and Opposition debates to discuss it, but other issues have taken priority. As Margaret Mitchell and others have said, the issue is important. I join her in thanking John McNeill and his staff for all their hard work and effort. I meet John regularly—I met him last week. I have not had the opportunity to meet all of his staff, but I put on record the Government’s gratitude for the good work that they have done. They have improved matters immensely. As I stated to John McNeill last week, it is not just that they deal with the issues that come before them; their good work and efforts have resulted in improvements to how the police deal with issues internally. It is a win-win situation. It is important that we put on record the improvement in standards that has come about and the importance of the staff. I recognise the difficulties that have been caused by the uncertainty, and I am sorry about that. What I can say about Margaret Mitchell’s motion is that not only do I welcome her bringing it here, but it has merit. It is undeniably the case that policing is unique as regards the ability to take away people’s liberty and the knock-on effect that that can have on people’s employability, as well as on other factors. The behaviour of the police and the ability to scrutinise them are fundamental in the democracy in which we live, so I fully accept that aspect. We have to recognise that things are changing because of restructuring, and that offers challenges as well as opportunities. We have been chastised briefly about costs—I will not bandy about the cost of elected police commissioners or anything else—but costs have to be taken into account. I recognise where we are. There has to be a review of the public sector landscape, and a review of the policing landscape is under way. It is important that we take our time to get it right.

That is certainly one idea, and I support many of Mr McLetchie’s comments. I have not yet formed a view on police reform, as he well knows. However, I recognise the imperative of making savings. The savings that can be made from any change within the PCCS are vastly different from the savings that can be made from police restructuring. In response to Ms McInnes, I say that savings need to be considered. Even small savings are important in these times, and indeed there are other costs to consider, too. We remain genuinely open-minded on the issue. We will not rush to a decision. No decision has been made about police reform, and we will take time to pause and reflect. We recognise that arguments in favour of a standalone body to handle police complaints are stronger under a single model. As Mr McLetchie well knows, I have argued that the case for a single model has strengthened, although it has not yet been made. I can give an assurance that we are genuinely open-minded. In response to Graeme Pearson’s valid point, I say that we have to keep the show on the road and maintain good services. I give the commitment that it is our intention, as I mentioned to John McNeill when I met him, to ask the PCCS to continue to do the excellent job that it does as we consider where to go with police reform and possible transfers of PCCS functions to the SPSO. The 2007 Crerar review proposed improvements to the complaints-handling system, including that the SPSO should oversee all public service complaints-handling processes. In 2008, the Sinclair review made similar recommendations about reducing the number of standalone complaints-handling bodies. That was three years ago. I have always been sympathetic to the principle, as set out in the Sinclair review, of simplifying public service complaints handling. The current work on the future of policing in Scotland provides the ideal opportunity to review how best that should be done. Given the important nature of the issue, at the end of last year I sought stakeholders’ views on the proposal to move the functions of the PCCS to the SPSO. A variety of opinions were gathered, and organisations took different views. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland is open-minded about the proposals and recognises that they are based on current financial pressures. It emphasises the significant corporate knowledge and experience of the PCCS. It is important that those are not lost. We take those matters and others on board. The short-life working group has representatives from the PCCS, the SPSO, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body—because of the significance of the issue—and the Scottish Government. I am grateful to all members of the group for their professional and positive contributions. I am also grateful to the commissioner for his on-going work, and indeed his fortitude in continuing with the matters under consideration. It is important that we acknowledge that circumstances have changed because of the requirement to change the public sector landscape. Circumstances have also changed because of the likelihood of police reform. Although I have not indicated a final outcome, I think that we all acknowledge that the landscape will not stay the same. It is appropriate that we take the time to get things right.

That follows from the logic of what I have said. I cannot give any guarantees on timescales, because I have obligations to the staff—as Margaret Mitchell and others have said. We are driving on as fast as we can with police reform, and the issue will be coming back at the end of the summer. We will have to consider the issue carefully—bearing in mind the fundamentally important points that Margaret Mitchell and others have made. The matter is not yet decided, but I put on record that some matters will have to change. We have to get things right. We will use the summer to hear people’s views. I am grateful to Margaret Mitchell for bringing this matter to Parliament, and I am grateful to John McNeill and his staff for the good work that they do. Long may it continue. Meeting closed at 17:36.

The impact of Scotland’s excessive alcohol consumption is estimated to cost Scots £3.5 billion each year, which includes crime costs of more than £700 million. The evidence is already clear on the link between alcohol consumption and crime. We know that more than three quarters of young offenders in 2009 said that they were drunk at the time of the offence, and we know that youth disorder and antisocial behaviour remains a serious issue in communities. We took steps to tackle that through the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, and we used the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 to make improvements to help licensing boards to use the 2005 act to its full effect. For instance, we introduced the mandatory “no proof of age, no sale” measure, banned promotions of alcohol likely to appeal to young people and increased the penalties for selling alcohol to children. The 2005 act also permits Scottish police forces to use alcohol test purchasing as an enforcement tool, and it is used in a targeted, intelligence-based way, mainly to enforce licensing law in relation to off-sales. We believe that a minimum price per unit of alcohol would be the most effective and efficient way to tackle alcohol misuse in Scotland.

I do. There are two issues. One is cheap alcohol, which is far too readily available. That is why my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy coined the phrase “pocket-money prices”. There is something ridiculous about that. Equally, Mr Dey makes the valid point that parents must take responsibility for their children. They have a significant role to play in addition to all of us, as parliamentarians, taking action against the scourge of cheap high-strength alcohol.

I am not aware of the particular schemes in the west of Scotland that Mr Kelly refers to, but I am aware of the schemes that have been operated by Lothian and Borders Police in the city of Edinburgh. Such schemes are worth while. Many of them are down to operational matters. I am more than happy to take on board any advice that Mr Kelly or others have, but it is certainly my understanding that such schemes are on-going across the country and are used in a targeted way when it is seen as proportionate to employ them. We fully support them.

I recognise the dedication of visiting committee members and the important work that they carry out. As the Parliament will be aware, in January and February we consulted formally on the most effective way in which to provide independent monitoring of prisons. The consultation received a significant number of detailed submissions and we are currently considering them. We will, of course, publish a formal response when that process is complete.

I am not able to give a precise timetable at the moment. I want to see the information that comes back. Dr Simpson obviously is opposed to integration with HM inspectorate of prisons, but I have not made up my mind on the matter. Some people are opposed, and some think that it is important that we reduce the amount of duplication. What I can say at the outset is that I recognise the important role played by prison visiting committees. It is correct and appropriate that they should be independent—otherwise, they would be neutered. We have to consider where they stand in the public sector landscape, and I will happily keep Dr Simpson appraised as we move towards a timescale.

Yes, I do. It is the right of every prisoner to be treated fairly and in line with prison guidance. They are entitled to such treatment notwithstanding the fact that they are serving a sentence. Prisoners should also have the right to contact an independent service and be able to raise any issues that they have about how they are treated, with the confidence that if the case is upheld the issues will be resolved effectively. I am grateful for the service that Maureen Watt gave as a member of a visiting committee, and I remain committed to what was carried out by her and is carried out by serving colleagues.

We recognise that those who have been a victim of a miscarriage of justice may face particular challenges on their release from custody. Local authorities have a statutory duty to provide voluntary throughcare such as advice, guidance and assistance to people who request it within 12 months of their release from custody. That includes those who are released from custody following a miscarriage of justice. The Government has protected the funding that is provided to the Miscarriages of Justice Organisation Scotland. We are making £66,000 available again this year, which will enable MOJO Scotland to provide a one-stop service to assist miscarriage of justice victims in gaining access to benefits, housing, health services, counselling and financial aid, with the aim of helping victims to reintegrate into society.

That is a valid point. Cabinet colleagues and I will be happy to look at what we can do. These are difficult financial times. I know that MOJO has a particular desire for respite-type facilities. Funding is difficult and limited across the country, as we have seen from those who have sought to raise funding for Combat Stress. As I said, Mr Doris’s point is valid and appropriate, and I am happy to take it on board.

At the request of Home Office ministers, the Security Industry Authority is leading work on developing a framework for a new regulatory regime and is working closely with all stakeholders, including the Scottish Government. I met the Home Secretary on 14 September 2010 and the chair and chief executive of the SIA on 18 November 2010 to discuss their proposals. In addition, my officials have been meeting and corresponding regularly with the Home Office and the SIA in taking the proposals forward. Since October 2010, they have met on 10 separate occasions. I also wrote to the Home Secretary on 14 October 2010, 8 November 2010, 12 January 2011 and 21 March 2011 outlining my views on the proposed new regulatory regime.

I know how much of an interest Derek Mackay has taken in this matter; indeed, he is right to be concerned. We as an Administration have previously made clear both our feeling that a strong regulatory regime is necessary and our opposition to the SIA’s abolition. To be fair, I think that a review is taking place south of the border. We welcome that, but our fundamental view is that there must be regulation. One way of tackling the problem of serious organised crime is to have a regulated regime, especially in the area of security, where we continue to experience some difficulties. I assure the member that we will not allow that aspect of life not to be regulated, and if we can take that approach across the whole of the UK in conjunction with the Home Office we will be happy to do so. That said, we reserve the right to act independently if we feel that the good standard of safety in our communities is under threat.

I welcome that commitment and I will be happy to keep Johann Lamont and her party colleagues appraised. I think that all members regard the current approach as necessary for the safety of our communities. Johann Lamont’s point is correct. As an Administration, we have met not only counterparts south of the border—we are grateful for the review that they seem to be carrying out—but representatives of the legitimate trade, if I can put it that way, in this country, who are concerned about the situation. Obviously, we also meet the police and Crown representatives. I welcome Johann Lamont’s commitment and we will keep her fully appraised. If we need to strike out alone on this matter, we will not hesitate to do so. However, if we can ensure that matters are dealt with adequately within existing structures, we will be happy to remain where we are.

The Government acted immediately following the Cadder decision to bring forward emergency legislation to enshrine a suspect’s right of access to legal advice before and during interview by the police. To give effect to that right, the Government brought forward regulations earlier this year to place a duty on the Scottish Legal Aid Board to arrange for solicitors to be available for the purpose of providing advice and assistance to any suspects in police custody. Those regulations come into force on 4 July. In order to take the duty forward, the Scottish Legal Aid Board has been in discussions with the Law Society of Scotland about setting up a police station duty scheme. The scheme will ensure that solicitors are available to advise suspects prior to and during police questioning, and will provide a single point of contact for the police when suspects have requested advice. The scheme will provide significant improvements for the police and prosecution, as well as for suspects.

The member raises several matters. I am surprised at her criticism of the independence of the Public Defence Solicitors Office, given that a Labour Administration established it. I believe that the procedures are clearly compliant with the European convention on human rights. I am not aware of any difficulties in that regard. The PDSO acts in the interests of those who face prosecution, which mirrors exactly the impartial way in which the Crown acts. On dealing with matters within an hour, if only that were the case. It currently takes an average of two hours 54 minutes to secure initial solicitor advice, usually by telephone. I think that if there was a question of that being restricted to one hour, the police would be heartily cheered by that. As I have said, it is appropriate to strike a balance. I am aware that some solicitors in private practice are dissatisfied with the situation, but it is not of our making. However, we are required to act to preserve good order. The current position is supported by the police and the Crown, and it provides a legitimate balance between protecting the rights of a suspect who is being detained and charged, and protecting the rights of the wider community, which also needs to be borne in mind.

The combination of tough enforcement backed by education is the key to tackling knife crime and violence in our communities, and under this Government that strategy is paying off. Crimes of handling offensive weapons have plummeted by 30 per cent since 2006-07, while in 2009-10 the average sentence length in Scotland for handling an offensive weapon was nine months, the longest for a decade and four months longer than that in England and Wales. We will continue to press home that successful strategy with the violence reduction unit and other partners, because any knife incident, with its damaging effects on Scottish communities, is still one too many.

I am rather bemused by Mr McMahon’s argument, as I thought that he would support the legislation that we discussed at stage 1 earlier today. I remind him that we face difficulties and challenges in this country regarding the carrying of knives. We do not underestimate the booze and blades culture, as my predecessor called it, but we are making progress. A record number of stop and searches has revealed that fewer people are carrying, more are getting caught and those who are getting caught are going to jail for longer.

In 2007 we set out to build a safer and stronger Scotland. Working with the police, prosecutors, prisons and other justice partners, we made significant progress across the justice portfolio. Crime rates fell by a fifth and are now lower than they have ever been over the past 32 years. Eighty thousand fewer crimes are recorded by the police each year. The incidence of violent crime is down by 11 per cent, to its lowest level for 25 years. Serious assaults are down by 14 per cent; robberies are down 16 per cent; and knife crime is down by a third. We are on a journey to replace ineffective short sentences with tough and effective community sentences. The incidence of domestic violence is falling, but it remains a major concern. Parliament legislated to modernise the law on civil protection orders against domestic abuse, and we took action to close a loophole in breach of the peace and to modernise the law on sexual offences. We are proud of that record, and we are proud that the strategic direction that we set is paying dividends. We are proud that the extra 1,000 police officers in local communities are making Scotland safer. However, we are not complacent, and there is a considerable journey still to travel. Now, in the second term of a Scottish National Party Government, we will build on that progress and advance our justice agenda with determination and vigour. Working with our justice partners, we will do the right thing for the people of Scotland, and we will strive for an inclusive and respectful society. Last season was not a football season to remember, and we are taking immediate and decisive action: a bill will soon be introduced that strengthens the law on sectarian and other offensive behaviour at football matches and outlaws threatening communications, giving the police and procurators fiscal clearer and tougher powers. At the same time, we are working with the police and the football authorities to deliver the eight commitments that were agreed at the football summit that was held in March. Along with the proposed bill, that can bring about real and lasting change. Racism, bigotry and sectarianism are not welcome here. We must now look to the future and focus on how we can make Scotland the country that we all want it to be: a diverse and inclusive society in which all members are accepted and able to flourish. Over the past four years we have made progress in tackling violence, gangs and knife crime. However, even one life lost to knife crime is one too many. Last weekend in Greenock and Airdrie, two more young lives were tragically cut short in knife-related incidents. I offer my sincere sympathy to those who have lost loved ones to this horrific crime. Fewer people carry knives. Of those who carry knives, more are being caught, and they are being given sentences that are longer than ever before. I am absolutely clear that we all need to continue working in a united way to tackle Scotland’s blade culture wherever and however it occurs. Initiatives such as the community initiative to reduce violence gangs project in Glasgow and our no knives, better lives campaign are equipping young people to move towards positive alternatives to violence, and many local groups work tirelessly to rid their communities of knife crime. We cannot and will not let up in our collective efforts to stop violence in all its forms, and we will continue to work with the Crown, the violence reduction unit and other partners to tackle the issue. We look forward to working together—we hope—across the chamber. In our first term, we made dealing with organised criminal gangs a priority. Under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, we took more than £40 million from organised criminal gangs and caused significant disruption to their criminal activities. Having recovered those significant sums of money, we were able to reinvest them to allow more than 600,000 young people to enjoy and benefit from a wide range of sporting, cultural and youth activities. We remain committed to the cashback scheme, and I hope that other parties’ previous support for it remains strong. We must provide an alternative outlet for all our young people. However, we can do more. Currently, there is an annual limit of £30 million on money raised under the proceeds of crime legislation. We will open negotiations with the United Kingdom Government to remove that limit so that all money seized from criminals can be invested in our communities. Previously, members of other political parties supported that approach, and we hope that that will be replicated. We will also introduce new serious crime prevention orders to restrict the activities of those with known criminal connections in order to prevent serious organised crime and protect the public—especially hard-working Scottish men and women. We will continue to support the police to disrupt and dismantle organised crime across Scotland. That includes support for the Scottish crime campus at Gartcosh, which will bring together all the agencies responsible for tackling serious organised crime. We are on track for occupation of the campus in 2012. On youth justice, to tackle crime over the long term we must reduce the number of young people coming into the justice system in the first place, and we are doing just that. The roll-out of early and effective intervention for young people across Scotland demonstrates an effective approach to addressing young people’s offending behaviour. Offence referrals to the children’s reporter are reducing year on year, with a 40 per cent reduction over the past four years. We welcome the actions taken by many local authority partners in providing the early intervention and wrap-around care that prevent young people from coming into the justice system. We will continue to promote targeted and robust early interventions for all under-18s across Scotland. As I said at the outset, we are proud of having delivered an extra 1,000 police officers in our communities—extra police who we believe have been pivotal in helping to deliver the lowest recorded crime levels in 32 years. However, we face unprecedented Westminster cuts. We will continue to improve and reform the way in which our public services are delivered, and that must include the police and fire and rescue services. Before Parliament was dissolved for the election, I indicated that there was a broad consensus across the chamber—apart from a small minority—that maintaining eight police forces and eight fire and rescue services was unsustainable. That situation remains the same, but we look forward to working with colleagues to ensure that we can deliver that reform and that the services are even more engaged with and accountable to the diverse communities that they serve. In recent meetings with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Police Federation, police board conveners and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I have made it clear that the case for a single force has strengthened. However, legitimate concerns and worries remain about centralisation, accountability and governance. We will seek to find answers to those concerns over the summer, and I will return to the chamber to address the matter in the autumn. It is not only police and fire and rescue services that will be reformed. We are determined to make our justice system more accessible, more affordable and quicker. Before the election, Parliament debated Lord Gill’s recommendations, and we will take them forward and remove obstacles that hinder and inhibit access to justice. Justice must be available to everyone, irrespective of their wealth. We will ensure that legal aid is available to those who need it most and we will discuss with stakeholders how best to target resources. As with actions that were taken in the previous session, we look forward to working with Opposition parties on how we can best implement Lord Gill’s reforms. This is not a party-political or ideological matter; it is about rolling out work that has been carried out by one of our most senior judges, supported by many other able people and, as I said, I look forward to continuing to work with Opposition parties on it. The most important people in the criminal justice system are victims, although they have often been forgotten. In our first term, we made progress on rebalancing the justice system in favour of victims, and I again pay tribute to my former colleague, the previous Lord Advocate, who drove that agenda forward in the previous session and as Solicitor General and Lord Advocate under a previous Administration. We are determined to build on that work. We will introduce a victims’ rights bill to enshrine in law a victim’s right to damages and compensation and to give victims input into sentencing policy and parole decisions, a matter that was raised by an Opposition member in the previous session. We look forward to working with colleagues across the chamber as we progress those important reforms. They are vital but, as with many things, the devil is in the detail, and there are complexities within them. I hope that we can share details with Opposition colleagues and seek to reach consensus and an agreement, because I do not believe that anyone in any party in this chamber does not wish to progress the rights of victims, whether in relation to parole, sentencing or any other issue. Other matters must also be addressed, such as the law of damages. Our ambition for Scotland is also about the framework of rights and obligations that make a fair and just society. Earlier this year, Parliament unanimously passed legislation to modernise the law on civil protection orders against domestic abuse and on damages for wrongful death—Bill Butler and Rhoda Grant deserve great credit for those pieces of legislation. The damages legislation should bring benefits—emotional and financial—to the victims and their families, where negligence and a breach of a duty of care results in premature death. I am pleased to tell Parliament that a commencement order is being made shortly to bring that legislation into force on 7 July. We will build on that momentum and—with input from stakeholders, not least the Scottish Law Commission—further reform our civil law. Recent court decisions have drawn attention to the way in which the Scotland Act 1998 explicitly subjected the Scottish criminal courts to London oversight. That was never intended, whether in the treaty of union or the 1998 act. Those decisions have resulted in major and hugely expensive changes to our criminal justice system. In contrast to the position of other jurisdictions in Europe, those changes were forced on Scotland without our being given an opportunity to put before the court at Strasbourg the context of a legal system that carefully protects a person’s human rights. Conversely, the UK Supreme Court can intervene even in Scottish cases of no general significance because, unlike in England, there is no mechanism to restrict it to cases in which public importance has been certified. Although our view is that the Scottish courts should make the final decision in Scottish criminal cases, the issue requires careful and objective examination, which is why we have appointed a review group of the highest calibre, which will consider the roles of the Scottish courts and the UK Supreme Court, and develop options for reform. That group is now at work. Taking Scotland forward is about giving our young people the best chance to succeed in life, protecting front-line services and doing what works. Making Scotland safer and stronger is an ambition that we all share. If we are innovative and creative and we work collectively as a Parliament, we can realise that ambition and help Scotland to achieve its full potential.

Section 4 will permit the retrial of an acquitted person when that person was originally prosecuted in the High Court and new evidence strongly suggests that the case should be retried. Amendment 2 is a minor technical change that is designed to make it clear that that exception covers acquittals secured not only at the original trial, but on appeal. Amendments 3 and 4 are minor technical amendments inspired by a question that was raised by Robert Brown at stage 2, when he queried whether the reference in section 9 to “justice of the peace” covered stipendiary magistrates. After reflecting on his point, we think that there is a potential gap and that it would be worth making a small modification. The amendment adopts the language used in the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007, which refers to “justice of the peace courts” rather than to individual justices of the peace. The change makes it completely clear that stipendiary magistrates are covered by the provision. I am grateful to Mr Brown. I move amendment 2. Amendment 2 agreed to. Section 9—Plea in bar of trial: nullity of previous trial Amendments 3 and 4 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to. After section 12

Amendment 1 ensures that the statutory rules of disclosure of evidence apply to all double jeopardy matters. When this Parliament passed the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, it agreed that the common-law system of disclosure of evidence in criminal proceedings should be placed on a statutory footing. Part 6 of the 2010 act is due to be commenced in June this year. There will be three stages in a double jeopardy case. The first stage is the original trial and any appeal that follows it. The second stage is the application to the High Court for authority to prosecute again. The third stage, assuming that the High Court consents, is the subsequent trial. The provisions of part 6 of the 2010 act will apply to any trial in a double jeopardy case. No amendments are required to ensure that those rules apply to any such trial, but amendment 1 seeks to ensure that the scheme will also apply to the application procedure. Amendment 1 is not fundamental to the bill. Disclosure at the application stage would take place under the common law if the amendment is not agreed to. However, we believe that, where possible, it is right to ensure that disclosure in any criminal proceedings is governed by the same framework. The application process is a new procedure and it is important to ensure that fairness to the accused is preserved. Disclosure of evidence is key to ensuring that fairness. Amendment 1 is lengthy and detailed, but let me be clear about what it does. It does not change the way in which disclosure of evidence is made under the 2010 act; it simply ensures that the principles and procedures in the 2010 act apply in the same way to double jeopardy applications. Despite its length, the amendment does nothing more than that. Amendment 1 introduces six new sections into part 6 of the 2010 act. New section 140A is an interpretation section. New section 140B introduces a prosecutor’s duty to disclose information that was not previously provided in earlier proceedings. That is particularly important in double jeopardy situations in which, for example, the application is based on the discovery of new evidence. It is important that the accused has sight of that new evidence at the application stage. New section 140C ensures that the prosecutor has a continuing duty to disclose information throughout the application stage. New section 140D provides that the prosecutor must respond to further requests for disclosure of information that are made by the respondent during the application stage. New section 140E allows the respondent to apply to the court to rule on a disputed issue of whether particular information should be disclosed. Finally, if new information becomes available, new section 140F provides further opportunities for the respondent to apply to the court for a review of any previous ruling on disclosure. Those new sections mirror what part 6 of the 2010 act already provides for in other criminal proceedings. They ensure that disclosure in double jeopardy applications is carried out in a consistent way. The absence of disclosure provisions was discussed in the stage 1 evidence sessions before the Justice Committee. At stage 2, I advised the committee that I would lodge amendments on disclosure. Though confident that the statutory scheme applied to the trial stages in double jeopardy cases, we considered that, in light of the evidence sessions, some amendment to the recently enacted 2010 act would be required to ensure that the statutory scheme also applied to the application stage. As members can see from this group of amendments, applying disclosure to double jeopardy is a technical and complex matter. The amendments have to fit in accordance with the provisions that are already contained in part 6 of the 2010 act. Furthermore, key principles of the bill were still being debated at stage 2, and the shape of the bill could have changed. For example, issues such as the merging of sections 3 and 4, the introduction of an application stage to section 11 and the type of offences that the new evidence section should cover were all being considered. All those changes could have required a rewrite of any disclosure amendments that were made at stage 2. Accordingly, the Government considered that it would be more appropriate to resolve those matters first, before inserting disclosure amendments at this stage. Given the detail of part 6 of the 2010 act and the fact that we have introduced a new procedure in the bill, it is not possible to translate disclosure into a single-line amendment. It is important that we follow as closely as possible the disclosure process that is already enacted and do not create a new and unintended approach. When discussing the bill, members of all parties have recognised that in allowing exceptions to the double jeopardy rule, fairness to the accused must be preserved. Amendment 1 provides an additional safeguard to ensure that that aim is met. Amendment 5 provides a power to make transitional provisions for the bill, so that the Scottish ministers can ensure a smooth transition from the common-law rules on disclosure that may have applied in a trial some time ago to the new disclosure regime under the 2010 act that will apply where a double jeopardy application is made. The power is restricted to making transitional provision that is necessary or expedient in consequence of the disclosure provisions in the bill only; it cannot be used in relation to any other aspect of the bill. Amendment 6 makes a series of consequential amendments to the 2010 act, which follow from amendment 1. For example, it ensures that the question of disclosing sensitive information that is relevant to a double jeopardy application can be considered by the court, which provides a safeguard for the fair treatment of the respondent’s position. The consequential amendments are necessary to ensure that the statutory disclosure scheme applies consistently throughout part 6 of the 2010 act to double jeopardy applications in the same way that it does to other criminal proceedings. I move amendment 1.

I am pleased that, at the end of the parliamentary session, we will complete what is an important reform. The Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill, the final piece of legislation that the Parliament will consider in the current session, can be traced back to a debate at the end of the previous session. On 22 February 2007, the Scottish National Party, together with the Conservatives, made the case for reform of double jeopardy. In a thought-provoking debate, a number of weighty points were made and there was general agreement that the issue necessitated careful study. The parties comprising the then Administration argued against making a commitment to reform, but I am pleased that they have now joined us in a widespread consensus that change is needed. I welcome the support for the bill in the Justice Committee and today in the chamber. Later that year, as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I asked the Scottish Law Commission to consider possible reforms in four complex areas of criminal procedure. That was a substantial piece of work. Each issue that was referred to the commission covered difficult technical questions of law and required the balancing of the many and often competing concerns of fairness to victims, fairness to the accused and fairness to society. The proposed reforms prompted searching questions about the type of criminal justice system that we want for Scotland. Such a substantial review could never have been undertaken lightly, and it was not. It required an enormous amount of careful fact finding, consultation and analysis. The Scottish Law Commission responded to my challenge with its customary diligence. The Government and Parliament have seized and built on the commission’s work and have made great progress in a remarkably short period. On Monday, the first part of the project—the reform establishing a Crown right of appeal—will become law. I think that all members welcome that, as the current situation is an anachronism. The measure will allow prosecutors to challenge decisions by judges to end a trial before the case can go to a jury. It will permit contested decisions that there is no case to answer to be challenged—an innovation that I am sure all members welcome. Again, I record my appreciation for the unanimity that the Parliament showed when that measure was passed. We now have before us the fruits of the second part of the reference, in the form of the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill. The commission is conducting a consultation on the rest of the project, to consider the use of evidence of similar conduct and the admissibility of evidence on previous convictions. That will be a matter for a future Parliament to consider. It is one of three proposals that the Lord Advocate raised some time ago, on the Crown right of appeal, double jeopardy and evidence of similar fact. When we conclude the bill, we will have delivered two out of those three proposals. The commission’s current work is an even more complex task. In essence, it focuses on the extent to which the accused’s past conduct should be brought to the attention of the jury. The use of evidence of similar fact involves the difficult balance of considering the value of certain information as evidence, but weighing up whether its usage would be unfairly prejudicial. We expect the commission’s final report on that to be published by the end of the year. I have no doubt that the Parliament in the next session, whatever the Administration is, will wish to assess that report. On behalf of my Administration, I confirm that we have a desire to implement the recommendations in that report. In reforming double jeopardy, we have built on the commission’s work through a public consultation and by considering the Justice Committee’s thorough evidence taking and analysis. We have taken on board most of the commission’s recommendations, but we have gone further by including a general exception for new evidence; by applying the exception to a wider range of serious cases; and by extending it to historical crimes. I am convinced that those changes are right as a matter of public policy and I am grateful that members have supported them. They were discussed and debated in the Justice Committee. I understand where the commission came from, but I believe that the position that has been adopted is correct and takes on board wider views in our society. The bill achieves a careful balance, as it must. It weighs up the rights of the accused and the broader rights of victims in communities. It upholds and enshrines the ancient principle of double jeopardy and restates it comprehensively and in modern terms. That is appropriate because it is only in a few exceptions that cases will arise. As much as I agree with what was said earlier about the importance and benefit of our common law, it is important that from time to time we enshrine certain things in statute. It is appropriate that we enshrine in statute the accused’s right, in the normal course of events, not to face a subsequent trial. The legislation provides for some strictly limited exceptions in which there is a clear and compelling case for a new trial. In short, it will—as it should—permit a trial tainted by threats or corruption to be re-run. It will allow a new trial when evidence, such as an admission or DNA material, emerges, demanding a new look at the case—the public expect no less. It will also clarify the rules that apply when a victim dies after a trial for assault. I am pleased that the reforms in the bill have near-unanimous support. The Justice Committee has made a significant and thorough contribution to the development of the bill. My amendments at stage 2 responded positively to many points aired at stage 1. The scrutiny and the resulting amendments have improved the bill. As Mr Kelly and Mr Aitken commented, many amendments are lengthy but relatively simple. Unfortunately, we require to state the changes at length. Together, we have raised the test for assessing admissions; we have restricted new evidence retrials to cases previously decided by the High Court; and, today, we have improved the disclosure regime that applies to the bill. I look forward to hearing members’ views on the bill and thank them for the manner in which they have worked with us in committee and elsewhere. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill be passed.

This has been a remarkably consensual debate, as it should have been for two reasons: first, because it has dealt with the final bill that the Parliament will pass in the current parliamentary session; and secondly, because the Parliament has, in the main, united around the subject. A great many thanks have been given, and I echo each and every one. As I mentioned in my opening speech, the bill started back in 2007. The issue was raised and commented on by John Lamont and Bill Aitken on behalf of the Conservative party, and we have been happy to work with the Conservatives throughout the bill process. Indeed, John Scott, who is not in the chamber, raised the issue before the bill process commenced. We recognise that we have come into politics to make Scotland a safer place, and nobody from any political party believes that the bill stands to make Scotland a less safe place or that we would have put forward proposals that would undermine our judiciary, our legal system or the rights of victims. We may disagree on some solutions—indeed, there will be hectic debates on the constitution, the economy and justice matters—but the debate has shown the Parliament at its best and has highlighted the genuine respect with which we can come together to make Scotland a safer place. There have been disagreements, and not simply between members of the Parliament. For example, the Parliament disagreed with the Scottish Law Commission, which I believe was appropriate. That is not to undermine the Law Commission, which undertook a tremendous piece of work—I echo what other members have said about our great debt of gratitude to Patrick Layden and all those who work with the Law Commission. Nevertheless, we were correct in taking on board the view of many and the broader views of Parliament that retrospectivity, for example, had to be addressed. I echo Stewart Maxwell’s comments on that. I pay tribute not simply to all those who have contributed to today’s debate, but to all those who have worked towards the passing of the bill. I echo the remarks that have been made about Bill Aitken. He has been thorough and has often been challenging, as I would have expected, but equally he has shown good grace and, more often than not, good humour. The election will decide Robert Brown’s fate, but I pay tribute to his service. He has been diligent both as a minister and as an Opposition spokesperson. The Government has often had the opportunity to work with him when we have shared his views; where we have disagreed, it has been on points of principle. I wish him well, whatever the outcome of the election may be. As I said, the bill started its long journey back in 2007, when much public interest was raised by the Lord Advocate’s statement in the chamber following the collapse of the World’s End case. Changes have already been made by this Parliament. The Lord Advocate raised three issues that arose as a consequence of that case. The first issue was the Crown’s right of appeal, which the chamber has addressed. It was wrong that the Crown was fettered in a way that meant that matters could go unchallenged and justice could not be done, at times. The Parliament was right to rise to that challenge. The second issue was double jeopardy, which I hope that we will address at decision time today. A matter remains outstanding around the issue of evidence of similar fact or bad character. That will be canvassed in the electoral debates and is being investigated by the Law Commission as we speak. I have no doubt that it will come back to this chamber to be decided on at a later stage. However, I think that that represents progress. As has been mentioned, the provision that we are dealing with today will be used in only an extremely small number of cases. Richard Baker mentioned the situation south of the border, where the numbers are still capable of being counted on two hands. The provision is not to be used lightly; it is to be used sparingly. As John Lamont and others mentioned, it involves a principle that goes back over centuries in our common law and of which we are all proud. However, as James Kelly and others mentioned, it is important that we make changes to reflect scientific changes and the changes in the media. If scientific changes show that there has been a manifest injustice, that has to be acted on. Equally, if people are found to be bragging in the modern media or it comes to light that they have subverted processes, action must be taken. All of us in this chamber meet youngsters and others to discuss issues. I am frequently asked what is the hardest part of my job, and I have to say that the hardest part of my job is meeting victims, and the hardest part of that part of my job is meeting victims who have received no justice. The buck stops with me, it stopped with my predecessors and it will stop with my successor, if there is to be one. It will be for them to decide. Doubtless, they will have to do exactly what I have done. However, the fact of the matter is that it is difficult to explain to someone that no action will be taken in a case in which there has been a manifest injustice, even though clear evidence has come to light. Justice must not only be done, it must be seen to be done. There will be instances where justice will not be done because of a lack of evidence, because witnesses cannot be found or simply because evidence cannot be gathered. However, where evidence is available, we cannot stand on ceremony. Clearly, we must ensure that the law balances the interests of the accused. The provisions will be used sparingly, but they are complex. As Mr Aitken and others mentioned, they could involve cases going back many years, and there could be issues around whether the evidence has been protected and preserved. At stage 1, Mr Brown asked how we can preserve evidence so that we can ensure that the accused has a fair chance. As I said, we are talking not about ensuring that someone is convicted, but about ensuring that there is an opportunity for a retrial; it will be for a judge and a jury to decide whether the evidence is sufficient to justify a conviction. The issue is about delivering justice. That is what we seek to do. I welcome the spirit in which the issues have been discussed. The issues are complex, particularly those around retrospectivity, which James Kelly and others mentioned. However, as Bill Aitken said, when we drill down, the issues become relatively simple. It is not sufficient simply to rest on the common law. Given that we have brought in disclosure in other legislation, it is important to ensure that it applies in relation to double jeopardy, even if only in a limited number of cases. As we all know, the issue of disclosure will be revisited by the Justice Committee and perhaps even by this chamber. It is a matter that causes me some angst and concern, especially when I see the amount of paperwork that hard-working police officers who carry out diligent inquiries into serious offences have to produce and the amount of bureaucracy that they have to deal with. I am not sure precisely what the solution is, because nobody—neither the police, nor the Crown nor anyone else—is seeking to make the process more difficult. However, at some stage, we have to have a review because, clearly, something is not correct. As members across the chamber have said, no Lord Advocate or High Court judge is ever going to assess the need for a new prosecution lightly. A double jeopardy retrial is designed for cases involving manifest injustice, where evidence that comes to light after the initial trial calls the acquittal at that trial into serious doubt. That is not to prejudge the outcome of any new trial: there will be a trial, and the normal rules and requirements for evidence will stand. Rather, it is about providing the fair trial that should have been: the one that was denied to the victim and to society because the full range of evidence was simply not available at that time, as Mike Pringle mentioned. The hardest job that any of us has to do is to meet a constituent or a citizen who has not been given justice for their family. To continue the existing law and close the door on all such cases would be to continue a situation that is simply incomprehensible and unacceptable to the public at large, and manifestly wrong. Once again, I express my thanks to all those who have been involved in the process: the Scottish Law Commission; those who responded to the Government’s consultation; members of the Justice Committee and those who gave evidence to it; and those in the clerking and bill teams who have done extremely diligent work. Together, we will deliver an important reform for the people of Scotland, which will promote confidence in our justice system and pursue persons who attempt to corrupt the trial process, brag about having escaped justice, undermine or suborn jurors or whatever else. As James Kelly and Bill Aitken mentioned, the tentacles of serious organised crime are dangerous and must be tackled, and those involved cannot be allowed to get away with their guilt. The reform will allow the fruits of new techniques and advances in science—which are spectacular—to be used to the utmost effect. It will allow justice to be done and to be seen to be done, and will deliver what victims want. That is the obligation on everyone who has the privilege of serving in this chamber. I once again thank all those members who have been involved—in particular those who will not be returning—for their service, not only in relation to the bill but in relation to the chamber, their constituents and the country.

Every murder is a tragedy, and my deepest sympathies are with Reamonn Gormley’s family and friends, as well as with the wider community. Reamonn was clearly an outstanding young man who had so much to offer. Every tragic incident and every life lost because of knife crime is one too many. The Scottish Government is committed to making Scotland a safer place in which to live and work. Latest statistics show progress. Crime in Scotland is at its lowest level in 32 years, the number of people killed by a sharp instrument is down 39 per cent over the past year and the number of people who have been caught carrying an offensive weapon is down to its lowest level in a decade. In South Lanarkshire, violent crime is down 12 per cent, and handling offensive weapons crimes are down 27 per cent. However, there is always more that can be done, which is why this Government will maintain 1,000 extra police officers on our streets, and it is why, last month, I announced a doubling of the funding for our no knives, better lives education campaign.

We appreciate that some areas in Scotland face significantly greater problems than other areas face. We must get matters into perspective; equally, we must remember particular problems and instances such as Mr McCabe mentioned. We are doing what we are doing. We are maintaining a significant police presence. More than a quarter of a million stop and searches have been carried out in Strathclyde alone, which disclosed that fewer people are carrying and more people are getting caught. The people who are caught are getting longer sentences, which is as it should be. The average sentence for a knife offence is nine months, and people who perpetrate serious offences such as murder face a mandatory life sentence, as of course they should do. We will work with the local authority, and discussions are on-going, to see how we can roll out the no knives, better lives programme, which has delivered remarkable success in Inverclyde, in areas that are equally blighted.

The work in Inverclyde has been successful and we hope to roll it out in South Lanarkshire—it is already being rolled out in Edinburgh, Clackmannan and Glasgow. It is appropriate that we train the trainers. Money to deal with the problems and consequences of knife offending is being provided to people who are involved in youth work in a variety of organisations.

The provisions for the community payback order have been in force for only a little over a month. The significant work that went into planning and preparing for implementation of community payback orders has so far enabled a smooth procedural transition from the existing system of community sentences. Recent snow clearing involved on average 1,314 low-level offenders, who worked 33,707 hours altogether. However, the long-term success of community payback orders will lie in their effectiveness in reducing reoffending in Scotland, which short prison sentences signally failed to do. As the member knows, three quarters of offenders imprisoned for three months or less reoffend within two years, whereas two thirds of those who receive community service orders do not.

I do not interfere in the independence of the judiciary, but I fully support any action that a sheriff feels it is necessary to take. If that is sending somebody who breaches a CPO to prison, so be it. Sheriffs have that right and face that obligation, so they have our full support. Equally, I remind the member that it costs £40,000 per annum to give somebody free bed and board. It is better that low-level offenders go out and do some hard work to repay the damage that they have done in our communities than that the taxpayer has to contribute to funding them.

I begin by reminding members that we are currently consulting on police and fire reform, and that both consultations are founded on an approach that protects local services in the face of unprecedented budget cuts and that gives local authorities and local communities a greater say on local priorities and services. The Liberal Democrats may wish to contribute to the consultation by press release, or indeed by megaphone diplomacy—that is a matter for them. Meanwhile, we will get on with consulting the key stakeholders. My colleague Fergus Ewing has been up meeting representatives of island councils. Just yesterday, we met the chief executive of Highland Council. I think that it is open to me to say that he will be contributing to the consultation, representing the majority view in the council. It would be fair to say that he accepts that the status quo is not tenable, and that it appears that Highland Council disagrees with the Liberal Democrat position that we do not need to change in the face of the unprecedented cuts. The chief executive will suggest, I think, that the majority view is for a regional model comprising four forces. Equally, I will be meeting not just the chief constable of Grampian Police but elected members and the chief executives of Aberdeenshire Council and Aberdeen City Council on Monday. I will be interested to hear their views and, in particular where they stand on the suggestion from Highland Council that Moray should be removed from Grampian Police and put into Northern Constabulary. I am happy to listen to the position and arguments for a regional model but, as I have said, there are questions that have to be overcome. A decision will be informed by the consultations and the work that Deputy Chief Constable Neil Richardson and Her Majesty’s fire service inspector Steven Torrie are taking forward, which will provide a professional and evidence-based view on the most effective and efficient way in which to deliver police and fire services in Scotland.

I have not said that my preference is for a single force. I have said that the argument for that clearly has greater weight at the moment than the regional force model has. That was my position in the statement and it is the position that I made clear to the chief executive of Highland Council. I am happy to listen to and to take on board the council’s suggestions, and if the Liberal Democrats in Highland wish to argue for a regional model, that is fine. They will need to explain, though, what the boundaries would be. They will need to explain to some forces, such as those in Dumfries and Galloway and Fife, which have unitary boards, how their accountability will be improved by moving to a joint board. There are questions to be answered. The Government’s position is that the status quo is untenable, and I will come on to that in due course. Two positions are clearly possible: a regional model; and a single force. The arguments for one are stronger at the present moment, but there are still major doubts to overcome, and that is why we have a consultation.

Well, the matters are on-going. Additional evidence was produced by Karyn McCluskey and, indeed, by Deputy Chief Constable Steve Allen of Lothian and Borders Police. Some might not have liked what they came back with, but evidence was produced by them and put in. We recognise that there has to be significant drilling down, which is continuing at the moment. That information will be made available; it was made available to the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and it will be provided further in due course. There is an acceptance that the open consultation is continuing, that matters require to be clarified and that we have to overcome the doubts. If there is to be a regional model, those who support that approach must square the circle. Would Moray be in Northern Constabulary, Grampian Police or both? What would the boundaries be? How would we ensure better accountability for Fife and Dumfries and Galloway? How would a board monitor various matters? Where would the Scottish Police Services Authority stand in relation to a regional model of four? Equally, there are questions about a single force that have to be answered—that is a valid point. There is a broad consensus, among all apart from the Liberal Democrats, that reform is essential to ensure that structures that were created more than 35 years ago—before unitary councils and community planning partnerships, before the Scottish Parliament, and before some of today’s policing and fire problems even existed—are fit for the 21st century and for the financial challenges ahead.

Not at all. After all, once the consultation has been considered and is concluded, it will be passed to the Christie commission. There is clear acceptance that, whatever boundaries are made and whether we go for a regional model or a single force, in any event things will be predicated on what is a local authority and, if that is varied by the Christie commission, will have to be adapted, so I do not see the two as conflicting at all. It is also essential to give all communities, urban and rural, access to specialist police and fire resources and to give Scotland the capacity and capability that it needs to deal with crime and incidents that show no respect for barriers or boundaries between forces and services. Chief Constable House has publicly said that Strathclyde Police would be unable to cope with a major counter-terrorism incident without assistance from other forces. Scotland needs the national capability to prevent and respond to real threats, and there are real threats. In the early tenure of this Administration, we faced the Glasgow airport bombing and, even as we speak, a terrorist is being detained—although I cannot go into that, as it is sub judice. That shows the position that we face in this country, which must be dealt with. Reform is essential to provide clear delivery of and national accountability for national issues, and to strengthen local accountability and engagement by bringing decisions and accountability for services closer to communities. Most of all, it is essential to protect local services for the long term. Communities do not want Fife Fire and Rescue to transfer firefighters to other brigades, or police forces such as Northern Constabulary and Grampian Police to go on closing police stations and freezing recruitment year after year. We do not want unnecessary duplication across eight police forces and eight fire services, with eight separate police headquarters and eight separate fire HQs and all the substantial overheads that those entail. The officers from Strathclyde Police whom I met in Arran a few weeks ago were not working to some city agenda or waiting for orders from a distant HQ. They were working with local communities to solve local problems. The man in charge was Sergeant MacKay.

There has always been mutual aid and that will continue to occur, because that is the nature of the services. They go and assist, whether on a cross-border basis or across forces. I have no intention of changing that or of throwing away hard-won gains such as the 10-year downward trend in fire deaths, the fact that crime is at a 32-year low and the provision of 1,000 additional police officers, including 145 in Grampian and 80 in Northern. Let us remind ourselves of the criticisms that people made at the time of the reforms in 1975. Before the old Ayrshire Constabulary became part of Strathclyde Police, it had a chief constable, two assistant chief constables and five chief superintendents. Today, the same area has one chief superintendent and two superintendents; it also has 150 more officers. Lest members think that that is a Strathclyde phenomenon, it is not just the case in Ayrshire. What is now Northern Constabulary used to be three separate forces, each with its own chief constable. Now, of course, there is only one chief constable, but there are 301 extra officers. In Grampian, where there were two separate forces, each with its own chief constable, there is now just one force with one chief constable, but there are 720 extra officers. The First Minister has made it clear that there will be bobbies before boundaries. We are quite clear that we will have a lot more police officers, even if that means far fewer at senior grades.

We have made it clear that, purdah notwithstanding, people will be able to contribute to the consultation. Clearly, the political process and the involvement of ministers end when purdah starts. The election will be held on 5 May. An Administration will have to be formed, and it will have to provide a view. The matter will be remitted to the Christie commission for its consideration. Frankly, the suggestion that the Administration that is elected—whether it is ourselves or others who form it—will make a decision immediately on 6 May is disingenuous. Views will be submitted to the Christie commission. Reform is about sustaining and improving the gains that we have made. The alternative for our communities and for the professionals who serve them is already playing out south of the border, where significant reductions in pay and conditions are likely to be imposed rather than negotiated, and where it is estimated that there will be 28,000 job losses in police services and 1,500 in fire services. The Liberal Democrats should ask the Police Federation what it thinks about Tom Winsor’s report. They would keep the HQs and the boys in braid, but they would be prepared to jettison the rank and file who protect our communities. We will not sacrifice them. There will be fewer police officers and firefighters for local communities if we do not make significant changes to ensure that we can address the budgetary problems. We understand that people are concerned about local services and worried about change, but now is not the time for political scaremongering. Rather, it is a time for serious and constructive discussion and debate about the best way to provide policing, fire and other public services in Scotland. Since 2007, this Government has given power back to local authorities. We have reduced ring-fenced funding from £2.7 billion down to £0.9 billion. We have put decision making firmly in the hands of local community planning partnerships and our consultations on police and fire services seek to further that approach. They are about addressing the financial challenge but, more importantly, they are about protecting and improving local services and giving local authorities and communities the opportunity for deeper and more meaningful engagement with police and fire services. I move amendment S3M-8120.2, to leave out from “is concerned” to end and insert: “notes that Scotland and policing have changed significantly since the existing structure of policing was introduced over 35 years ago; notes the Scottish Government’s consultation papers on police and fire services reform and agrees that, given the significant financial challenges, such reform is necessary to protect and improve local services and to strengthen and improve local accountability and engagement; agrees that reform can only happen if it gives local communities and local elected members a greater say on local priorities and services, and notes that the expectations and requirements of health and social care have similarly changed significantly since existing structures were introduced and that reform is needed to deliver integrated services that are sustainable and appropriate and that make best use of resources focussed on the needs of local populations.”

No. There is the Police Negotiating Board.

It is not true—

The member is—

Is the member aware that the Police Negotiating Board is pan-UK and that police terms and conditions and pay are set across the UK?

That is not what he said.

Yes. The work of civilian support staff is one of the core functions against which the sustainable policing project, which is being led by Deputy Chief Constable Neil Richardson, is assessing the three reform options on which we are consulting. That work will be reported to the Scottish policing board on 21 March and published on the Scottish Government website by 22 March to help inform the debate on the future of policing in Scotland before our consultation closes on 5 May.

Yes. Those figures are disputed. What is clear, though, is that the consultation is on-going and that information has been provided to the police family. As has been pointed out, the status quo is not tenable, because we would end up in the same position as south of the border—which is due to the Liberal Democrats—where 28,000 front-line staff are threatened with redundancy and police officers’ terms and conditions and pay are threatened with being varied and reduced. Indeed, I remember being in this chamber for a debate on forensic services, when we took steps as a Government to ensure that we protected front-line services in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow, and were criticised by Ms McInnes. The position of the Liberal Democrats south of the border has not been to preserve those services; it has been to privatise them.

A review of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 has been under way since January 2010. It was commissioned through NHS Health Scotland as part of MESAS: monitoring and evaluating Scotland’s alcohol strategy. The review will evaluate the implementation and compliance with the objectives of the 2005 act over three years and is due for completion in 2013.

Local licensing boards set fees, subject to the bands that the Government sets. Clear questions have been asked about how matters are dealt with, but nobody has proposed a better system than the current system, which is based on rateable values. We recognise that significant difficulties have occurred, particularly in rural areas. As a Government, we have sought to address issues where we could. However, the fundamental structure and basis of charging are in the 2005 act, which must be the subject of significant consideration. As I said, we will be happy to see the returns to the review. When points have been made about short-term matters or issues in Shetland or wherever—I say that, as Tavish Scott has just entered the chamber—we as an Administration have shown a willingness to address them.

For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Damages (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill.

Why?

Why Glasgow or Edinburgh?

Consultation is going on and those matters will be discussed. If the member wishes to suggest where, if we go to a regional model of three or four forces, the headquarters should be based, that suggestion will be considered. If he wishes to suggest where the headquarters should be based if we go to a single-force model, that too will be considered.

I thank Mike Rumbles for securing the debate and I accept the spirit and ethos that have been shown by him and every other member who has contributed. Every elected member has at heart the interests of the police and services that they provide in our communities, although perhaps there has been more heat than light in some of the things that have been said. I begin by reminding members that we are consulting on police reform and that the sustainable policing project, which is led by Detective Chief Constable Neil Richardson, is in the process of putting more quantitative and qualitative detail on the various options. A decision has not been made. That will be for any new Administration after the election. We have heard some interesting and thoughtful contributions from all parties today. We have also heard some understandable, but not insurmountable, concerns about local policing and about centralisation and accountability, particularly—although not uniquely—under the single-force model. However, we have also heard some political scaremongering from people who are well aware of the financial challenges that are facing us, but who seem to ignore the necessity for reform. We have heard from members who appear to believe that a policing structure that was created more than 35 years ago is still the best model for Scotland. Can a model that creates barriers and boundaries between forces really deal with threats and crime that pay no attention to such boundaries? Scotland is significantly changed from what it was 35 years ago. Is it right that forces have to call on each other to get access to specialist resources to help to deal with major incidents? Is it right that such support is often provided on an informal or ad hoc basis, or that forces are spending valuable time and resources on agreeing contracts and service agreements with each other? Even Strathclyde’s chief constable has said that Strathclyde Police would be unable to cope with a major terrorism incident without assistance from other forces. If the largest force in Scotland cannot cope on its own, how can the seven smaller forces hope to cope?

Mutual aid is always provided when it is requested. That happened during the dreadful shootings in Cumbria. As I understand it, Strathclyde Police covered the M6 down to Lancaster as Cumbria’s forces were mobilised within the community. We are talking about a terrorism incident and we have faced one in Scotland, although many of us were deluded into thinking that it would not happen. We should listen to Strathclyde’s chief constable when he says that he does not think that his force could cope with a major incident. We were extremely fortunate and well served by police and other individuals in a personal and work capacity at the Glasgow airport incident, but we must prepare. Does a regional structure that preceded the Scottish Parliament, having been invented 20 years before unitary councils and 30 years before community planning, provide the right kind of national and local accountability? Is the structure really right for the partnership working and local engagement that is vital to safer communities? Finally, is it right that in the face of unprecedented budget cuts we are maintaining eight separate police headquarters and unnecessary duplication across the eight forces? There is duplication in areas such as human resources, finance and legal services; in policies and procedures; and in areas such as roads policing and specialist operations. There are eight HQs and all that duplication, when the northern joint police board has just agreed to close 15 police stations, and Grampian’s suspension of police officer recruitment and its freeze on police staff recruitment are continuing into next year, and it is running its third voluntary redundancy scheme. Reform is about addressing those questions; the status quo is not an option. There is not a shred of evidence to support suggestions that merging police forces could lead to 4,000 fewer police officers or that reform will somehow mean that everything is centralised and officers are taken away from local policing. We are reforming so that resources are used for local front-line policing in all communities and not for unnecessary duplication.

We need the evidence. I have no doubt that that was said—it is not in dispute—but where is the evidence? We are reforming so that local officers can continue to solve local problems. The officers whom I met in Arran a few weeks ago were not working to some city agenda or waiting for orders from a distant HQ. They were working with local communities to solve local problems. As one of the respondents to the Northern Constabulary survey says, “This argument was the same when the various county forces merged to form Northern Constabulary in the mid-late 70’s. There was a fear about local policing then, but we managed it in a professional way”. Mr Don referred to the position in Ayrshire. In the Northern Constabulary area, there used to be three separate forces, each with its own chief constable. Now there is one chief constable, but 301 extra officers. In Grampian, there used to be two separate forces, each with its own chief constable. There is now just a single force led by one chief constable, but an extra 702 officers. I do not know whether at the time of the last negotiations Liberal Democrats opposed the moves, but those facts confirm to me that we can deal with providing and protecting front-line services. Reform is about protecting the 1,000 additional officers that the Government has delivered, including 145 in the Grampian Police area and 80 in the Northern Constabulary area. It is about spreading services and functions around the country and ensuring that all communities have access to specialist policing. It is about improving local accountability and engagement and providing clear accountability for national policing structures. There are many views and we want people to contribute. We need to ensure that we consult. No position has been taken by the Government. We set out three options, but we are quite clear that the status quo is not tenable. I welcome people’s contributions—[Interruption.]—preferably not from a sedentary position. I will welcome significant contributions that people make. We will not take a decision until we have considered the views and the work of the sustainable policing project. However, members should make no mistake: the status quo is not tenable and reform is necessary. As I indicated, what matters is bobbies and not boundaries. I hope that those who are worried that a reduction in the number of forces, whether to a regional or single model, will take note of the advances that have been made in Ayrshire, and in the Grampian Police and Northern Constabulary areas. Meeting closed at 17:38.

The Scottish Government and local partners are working hard to reduce crime in North Ayrshire. For example, we have invested more than £150,000 in local projects throughout North Ayrshire over four rounds of the cashback initiative to provide participation and diversionary activities. In light of that, I am sure that the member will welcome, as I do, the 12 per cent reduction in total recorded crimes in North Ayrshire between 2008-09 and 2009-10.

Absolutely. It was a privilege to meet last week with members of the force at Arran police station, which is part of that division. I appreciate the excellent work that they do. As Mr Gibson says, there is a clear correlation between increased police numbers and a reduction in crime—and in the fear of crime, as the First Minister mentioned at First Minister’s questions. The changes that have been made to the cell structure will benefit the police and ultimately the communities by ensuring that officers’ time is spent in better ways than transporting prisoners around looking for an available cell.

We take a serious view of antisocial behaviour, but equally we recognise that it comes in a variety of forms. It can come in a form that is very serious and clearly criminal, and which should be dealt with by the police. Equally, it can appear at relatively low levels, in the form of ignorant behaviour that is unacceptable. For example, in the city of Edinburgh—the situation is probably the same in other communities—a failure to take a turn at cleaning the stair, or a failure to take responsibility for other such matters, will quite correctly be classified as antisocial behaviour, although such behaviour is clearly not in the same category as keeping someone awake, disrupting their family life and their sleep or threatening or abusing them. However, each and every one of those matters is significant. They are taken seriously, not only by the Government but by local authorities. That is why I welcome the activities in my constituency in Edinburgh—and, no doubt, in North Ayrshire—in which police and other partners, such as housing associations and the local authority, work in conjunction with one another to ensure that people realise that a tenant has a responsibility as well as rights and to ensure that action is taken.

Decisions on the release on licence of determinate sentence prisoners serving four years or more, extended sentence prisoners, where the custodial term is four years or more, and life prisoners are a matter for the Parole Board for Scotland. The board will not direct early release on licence until it is satisfied that the prisoner no longer presents an unacceptable risk to the public. The Scottish ministers are obliged by law to accept its decisions.

I recall the meeting with Willie Coffey and the McGrand family. When prisoners are freed on licence, the local authority supervising officer is required to notify the Scottish Government’s parole unit if they have any concerns about the prisoner’s conduct or behaviour, even if it does not actually constitute a breach of licence. Various actions can be taken in the event of a breach, including immediate recall to custody if, in the view of the Scottish ministers, the person presents an unacceptable risk to the safety of the public. Those powers were exercised 44 times in 2009-10. However, I agree that we should learn lessons from such cases. Following the meeting that I had with Willie Coffey and Mr and Mrs McGrand, I asked the Social Work Inspection Agency, which is an independent body, to examine the issues as part of its work on serious incident reporting. It has agreed to do that because, as we discussed with the McGrands, all partners take such matters seriously but improvements can be made, and we must strive to make them.

As I said to Parliament in 2009, the Scottish Government is committed to delivering the benefits that are sought from establishing a dedicated community court in Glasgow. I also said that we would work with partners to do that more cost effectively. By using existing staff and buildings more imaginatively, the pilot for a fast-track community service at Glasgow sheriff court that was announced last month will deliver on that commitment, and will do so within current financial constraints. The pilot will result in quicker delivery of community payback, with offenders being assessed and starting unpaid work placements within hours of being sentenced.

Absolutely. We accept the problems and I am aware of Mr McAveety’s commitment to the proposal. However, there are clearly financial pressures on the justice budget and, in particular, the courts budget. There are calls for the expansion of domestic abuse courts, drugs courts and so on. There are also pressures on providing for the improvement of the High Court—a matter that is dear to the Lord President’s heart. The Government accepts the direction of travel. At the moment, when funds are limited, we have to ensure that we provide the service that will make Mr McAveety’s area in the east end of Glasgow—and the whole city of Glasgow—safer and ensure that those who are convicted are dealt with more speedily. When we do not have the money to spend on the buildings, we must at minimum improve the way that we operate within the current structures.

I regularly discuss a wide range of matters with the SPSA’s convener. I have had no discussions with the SPSA board about the recent staff regrading exercise, which is an operational matter for the SPSA’s executive team.

I am happy to pass on those points to the SPSA and to ask it to give me a briefing to respond to Lewis Macdonald.

On 26 October 2010, the United Kingdom Supreme Court issued its decision in the case of Cadder v Her Majesty’s Advocate. The case considered the law and practice in Scotland of interviewing detained persons in a police station without ensuring that they had access to legal advice. The UK Supreme Court judgment overturned a previous unanimous ruling of the High Court of Justiciary in 2009 by seven of our most senior judges, including the Lord Justice General and the Lord Justice Clerk. The High Court of Justiciary had previously and repeatedly upheld the Scottish law, which was introduced by a Westminster Government in 1980 and which had not been altered by subsequent Administrations there or in this Parliament. Throughout the process, the Scottish Government, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and the police have acted to minimise the impact of a possible adverse decision by the UK Supreme Court. The Lord Advocate issued guidance to police in June 2010 in the wake of the UK Supreme Court hearing in the Cadder case. That precautionary measure was taken when it became clear that the UK Supreme Court was considering overturning previous judgments of the Scottish courts. That was the first point at which there was any clear indication from the courts that the Scottish system might be ruled not to be compliant with the European convention on human rights. On the very same day as the judgment of the UK Supreme Court was issued, I introduced proposed emergency legislation to ensure the continued viability of Scotland’s criminal justice system and announced a judicially led review of the law and criminal procedure in Scotland. That review, led by Lord Carloway, is well under way. The emergency legislation—the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 2010—was introduced as a bill following significant cross-party consultation and was passed with the support of the vast majority of members the following day. The act was necessary for three reasons. First, it enshrined in statute a suspect’s right of access to legal advice before and during interrogation. Our law now implements the court’s decision and that important right is articulated in statute, rather that in guidance from the Lord Advocate, which does not have the same force. Secondly, the act extends powers of detention to ensure that we maintain an effective system for investigating and prosecuting crime in the new environment. Thirdly, the act reinforces the need for finality and certainty in concluded cases, as articulated by the United Kingdom Supreme Court. The UK Supreme Court decision emphasised the importance of finality and legal certainty in concluded criminal cases, but it affected cases in which an appeal had been made timeously or in which the relevant point had been taken during a case that was still live. The Government could not limit that through legislation. At the time of the judgment, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal service indicated that up to 3,500 live cases could be affected. The Crown Office has been working hard to find other ways in which to support cases that are affected by the ruling, such as looking at alternative sources of evidence. Those actions, and the contingency measures that were taken previously, have been effective in that they have dramatically reduced to 867 the number of cases that are unable to proceed. That represents less than one quarter of the cases that were originally feared to be affected and a tiny percentage of the cases that our courts process each year. In some solemn cases, the Crown has decided to discontinue proceedings in the meantime. Those cases are not closed and proceedings may be raised should additional evidence come to light in future. I am acutely aware that that will be cold comfort to the victims, relatives and witnesses who are involved in the cases affected and I am particularly conscious that among those cases are some related to serious offences. I have no doubt that the victims will find it hard to understand how a case involving the very different Turkish justice system has had such a dramatic effect on Scots law, which already had strong protections for suspects through corroboration and the right to silence. The loss of any proceedings on Cadder grounds is a matter of regret. However, I believe that the strong action that the Government has taken in the wake of the Cadder judgment means that we can maintain an effective system for the prosecution and investigation of crime and avoid many more victims being denied justice. It remains a fact, however, that a court from beyond Scotland has imposed this change on us in a way that affects live cases. Scotland is uniquely susceptible to the effect of European convention on human rights challenges in criminal cases, because we are subject to the Human Rights Act 1998 and the effects of section 57(2) of the Scotland Act 1998. Scotland does not have direct access to the European Court of Human Rights to defend its laws in the way that other criminal jurisdictions have. That is an anomaly that should be rectified, but that requires legislation on the part of Westminster. Traditionally, in criminal matters, the High Court of Justiciary had the final say, but the route of raising devolution issues that is concerned today is undermining its final authority. The UK Supreme Court has taken on a much greater role in criminal matters than was anticipated at the time of devolution. The Government’s view is that the centuries-old supremacy of the High Court of Justiciary as the final court of appeal in criminal matters must be restored. As a matter of principle, I want to ensure that Scotland is in no worse a position than other jurisdictions in the UK and Europe, but this is a reserved issue that can be dealt with only at Westminster. The Advocate General has proposed changes for inclusion in the Scotland Bill, but they could make the situation worse. On 8 February, the Lord Advocate said to the Scotland Bill Committee: “There is a real danger that we will have … a complete loss of identity for Scots law, unless the Supreme Court process is genuinely rarely exercised”.—[Official Report, Scotland Bill Committee, 8 February 2011; c 480.] Within the constitutional framework that is afforded to us at this time, the Lord Advocate has been compelled to seek clarity from the UK Supreme Court on Cadder-related questions that have been raised in a number of criminal cases. She has asked the High Court of Justiciary to refer a further five cases to the UK Supreme Court for definitive resolution on a number of Cadder-related issues. That is necessary to minimise the uncertainty related to those further points. In the period until those issues are resolved, we will continue to take action. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has issued guidance to forces on issues surrounding interviews at the locus as an interim measure until the law is clarified, and I know that those issues are also being considered by Lord Carloway. It is expected that the court will consider these cases later this year and we will work closely with the Crown to ensure that it has any assistance that it requires. I stress at this point, however, that the issues are narrower than those in the Cadder judgment and are expected to affect a much smaller proportion of cases. In the run-up to the decision of the UK Supreme Court, I sought to involve members on all sides in setting out the situation that we faced and the impact that it would have, and to engage as openly as possible in exploring how we would seek to minimise the effects of the decision. The vast majority of the chamber supported our aims and our plans, and I hope that we can continue in that spirit, to preserve Scots law and protect our communities.

Richard Baker raises a variety of issues. First, with regard to the Glasgow Bar Association, I would not seek to be too hard on an agency of which I was once a member. I know that Mr Baker’s knowledge of Scots law is limited, but he conceded that the Glasgow Bar Association is not on the same level as the High Court of Justiciary. It is certainly not on the same level as a bench of seven judges including the Lord Justice General and the Lord Justice Clerk. With all respect to the members of the Glasgow Bar Association, the two most senior members of the legal profession in Scotland are the Lord Justice General and the Lord Justice Clerk. It would be ill fitting for any politician—certainly, for a Cabinet Secretary for Justice—to seek to undermine a decision of a court of seven judges in Scotland that had decided that there was no incompatibility, even if Mr Baker and some members of the Glasgow Bar Association think differently. The sons of Cadder cases are a moveable feast, to some extent. The issue was raised by Lord Hope in his judgment on various matters including interviews at crime scenes. Reference has been made to matters such as how police deal with admissions being made when cases are being investigated—a circumstance that will arise on a regular if not a daily basis. That is why I mentioned in my statement that ACPOS and the Crown Office are taking action. Such matters need to be clarified and we need some greater definition by the courts. That point was raised by Lord Hope and has been supported by the judiciary here. As I say, the Crown Office asked the bench in Scotland to refer the matter, and it will also be considered by Lord Carloway. We will be more than happy to try to keep members abreast of the number of cases, but they are with the Crown Office and the number will vary. What lesson is to be learned? It is that, when we have a Parliament that has served us well for more than a decade and a legal system that has served us well for centuries, it is ill fitting for the law of Scotland to be turned on its head—with, in many instances, the approval of many judicial commentators outside the chamber, and not for the better—by a decision relating to a case from Turkey dealing with terrorism, which is not applicable to matters in the case of Cadder v Her Majesty’s Advocate. The lesson to be learned is that the Parliament must have the powers and our judicial system the ability to decide with certainty. The High Court of Justiciary should be the final court of appeal in criminal cases, as was always intended, and matters that are before the Parliament should not be second-guessed by an unelected body, whether it is the UK Supreme Court in London or the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.

I have had meetings with Ken Clarke. A variety of issues is involved. We as a Government accept that Scotland is in an anomalous position in relation not simply to other jurisdictions in the United Kingdom but to other countries. France and Ireland are affected by Salduz, but they have not had to rush to pass emergency legislation. Something is far wrong, and we must change that. We are committed to the ECHR’s principles and tenets, but we have much sympathy with the reasonable points that Ken Clarke has made. Greater understanding is required and Governments must have opportunities to deal with matters. We are more than happy to work with the UK Administration, the Lord Chancellor and agencies south of the border to try to ensure that the ECHR deals with clear problems. Not even those who face terrorism charges should be subject to abuse or whatever else, as was clearly intended in the case of Salduz. However, when the ECHR impinges on matters such that victims are treated almost with contempt, it is clear that something is wrong. We are working with Ken Clarke to develop a more pan-European position—he does not suggest withdrawing from the ECHR; quite the contrary—but Scotland should in the interim have as a minimum the same rights as the Governments south of the border and elsewhere in Europe have.

Robert Brown raises three matters. Given the unique position of Scotland’s law, it is manifestly wrong that the Scottish Government does not have even the right to be represented at the European court. That is a fundamental problem. Given our distinctive legal system, which has evolved over centuries, it cannot be right that we cannot be present at decisions. My Government colleagues and I will continue discussions with the Advocate General for Scotland, but we have expressed our view, as I said. Mr Brown will be well aware that guidance is issued by the Lord Advocate and not at my behest. I have no right to interfere with an independent and impartial Lord Advocate. The day that a Cabinet Secretary for Justice seeks to interfere with the workings of the Lord Advocate, we will have cause for concern. When the Lord Advocate issued guidance not in 2009 but in 2010, I received representations from solicitors and bar associations that thought that she had gone too far and which wanted the guidance to apply not to summary cases but only to solemn matters. However, the Lord Advocate has been shown to have acted appropriately and wisely, for which we owe her a debt of gratitude. At the end of the day, I cannot comment on Cadder as it is still a live matter. The fundamental position is this: human rights are a matter of balance. Everyone accepts that people have a right not to be mistreated; the Scottish court system provides for that. My position is to stand behind measures and manners, and individuals—not just the High Court of Justiciary with its seven judges, but eminent Queen’s counsel, whether Paul McBride or others. Within the Scottish legal system, we had not only a requirement for corroboration, but tape-recorded and videoed admissions. This was not a case, as in Turkey, of a 16-year-old being tried on terrorism charges. Nonetheless, the result is that many men who have been charged with serious sexual offences are making it much more difficult for the Crown to bring a prosecution and for victims of crime to receive justice. That I regret. I make no apology for regretting that, or for saying that we acted as we had to. I wish that we had not had to. If only the UK Supreme Court had stuck by the law of Scotland and not overturned hundreds of years of Scots law.

Absolutely. As I mentioned, the clear fact is that the UK Supreme Court is getting by the back door matters relating to the criminal law of Scotland that it was never anticipated it would deal with. The majority of its judges have no concept of Scots law. Our law, particularly our criminal law, is unique—it is vastly different, particularly given corroboration. However, we are where we are. Until such time as Scots law is settled by Scottish judges, we will face significant problems.

The principal point relates to money. As we made clear at the time, the increased costs to the legal aid budget would not come out of budgets such as health or education, or from those that deal with the problem of domestic violence, including obtaining interdicts against those who perpetrate the problems that we face in Scotland. I hope that Mr Kelly supports the Government in biting the bullet, which includes reducing some fees to deal with the problems and consequences of the actions of a UK Supreme Court in London.

I do not have the precise number, but the number of people who have been detained beyond the 12 hours has been very few. As Mr Rumbles well knows, these matters are significantly smaller than those in England under a jurisdiction—

Recently, I received a letter from the United Kingdom Government, in which the Liberal Democrats are a partner, that asked the Scottish Government to make legislative changes in cases relating to HM Revenue and Customs and HM Customs and Excise to allow for 12 hours and the extension—[Interruption.] The Liberal Democrats south of the border may yet again take a different view from their colleagues in Scotland. The Government in Scotland—

We will accede to the request of the Government south of the border. If Mr Rumbles disagrees with that, he should take up the matter with his ministerial colleagues in England.

Because of the prescient actions by the Lord Advocate, the numbers were restricted initially, it was thought, to 3,500 and then to 867. That is a very small percentage of the number of cases dealt with annually by the Crown—it is probably in the region of 1 per cent or so. On the level of severity, there is no denying that some of the cases—some have been publicised—are deeply traumatic to the individual. They are matters of great concern, which is why we opposed this in the first instance. Equally, even crimes that might be viewed as less serious can still be of great seriousness to the individual affected by them. I can be of assistance to Mr Maxwell in saying that the Crown has been liaising with victims as a consequence of this, in order to do its utmost to ensure that victims are appraised of why things are happening and whether the options can be kept open—whether additional evidence can be provided—and to seek to assuage their understandable anger and discomfort.

The answer is that I cannot provide that information. That is information relative only to the Crown. I have no doubt that the Crown would be more than happy to provide it, so if Ms Craigie wants to write to me, I will happily pass on the letter to the Lord Advocate. As I said to Stewart Maxwell, the Crown is conscious that even cases that are perhaps not the most severe can cause great distress, not just to the victim of the crime but to those who were due to give evidence on the offending. The Crown is going above and beyond its normal measures to ensure that people understand and are told what might be possible to try to deal with matters. I am sure that the Crown will do its best to try to provide the drill-down details that Ms Craigie seeks.

That is a valid point and it is part of the reason why the Lord Advocate has acted appropriately and sought to have these son of Cadder matters removed. As an official said to me earlier, we cannot have a position where an officer turns up at a scene—perhaps a road traffic accident—and before they investigate and call for an ambulance, they ensure that a lawyer is present. Unfortunately, the position taken by some in the legal profession would seem to drive us towards that, but it will not be countenanced.

That is a perfectly valid question. I am happy to say that I am obviously here to appraise the chamber. Equally, I think that I am due to appear before the Justice Committee in less than a fortnight—Mr Butler, as the deputy convener, will keep me aware of that. That is what we are doing to keep both the Parliament and the committee appraised.

I do not think that it was anticipated that the High Court would be in this position. It has been the devolution minutes that have resulted in the Supreme Court dealing with criminal matters that it was not anticipated would go there. There is a fundamental point relating to the nature of Scotland within the constitutional framework of the United Kingdom. As I said in response to Mr Lamont, I think that most right-minded people thought that the views of Ken Clarke were perfectly reasonable and balanced. He is not seeking to withdraw from ECHR, but there has to be a review to ensure that Governments and legislative matters elsewhere have that opportunity. I am more than happy to seek to co-operate with Ken Clarke on that, but I believe that in the interim we must ensure that the Scottish Parliament, the Scottish Government and the Scottish legal system have the same rights and protections that the United Kingdom Government, Parliament and system have at present.

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell and the Equal Opportunities Committee on securing the debate, which provides an opportunity to tackle important issues. I read the committee’s report with interest and I am sure that the Parliament will join me in complimenting the committee on its extensive work. Scotland has a long and proud history of welcoming migrants. The positive cultural, economic and social contribution that migrants make in shaping a modern and vibrant Scotland benefits us all. In “The Government Economic Strategy”, we recognised that migration is a key part of ensuring Scotland’s future prosperity. Integration into our communities in Scotland begins from day one. Work is supported through our fresh talent initiative, which includes our free relocation advisory service, the aim of which is to welcome new Scots and retain Scots who are already here. No single organisation is responsible for, or able to tackle, all the issues of concern that some migrants in Scotland experience, as the committee correctly acknowledges. We, too, recognise that partnership working and supporting such relationships are key to achieving a joint vision of Scotland. The support that we provide is varied and includes funding for, for example, the COSLA strategic migration partnership, a Highlands and Islands migrant worker co-ordinator and last year’s Scottish migrants network conference. I assure the committee that we are not complacent and will continue to provide political leadership in condemning racism and welcoming migrants to Scotland. We are committed to continuing to work with the UK Government so that it understands the devolved implications of changes to immigration rules. There are a number of links between immigration and trafficking. We and our agencies work closely with the UKBA on both those issues. The problem and responsibility are shared. Our relationship is generally positive, but we disagree on occasion and it is important that we express our concerns frankly. In particular, I am concerned about the UKBA’s withdrawal of funding for three officers seconded from Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary to work at Stranraer. The impact is that there will no longer be a direct immigration resource at either of the Stranraer ports.

The Crown and the police take those matters very seriously. As Jim Hume will be aware, the UKBA’s withdrawal has affected the situation. Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary has correctly pointed out that Stranraer to Cairnryan is the main conduit. Many people do not come up to Scotland but simply transit through the ports and go south. The withdrawal of the UKBA is a matter of great concern not only for me as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in Scotland but for the Minister of Justice in Northern Ireland and, indeed, the Minister for Justice and Law Reform in the Republic of Ireland. However, Jim Hume should rest assured that we recognise that trafficking is happening in Scotland, even if much of the traffic through Stranraer goes south down the M74. The Crown and, in particular, the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency are on the case. The director general of the UKBA maintains that there will be no problems, as immigration will be dealt with in Northern Ireland. I disagree with that conclusion. Fewer UKBA officers on Scottish soil will mean a lower checking and arrest rate at the Stranraer and Cairnryan ports in relation to immigration offences, which will weaken our defences. We expressed strong concern to the Home Secretary and the UKBA at the time that the decision was made. We will liaise with the Northern Ireland Executive and Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary and, if there is evidence that the decision has a negative impact on policing the Stranraer port, we will make further representations.

The arrangements are a matter of continuing concern. I appreciate that they are being reviewed south of the border, but we believe that they are prejudicial. My discussions with the Northern Ireland Executive and the Government in the Republic of Ireland go back to last year. There is an issue. We have not yet been satisfied by the response of the Government south of the border or the UKBA. We continue to highlight the issue and, in the interim, all organisations—the Crown, the police, the SCDEA, the Scottish Government and UKBA officers elsewhere—will continue to do what they can. The issue is just one of those highlighted in the committee’s report, to which we have provided a detailed written response. We are taking forward action in the areas in which the committee highlighted concerns. We are striving to ensure that people live their lives free from crime, disorder and danger. Within that context, we place a high priority on tackling trafficking. The key to eradicating trafficking is partnership working, and we will always listen to and take on board any recommendations that are made. I emphasise that we take our responsibilities under the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings very seriously, in particular by providing leadership on the anti-trafficking agenda in Scotland. We do so in a variety of ways, through engaging with Scottish stakeholders and working with UK departments. We are grateful to the committee, as the issue is of concern. I assure members that all bodies in Scotland are taking responsibility for dealing with this most heinous of matters.

Double jeopardy is a fundamental legal principle that provides an essential protection against the state repeatedly pursuing an individual for the same offence. The Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill enshrines that ancient principle in legislation for the first time in our history. The bill is also designed to make that principle fit for the 21st century. Reform is required to take account of advances in science and because an acquitted person should not be able to walk free from court and boast with impunity about getting away with it. It is required to ensure public confidence in our justice system that, wherever possible, justice will always be done. The need for reform has been widely recognised, and I am heartened by the level of support that the proposals have received. Careful work by the Scottish Law Commission was followed by a debate in the chamber last March. Thereafter, a Government consultation exercise took place last summer and a thorough stage 1 report was provided by the Justice Committee just last week. I record my thanks to all those who took part in that process in whatever capacity, and I am grateful to the committee for its detailed and careful consideration of the bill. I am conscious of the committee’s full schedule this session and the effort that was required to prepare and publish its comprehensive report so swiftly. During stage 1 scrutiny there were, understandably, differences of opinion on some aspects of the reform. I now turn to the parts of the bill that have attracted the most comment. The bill will allow a new trial when an acquittal has been tainted. It seems clear to me that people should not be able to evade justice because of threats or bribery, and I am pleased that the committee endorses that provision. At the heart of this reform is the idea of allowing a second trial when new evidence emerges that casts doubt on an acquittal. There appears to be a consensus in favour of that concept and its application to historical cases. Some have argued that applying the change retrospectively will be unlikely to have a practical effect, because the passage of time might have diminished the evidence that is available. I accept that that will be true in some cases, but not necessarily all.

The committee raised a valid point, which relates, in many cases, to the attitude and actions of the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The Crown gave a full explanation of how it deals with such matters. On many occasions, productions are kept routinely, but it is a judgment call for the Crown. If Mr Brown or any other member wants me to go back to either the Lord Advocate or the Solicitor General for Scotland on particular issues, I will be happy to do so. However, it seems that the Crown Office has a procedure for dealing with productions, not all of which from every case in Scotland can be held, otherwise the service would be bursting at the seams. Nevertheless, in appropriate circumstances, productions will be retained for a relevant period, and that is a judgment call for the Crown. If members have any information or issues that they want to clarify, the law officers and I would be happy to speak to them. As recently as December, the conviction of Mark Weston in an English retrial for the murder of Vikki Thompson underlined the value of retrospectivity. The bill will allow for retrial based on two broad categories of evidence. The first of those is admissions by the accused. The second is generally referred to as new evidence, and includes evidence that is obtained through advances in DNA technology. There are differences in the nature of the two categories, and the bill treats them differently in relation to the tests that are applied. Substantial requirements will apply to admissions, but I accept the Justice Committee’s conclusion that there is sense in bringing the treatment of admissions and new evidence closer together. I therefore propose to lodge amendments to reflect that. The effect of that change will be that an admission will have to strengthen the case against the accused substantially in order to justify a retrial. It will also mean that the court will have to be satisfied that it is highly likely that a reasonable jury would have convicted had the admission been available before. I propose, however, to keep some points of distinction between admissions and new evidence, because I believe that persons who admit their guilt lose the right to absolute certainty that they can never be brought back to trial. No one should be able to brag about their guilt with impunity. That undermines the system and deeply wounds and scars the victims of crime and their families. I therefore think that the admissions exception should apply to all types of criminal case. The exception for other forms of new evidence will be available only for more serious crimes. Both exceptions are targeted at serious offences, and that is where the Crown Office will focus its attention.

Absolutely. That is a matter that Paul Martin, who is not in the chamber, has frequently raised and something that we have consulted on and have worked on with Governments, both current and past, south of the border. All fair-minded people think that there is something reprehensible about what Stewart Stevenson describes. Whether through a tabloid or through a book, people should not be able to make financial gain at the expense of others. There is an important point of principle in making it at least possible to pursue persons who boast of having evaded justice, whatever the crime. The committee considered carefully the question of which offences should be covered by the exception for other types of new evidence. In that sort of situation, the question mark over guilt would arise not from a confession but from an external factor such as DNA material or a new witness. There seems to be a consensus that a new trial in such circumstances should be possible only for the most serious offences. That will provide certainty in the law and keep the focus on serious crime. The question of which offences should be covered is a difficult one, however. The Scottish Law Commission suggested limiting it to murder and rape. The bill goes further by adding other serious sexual offences and culpable homicide, and valid arguments can be made to include other crimes such as attempted murder or serious drug offences. The Justice Committee questioned whether any list of that sort would ever be adequate, however, and suggested simply restricting the new-evidence exception to cases that were prosecuted originally on indictment or to cases in the High Court. I agree that the focus must be on serious crime, and I will give further consideration to the committee’s views. I also want to hear members’ views on the issue. The Government is genuinely open to ensuring that, when new information or evidence comes to light regarding those who have perpetrated the most serious offences, we are capable of dealing with it. The European convention on human rights sets parameters and for natural justice there is some requirement for certainty, but I am sure that, if we work together in the chamber, in committee and in Government, we will reach a solution that will provide what is required. Section 11 of the bill deals with the situation when an accused has been prosecuted for assault or some other offence involving physical injury, but the victim later dies as a result. At present, the common law allows a further prosecution for causing the death, regardless of whether the accused was convicted or acquitted of the original assault. In order to ensure that the law is consistently and equitably applied, the Government wishes to enshrine that in statute. It is right that such an important and fundamental principle is recognised and retained in our legislation and in our system. I welcome the committee’s general support for that provision. The committee appears to accept that the bill takes the right approach in dealing with the accused who was convicted of the original assault, for which I thank it. I also thank the committee for its pragmatism in recognising the practical reality that demands that more resources are allocated to a murder investigation compared with an apparently simple assault. Discussion of the provision has focused mainly on whether an accused can be tried for murder after being acquitted of the original assault. I believe that the common law in Scotland is correct in allowing the accused to be tried for causing the victim’s death. Such occasions are rare, but they do occur, therefore it is important that they are covered by the law and that victims and their families are protected.

Yes. Mr Brown is correct. That point was flagged up by the committee and I will do my best to answer it. He is correct that a high standard and a high bar must be set. The bill provides that when the accused has been acquitted of assault, the court should apply an interests of justice test. The committee has asked the Government to consider whether in that situation some other additional test should be required before a retrial is allowed for causing the death. The committee has suggested that some form of new-evidence test is required. I am happy to consider the issue ahead of stage 2, but I must stress that it would not be a double jeopardy situation. The second trial in that situation would not be a retrial. The accused would never before have been tried for causing the death of the victim, whether the charge was murder or culpable homicide. He would have been dealt with previously on a lower charge. We would be dealing with a different offence, whereas the double jeopardy exceptions are designed to hear the same offence again. In the scenario, it would not be a straightforward matter of the Crown rehearsing the same evidence. The court would be considering a different offence, which by its very nature would require additional facts and would require the court to consider questions of fact and law that were not considered in the assault trial. There will always be additional evidence in such cases. The very fact that a death occurred will require the Crown to produce further evidence. Medical and forensic evidence will be required to link the death of the victim to the actions of the accused. The previous trial would not and could not have considered that. The bill provides that when there has been an acquittal for assault, the court will have to consider whether it would be in the interests of justice to proceed with the new trial. That requirement, which is new and does not feature in the common law, will offer additional protection to the accused. The Crown will need to consider carefully the evidence that is available to it and the court will need to decide whether it is in the interests of justice to proceed. The committee is right to point out that we should tread very carefully and with great caution in such circumstances. I believe that the interests of justice test that is contained in the bill will ensure that accused persons are treated fairly, but I am happy to consider the point further, either individually with members—be it Mr Brown or anybody else—or directly in discussion with the committee. I express once more my thanks to the committee and to all those who contributed to the process of bringing the bill to Parliament. I hope that the exceptions to double jeopardy that are set out in the bill are seldom used. As was narrated in evidence, it is anticipated that only a handful of such cases will arise over many years, but they will be cases of great significance, both for the individuals concerned and, especially, for the whole justice system. We are, after all, focusing on cases where it appears that justice was not done, which cannot be right. As I said, such cases thankfully are rare, but each one involves suffering by victims and their families and can affect faith in our justice system. We need to get an element of closure whenever we can, and we need to ensure that we bring to trial perpetrators of serious and heinous offences. Allowing a second trial in exceptional cases will lessen suffering and promote public confidence. I am confident that the bill will achieve that aim, and I await with interest the views of members. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill.

Judicial discretion will remain and when a court considers that no other method of dealing with an offender is appropriate because, for example, there is an unacceptable risk to public safety, it will be able to impose a short prison sentence. As they do now, courts will continue to take public safety concerns into account when they decide what sentence it would be appropriate to impose in any particular case.

It will not. The reason for judicial discretion is that the Government was lobbied by those who work in domestic violence and by, for example, Sheriff Susan Raeburn of the domestic abuse court in Glasgow. They made it quite clear that they saw merit in the short sentence because it provides respite for the victims of domestic violence and their families. We were persuaded by that, which is why it remains a matter for the court’s discretion. If Sheriff Raeburn or any of her colleagues, in Glasgow or elsewhere, wish to impose a short sentence to provide respite, they will have the full support of this Administration. We have to break the cycle of reoffending, which is why it is a great tragedy that Mr Kelly failed to note Ed Miliband’s debut speech as leader of the Labour Party in September 2010, when he said: “when Ken Clarke says we need to look at short sentences in prison because of high re-offending rates, I’m not going to say he’s soft on crime.” What a pity that the Labour Party north of the border still has its ears closed.

Absolutely. That is a fundamental point and it is a great tragedy that rather than the Labour Party looking at what Ed Miliband is trying to do south of the border and giving us a coherent penal policy, we get scare stories that are meant to inflame the situation. When someone needs to be sent to prison for a short prison sentence, whether because of domestic abuse or something else, the court will have our full support. Mr Maxwell’s point is equally well made. Those who perpetrate serious violent offences in Scotland should not be getting short prison sentences or community disposals; they should be locked up to protect our communities.

Not at all. I cannot provide the evidence at the moment—it is not in front of me—but anecdotally I can share with Mr Aitken the discussions that I had with the Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice, Ken Clarke. He was telling me about when he was Home Secretary in a Tory Government in the distant past and how, since then, prison numbers have continued to rocket. He persuaded me that the level of crime and anxiety in England have not rocketed to the same extent, and he thought that something was manifestly wrong. That is why the Conservative Government, supported by its Lib Dem partners, is seeking to head in the same direction as this Government, which direction is, as Mr Maxwell pointed out, that prison should be for those who commit serious offences and are dangerous and violent in our communities while those who are feckless, handless or whatever else should be dealt with by tough community sentences. In these times when financial probity is needed, we are sick and tired of having salt added to the wounds by paying substantially to give people free bed and board when they should be paying back through the sweat of their brow for the damage that they have done.

In my statement on 12 January, I set out the Government’s ambitions for improving the performance, local accountability and financial sustainability of Scotland’s police and fire and rescue services. We are looking at how to structure our police and fire and rescue services effectively to protect the front-line delivery that is essential to communities in Angus and across the whole of Scotland. Our consideration of the options is not simply about addressing the significant financial challenges each service faces. It is also about providing appropriate accountability and enhancement of service. We will shortly start a consultation that will allow everyone to put forward their views. Although we are minded towards single services, no decisions will be made until all the evidence, including the consultation responses, has been fully considered.

That is a valid point. We are clear that the status quo is already untenable and the financial strictures are beginning to hit—we see that in news coming from around the country. That is why we have to change, whether it is in the fire and rescue service or in the police. We accept as a Government that change is not cost free and that significant elements of detail require to be fleshed out, but the point that Mr Welsh correctly made is that, although one of the reasons for—indeed, perhaps the genesis of—the proposals for change is the overarching financial position, we should not forget that the current structure was introduced arbitrarily in 1975. Everybody acknowledges that, if we were starting with a blank sheet of paper, we would not configure such services in Scotland in the current way, with one half being represented by one force. We have to look at accountability and structures, and we have to ensure that the level of service provision in urban areas is available elsewhere, even in peripheral rural areas.

I am entering into a consultation and I have set a direction of travel for the Government. I know that the Labour Party has made its final decision without trying to square the detail. We have always made it clear that the quality of policing in Scotland, which is unsurpassed and excellent, has come about because we have policing by consent. It is clear that there is some dissension and dispute, both in the ranks and in our communities, about what the best structure is. As a Government, we are convinced that the current structures are untenable and that we require to go forward, whether that is to a single service or a regional model. We want to reach consensus. On that basis, we are having a consultation and we will seek to work with people to square the circle and to meet the doubts and scepticism. We hope that, ultimately, we will come to a decision that unites the people of Scotland. I will leave it to the Labour Party simply to dictate a position.

The term “weapon” has been taken to mean any form of knife—the most prevalent being lock knives, penknives, kitchen knives and Stanley knives—along with scissors, loose blades for Stanley knives, open razors, razor blades and knitting needles. The number of weapons seized by the Scottish Court Service was 311 in 2007, 1,518 in 2008, 1,937 in 2009 and 2,030 last year. It is likely that the rise in confiscation figures can be attributed to improved security in courts, improved recording and reporting activity, greater awareness among staff, and more frequent sharing of security intelligence between justice partners. The discovery by staff of any weapon or potential weapon is immediately reported to the police, who have a presence and responsibility for public order in all our court buildings, and successful prosecutions have resulted from the Scottish Court Service’s security arrangements.

I practised in the criminal courts in Scotland for 20 years and, during that period, which ended almost 12 years ago, security measures such as metal detectors were introduced. I think that they came in at a time when a Labour Government was in power. The problem is not new. It has been with us for some considerable time. However, it is clear that the actions that the Scottish Government is taking are working. A record police presence, whether in our communities or in our courts, is resulting in people feeling safer and more secure. We have the lowest recorded crime in 32 years and we have also seen a significant drop in violent crime, which is down to its lowest level since 1984. Progress is being made. We do recognise the cultural problem. It is just a great pity that Labour north of the border fails to recognise the opportunity that exists south of the border to work towards a consensus to make our communities safer.

As I said, it is clear that significant progress has been made. The member is correct to point out that significant and substantial progress has been made in his own area of Inverclyde, which has been one of the most blighted areas. Wherever members sit in the chamber, they should recognise that progress. We should also remember that the proposals for a six-month mandatory sentence are significantly less than the powers that are already possessed by a sheriff sitting in a sheriff court in Greenock or elsewhere. It beats me why on earth we would want to have a sheriff impose a lower sentence when somebody with evil intent is apprehended, detained and ultimately prosecuted for possessing a knife. The fact of the matter is that progress is being made and we should welcome the actions of the police, prosecution and indeed those who sit in the judiciary in Inverclyde and elsewhere.

As I briefly mentioned in response to Mr Aitken, I met the Secretary of State for Justice on 14 September last year and we discussed a range of issues including the importance of community sentencing. Since then—indeed, last month—the secretary of state published a green paper on reoffending, much of which I think we can welcome. The UK Government is setting out to reduce the use of short prison sentences, make increased use of community sentences and make such sentences more effective in terms of reducing reoffending. Legislation passed by this Parliament to move in the same direction is of course already on the statute book and will, I am glad to say, come into force on 1 February.

I would absolutely welcome that. I was not aware of that particular quotation, but I very much welcome it. Indeed, it follows on from the comments made by Kenneth Clarke to which I have already referred. I have no doubt that Mr Leigh’s statement will also be welcomed by Ed Miliband, even though it will fall on deaf ears up here. Not only is this approach being taken north and south of the border; the Government and the major opposition parties in the Republic of Ireland are heading in the same direction. With the Conservative Government and the Labour leader down south, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, consensus is growing. I have no doubt that some day and some time sooner rather than later the Tory and Labour coalition that exists in Scotland will come forward.

We have not taken that away. That is the whole purpose of retaining judicial discretion in such matters. I do not know what relationship the member has with Scottish Borders Council, but I point out that my constituency covers areas such as Craigmillar and Lochend, which have their fair share of trouble—more, perhaps, than some of the areas that he represents—and in my experience the community safety team at council level and the policing at police station level have been outstanding. There are, of course, difficulties and challenges to face and there are certain people who neither work for nor want to and cause great difficulties. However, that is why we have and seek to use antisocial behaviour orders and why those who are beyond such measures and face criminal charges are finding that they are going to prison—and for longer.

I want to set out for Parliament the Government's ambitions for improving the performance, local accountability and financial sustainability of Scotland's police and fire and rescue services. Once again, I pay tribute to the outstanding contribution made by our police and fire services to our communities on a daily basis. We have delivered 1,000 additional police officers in our communities, which has helped to achieve the result of a 32-year low in recorded crime. We have also seen fire deaths in Scotland continue to fall over the long term. Those are real successes of which we should all be proud. However, in order to maintain those successes in the face of unprecedented budget cuts from Westminster, the status quo is no longer tenable. The current configuration dates back to the 1970s. Structures need to be able to cope with the challenges of the 21st century. Accordingly, we need to look at how we structure effectively our police and fire and rescue services to protect the front-line delivery that is essential to our communities. It is not simply about financial challenges; it is also about providing appropriate accountability and enhancement of service. All three criteria require to be met and addressed. Change is demanding. It is not without cost or challenges. We require to take time to get it right, but change we must. Police and fire services are not alone; the challenges go across the public sector. It is for that reason that the Christie commission was established, and the results of the consultations that I set out today will be submitted to the commission to inform its wider work. I will recap what has been done to date. Last year, the Government formed two representative sub-groups of the Scottish policing board and the ministerial advisory group on fire and rescue. Drawing directly on input from senior police and fire and rescue officers, that early work confirmed that the status quo in both police and fire services was not tenable and provided some options for change.  Policing and fire services in Scotland have, historically and correctly, happened by consent. That is how we want the position to remain and is why we are consulting. There has been some limited public comment, but it is appropriate that we should widen the debate. We wish to see whether we can reach a consensus as a country on the structures for our fire and police services for the 21st century. Therefore, I am announcing plans for consultations on the future options for both the police and fire and rescue services. The consultations will commence early next month. The consultations will be separate for each service, but run in conjunction with each other. In both there will be three options: eight services, but with enhanced collaboration; a regional structure with fewer boards; and a single service. First, I will deal with fire and rescue. The Government believes that there are compelling arguments for having one service. The options of an enhancement to eight boards or a regional service with fewer boards appear not to meet the criteria of appropriate financial savings, improved accountability or an enhanced service. Collaboration to date has proved challenging and has not delivered the scale of efficiencies required. In reality, the current structure of eight fire boards simply does not lend itself to the most effective collaboration across boundaries. Although a model with fewer regional boards will deliver some returns, it is unlikely to achieve all the desired outcomes. Unnecessary duplication will still exist and local accountability will be further diminished. In our view, a single fire and rescue service with a national framework and standards will be best at reducing unnecessary duplication and cost and making sure that maximum funding is channelled to the front line. Having one service provides the opportunity for greater accountability locally and improved service in our communities. We need to reduce headquarters bureaucracy and provide more autonomy to the front line. There are fears about centralisation, but having one service provides an opportunity to give more power to local stations and local authorities rather than joint boards, one of which can cover up to 12 local authorities. All our communities, irrespective of their postcode, would have access to the full range of Scotland's fire and rescue capability and all our firefighters, wherever they are based, would have appropriate access to the training and equipment that they require. In the 21st century we face a variety of complex and difficult challenges, not all of which are financial, and all areas must be resourced to meet them. Some have argued for a blue-light service incorporating the fire, police and ambulance services. In my view, that case has not been made and there is significant opposition from within  those services to such a scheme. We will seek greater co-operation where appropriate but we are not persuaded of the case for a single blue-light service. That said, we wish to reach as wide a consensus as possible and the consultation provides an opportunity for those otherwise minded to try and persuade us. However, let me be quite clear: any alternative option would require to make those financial savings, meet the need for accountability and provide an enhanced and improved service. With regard to policing, the debate is different and distinct. Again, we will consult on three options—after all, many of the arguments made in respect of the fire service apply to the police—but it is quite clear to us as a Government that the option of the current eight forces with enhanced collaboration will not provide the savings necessary or the enhanced service required to meet the challenges of the 21st century. That leaves the options of a single force or a regional model. Significant arguments have been made for a single force but questions remain over accountability in the absence of local boards and the centralisation of services. Some have argued for a regional model but many questions remain unanswered, in particular whether there would be any significant savings or service enhancement and how accountability would be improved with fewer and more remote boards. That is why we wish to consult: which model meets the criteria of financial savings, improved accountability and an enhanced service? In a single force model, the savings can be significant, which is necessary in these financial times. Such a model can also provide a better service locally, devolving more decision-making control to local commanders who know and account to their local communities. However, there are understandable concerns about accountability and centralisation that have to be answered. There have already been suggestions by, for example, the deputy chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police, who has proposed a model in which local authorities attain more accountability than that which exists through joint boards. It is also argued that having one service in fact provides more autonomy for local areas. However, those arguments have to be made and won. A regional model with three or four forces has some legitimacy. However, those who favour that model will need to demonstrate that, with the retention of so many back offices, the required savings can be made; that, with even more remote joint boards, accountability can be provided; and that improved service can be provided across all forces.  The consultation provides the opportunity for those who support a particular option to make their case and address their doubters. They have to demonstrate that the option in question will make the savings, provide the accountability and enhance the service. The status quo is no longer tenable in both the fire service and the police. The Government believes that there is a compelling case for a single fire service but we will strive to reach a consensus. As for the police, a strong case has been made for a single service but concerns about accountability need to be allayed. There is an argument for a regional model but significant efficiency challenges have to be overcome. In a country where we pride ourselves on policing by consent, we hope that the consultation provides us with an opportunity to reach a consensus. Let us decide as a country on the structures of our police and fire and rescue services to meet the challenges of the 21st century.

I welcome Richard Baker's support for our position on a single fire and rescue service. The consultation will last for the normal period of three months. As for the Scottish National Party's position at the election, that will be decided by those who are in charge of that. The police and fire services are distinctly different—we have seen that in the arguments that a variety of officers have made in public. Scotland has always prided itself—correctly—on policing by consent and not by diktat. We do not wish to go down the Labour route of dictating to the police; we will try to reach a consensus. I would have thought that Mr Baker would welcome the opportunity for a consultation, so that we could reach a consensus—as a Parliament, I hope, and perhaps even in the Labour Party. On the airwaves today, Eric Milligan—a Labour councillor—denounced the one force option. I have received letters on the matter and, in the Dundee Courier , the Labour MP Tom Docherty opposed the abolition of Fife Constabulary. I would have thought that Labour would welcome a consultation, so that it could perhaps even achieve a consensus itself, before we sought a consensus in the country.

We do not support the proposed elected commissioners, which all ranks of the police service uniformly oppose. We do not seek to replicate that proposal. That said, I welcome and agree with John Lamont's point that the nub of the debate on the police is accountability and fears of centralisation. How do we ensure that areas do not lose services? How do we prevent power from going to the centre and retain it at the grass roots? The deputy chief constable whom I mentioned has contributed significantly to the debate. As has been mentioned, opportunities exist in relation to  the fire service, which could be replicated, as the deputy chief constable has said. Local authorities could have their own police and fire boards, of which every councillor could be a member. That would allow every councillor to have an influence, unlike the current position, in which seven out of eight of our councillors are not members of such boards. John Lamont is correct to flag up that the issue is accountability. We accept that there is a strong case for one force and that the understandable doubts that remain will have to be overcome. We know that legitimacy would otherwise be given to other options.

A variety of matters are involved. I will try to deal with them all. Robert Brown asks whether policing is local or national. The answer is the same as the answer to the question whether policing is about rapid response or the bobby pounding the beat: it is both. The police have to be local because that is fundamental to the safety and security of our  communities. In the 21st century, we face significant challenges. Even in this country and this chamber, we know the threat of terrorism. That cannot be dealt with locally; we have to ensure that we deal with it collectively, just as we do with serious and organised crime. We know that crime does not respect local boundaries or local communities. As I said, policing is both local and national. The fundamental point that Robert Brown and John Lamont raised is accountability. That remains an issue. There has to be validation. We will embark on pursuing that in parallel with on-going matters in terms of the consultation. We will undertake further drilling down into the figures. The figure of £200 million that was released has been disputed. I will not say that the figure is pound perfect in any way, but I can say that significant savings can be made by a move to one force. We can argue about the amount, but significant savings can be made. The status quo is not tenable. If we were to follow the Liberal Democrat line and the status quo were to remain, we would end up in the position of people south of the border. I remind the chamber of the position of Greater Manchester Police under the Liberal coalition south of the border. It is to lose a quarter of its 12,000 staff, including front-line officers. A total of 1,387 officers and 1,557 civilian posts could go. On Monday 15 November, the chief constable announced that 750 civilian employees and 309 officers would go by 2012, with more to follow, and that, by the financial year 2014-15, there would be a 23 per cent reduction in employee numbers. The status quo is not tenable. We can argue over whether there should be a single force or a regional model. Arguments about accountability have to be made in terms of centralisation, financing and performance across the remaining forces in relation to the regional model, as well as the accountability of remote boards—

We cannot stay as we are. If we do, we will end up with the redundancies that are happening south of the border.

Yes, I do. Local knowledge remains fundamentally important. That applies in the fire service especially but it also applies in the police. A move to a single fire service does not mean that there has to be a single control room. As we have said, there have been difficulties with the firelink scheme. However, that matter will be reviewed, and whether we move to one control room is a separate issue. Many people have made good arguments that we need to consider sharing across services. On Stewart Maxwell's fundamental point, a single service does not mean that everything has to be centralised. We are conscious that the issue must be about decentralisation of powers to local commanders and local stations, and about ensuring that there is accountability locally. We have taken those points on board and they will be fundamental to the consultation.

The consultation is to decide on the structure. Some of the aspects that James Kelly mentioned will be viewed as operational. It would not occur to me, nor to my colleague the Minister for Community Safety—nor, indeed, to any of our predecessors—to interfere with those matters. We have the ministerial advisory group. We have to go forward to a consultation on the structure. On the issue of how fire officers do their work, we correctly leave that to those who are empowered in that area and who represent those on the front line. We will work in collaboration with fire officers and the Fire Brigades Union on those matters as we seek to reach a consensus about how we build on the excellent service in every rank.

I do not have that information to hand but I am happy to try to obtain it from the relevant sources and provide it to the member. The Government echoes the comments of the chief fire officer of Strathclyde—perhaps it is a pity that other members did not heed them—about the problems of alcohol and the consequences not simply for the health service but throughout society.

Cathie Craigie's comments seem to be in direct opposition to the comments made by Richard Baker, but there we go—some things do not change. We have already put the various minutes on the ministerial action group and Scottish policing board web pages. When we go to consultation we will be happy to make available any further information. There are groups working in collaboration, and we will be as open and supportive as we can be. We have taken on officials seconded from the Fire Brigades Union and staff from Lothian and Borders, Strathclyde and other forces. This is a matter on which we are striving to reach a consensus. It is a pity that Cathie Craigie cannot change the habits of a lifetime.

That is a sensible point. As I mentioned in the statement, we considered co-operation across services. Although we are opposed to having one blue-light service as such, we recognise that co-operation between services is essential. There has been a great deal of co-operation to date, but there can be a great deal more. We accept the point that Bill Aitken makes about back-office services. Much of that is a matter of operational balance, and it is important to get it right. We will be more than happy to take the issue on board and to try and ensure that those who are now building on the situation and who are dealing with the consultation also take it on board.

I listen to all police officers, irrespective of their rank. I listen to the deputy chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police, to the chief constable of Grampian Police, to the chief constable of Strathclyde Police and to the chair of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, which has made it clear that the fundamental argument is about what works—although the association is minded to support having one force. The point that Mr Rumbles correctly makes is that local factors are important. We accept that accountability—which was raised by John Lamont—is fundamental, and we must deal with that. Those who support the option of having one force must allay fears that it will mean a negation of local matters. I do not necessarily think that it will, but that argument has to be won. My interaction is not, in the main, with chief constables—except when I am doing my day job as cabinet secretary. As a constituency MSP, my interaction is with rank-and-file beat officers and inspectors, whether that is in Portobello, Leith, Musselburgh or Craigmillar. That is where power must go—as well as there being sharing of back-office services.

That is a valid point. Those matters have to be expanded on by those who promote the argument for a single service. We have to ensure that the structure provides more power at grass-roots level, especially to local commanders, who know their areas. If there is to be a single service, centralisation must be shown to mean that not everything is on one site; the fruits that come from centralisation must be shared around communities, wherever they may be.

As I said in response to Richard Baker, we are not trying to obtain consensus by diktat—although that may be the Labour position. There is a considerable argument for, and a lot of merit in, what has been put forward by the deputy chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police, which provides an answer to Mr Butler's point. Other suggestions or points might be made by other officers, whether they are in Strathclyde or in the north. That is why we are having a consultation. The arguments have to be won, because of people's legitimate concerns about accountability and centralisation. We have to strive for consensus.

No. That is not the approach that operates in most other matters. I think that Deputy Chief Constable Steve Allen, of Lothian and Borders Police, whom Margo MacDonald will know, referred to the possibility of there being a  board, predicated on the boards that will be based at local authority level. The issue is another fundamental point that must be answered by the people who support the idea of a single force. If such points, whether in relation to protection from political interference or local accountability, cannot be answered by those people, I would have thought that the argument that aims to build consensus will fail, leaving another option. However, if people can succeed in answering those points, and given the position in relation to savings, I think that there will be success. That is why we are having a consultation. There is an answer, but it must be given and people must be persuaded.

I thank the committee and its clerking team for its stage 1 scrutiny of Hugh Henry's bill. The bill raises a number of issues, which I will touch on during my short contribution to the debate. No one disagrees that workers who serve the public deserve protection. What the stage 1 scrutiny has revealed, however, is that there is disagreement on how best that can be achieved. It is important to be clear about the effect that the bill would have if it were passed. It would take a bit of the existing common law of assault and replicate it as a new statutory offence. It would not extend the criminal law in any way and it would not, therefore, extend new protections at all.  We sympathise with Hugh Henry and the important issues that his bill casts light on, and we agree that raising awareness of the issues that workers face is critical. Parliamentary scrutiny helps in that regard. However, the issue cannot be addressed without tackling the underlying causes of the offences. We have clearly said that only through rebalancing Scotland's relationship with alcohol can we hope to achieve long-term success in reducing violence in our society, including alcohol-fuelled incidents against workers. The statistics are clear. According to a 2009 survey, 50 per cent of prisoners indicated that they were under the influence of alcohol at the time they committed their offences and 45 per cent indicated that they were under the influence of drugs. We are concerned that the bill would apply to so many types of worker that it would, in effect, risk creating confusion in the law over those who would be covered and those who would not. We note the comments that were made during stage 1 about the lack of data on offences on workers. However, we are not persuaded that spending money on collecting more data is preferable to spending money on putting 1,000 extra officers on the streets. We make no apologies for that—putting more police on the streets is where our priorities lie. That kind of visible police presence will reassure and protect public-facing workers and, where any such worker is assaulted, will detect and bring to punishment those who have perpetrated the offence. Any decision on guidelines on the prosecution of assaults against public-facing workers is of course a matter for the Lord Advocate. However, I am clear that the Lord Advocate—and indeed the Solicitor General, whom I met yesterday to discuss the bill—the Crown and prosecutors at every level take very seriously cases in which a public-facing worker is the victim. Every member of the public and public-facing worker should be reassured in that regard. I also point out that such matters are quite correctly regarded as an aggravation that can be considered by sheriffs under the common law. Having practised in the criminal courts, I can say that sheriffs view assaults on the workers to whom Mr Henry referred as a considerable aggravation and a matter to be dealt with in the most serious way, and we should recognise and support the commonsense approach that those in the judiciary and the Crown take to such cases. As with prosecutions under the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, prosecutors will often seek to prosecute cases against public-facing workers in the sheriff summary courts rather than in the justice of the peace courts to ensure that a higher sentencing limit applies. As for sentencing guidelines, we agree that, when the  sentencing council is established, it may well wish to examine whether guidelines in this area would assist the Crown and the judiciary. This is a well-intentioned piece of legislation and we all support its intention of protecting people from individual actions. However, for the reasons that we have given—in particular, the need to tackle the root problem of alcohol abuse—we will not support it at decision time.

I have had no such discussions with local authorities.

I am surprised at the hostility of a member of the Conservative party to private enterprise. I meet quarterly with the Law Society of Scotland, which represents solicitors who work in the public sector and solicitors who work in the private sector. It seems to me that this is a matter of balance. Some matters are understandably and correctly put out to tender, particularly large-scale conveyancing, and some matters are deeply complex and are beyond the skills or attributes of those who work in the public sector. I believe that councils seek to strike an appropriate balance  between what they can do in-house and what is correctly sent out to the private sector. If there are particular matters of concern in relation to the City of Edinburgh Council, I am sure that members of Mr Brocklebank's party who are members of the council will raise them.

In criminal matters, the Government believes that it is desirable to restore the historic position of the High Court of Justiciary as the final court of appeal, as it was prior to devolution. In civil cases, for as long as Scotland remains part of the United Kingdom, a range of complex questions would need to be resolved before consideration could be given to removing the historic link between the Court of Session and the Supreme Court—formerly the House of Lords. Of course, the Scottish Government’s preferred option is that, in an independent Scotland, the final court of appeal in both civil and criminal cases should be in Scotland.

It is an opportunity. The Advocate General for Scotland has indicated his willingness to look at certain matters. We think that the Scotland Bill offers an opportunity to restore matters, avoid some cases going to the Supreme Court and avoid fundamentally amending Scottish criminal law when that was never the intention either of the Westminster Parliament or this Parliament.

Trafficking in human beings is an abhorrent crime that has no place in a civilised society. Tackling that form of serious organised crime is a priority for the Government and we are working with others with the aim of eradicating it in Scotland. That work is being led by the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, which we have provided with £4 million of additional funding to boost its capacity to tackle organised crime. The agency has established a human trafficking unit, which is Scotland’s first expert resource dedicated to building the intelligence necessary to improve and support the investigation of human trafficking. The Scottish Government is also supporting the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s inquiry into human trafficking in Scotland, which is led by Baroness Helena Kennedy.

Trafficking is a complex matter on which it is appropriate that we all try to work together. I said in my evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee that the important issue was which system was best for the victim. That means that we have to be able to deal with particular localities and work with local authorities. On the separate UKBA point, it is a matter of record that Ms McKelvie, the First Minister, the Government and, I believe, most members in the chamber are deeply discomfited by some of the actions that the UKBA is taking. We must always remember that we are dealing with victims, and that applies most particularly when we are dealing with those who are vulnerable, such as children.

I think that this Government has already dealt with the issue of on-street prostitution. We legislated on that issue early on, and we increased the penalties for those involved in running brothels and in other such matters in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010. We are aware that, in many ways, off-street prostitution is tied in with human trafficking and, indeed, with serious organised crime. It is for that reason, as I said in answer to Christina McKelvie, that we have been operating with Baroness Helena Kennedy, who is carrying out an investigation and to whom I have given evidence. Our justice directorate, the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and the Crown are fully supporting her. We should await the outcome of her review; thereafter, I think that it would be appropriate for us, as a chamber, to seek to act upon it.

The Solicitor General for Scotland advises me that there have been convictions, and we are also aware of people in Scotland who have been involved in Northern Ireland, where a Scottish gang was convicted. We clearly co-operate with the authorities, such as the Police Service of Northern Ireland and the justice directorate across the Irish channel. We know that matters are on-going, but we are dealing with people who are often frightened and who, in many instances, have a different view of the police and the prosecution than we do in this country. We have to raise awareness, but there are some areas of the country where it is perhaps less prevalent than it is in others.  I think that I can give Mr Brown, who I know has pursued the matter doggedly, an absolute assurance that all of us, whether in the SCDEA, the Crown Office, the voluntary agencies or, indeed, the chamber, are looking to learn what the extent of the problem is. That is what we are looking to establish through Baroness Helena Kennedy’s investigation, which we will seek to act on, whether by providing resources—albeit that this is a time of financial austerity—by making legislative changes or by addressing attitudes. I think that there is a common will in Scotland, as in the chamber, that trafficking is abhorrent and that we have to deal with it.

The prisoner accommodation in Friarton hall is not fit for purpose and would require significant investment before it could be used to house the mainstream prisoner population. There are no plans to make such investment.

Absolutely. I thank Murdo Fraser for the tenor of his question and the  manner in which he asked it. Discussions are on-going. Although these are operational matters for the Scottish Prison Service, I point out that we operate with partners and today I met not only the SPS but the Prison Officers Association to discuss Friarton and other issues. The various issues are being borne in mind in discussions and decisions will be made shortly.

Forensic science services are a vital part of the fight against crime in Scotland. Following a debate on the matter in September, I made a commitment to come back to the Parliament to make a statement on the future of forensic science services in Scotland. I have given due consideration to all the options presented to me and I will now inform the Parliament of my decision. Since forensic talent was brought together in the Scottish Police Services Authority in 2007, there has been a remarkable improvement in the standard of service delivered. Outstanding cases have halved, and more than nine out of 10 criminal justice DNA samples are now placed on the database within four days, compared to one in 10 in 2007. However, challenges remain and the service needs to modernise in order to meet the needs of its customers and cope with the difficult financial situation that we face. Let me stress, though, that in reaching a decision on this matter I have been determined to reflect as far as possible the will of the Parliament. I have met union representatives and members of the Parliament from various parties and have given careful consideration to their views. For the benefit of the Parliament, I begin with a reminder of the process that brought us here today. Following an initial proposal by the SPSA to close the Aberdeen forensic science laboratory in 2008, I asked the SPSA to work instead on a national service model for all forensic science services. That modernisation programme led the SPSA to publish four options for improving the speed, consistency and cost effectiveness of forensic analysis in Scotland. Option 1 was to retain the current laboratory configuration and introduce new service standards to improve effectiveness and efficiency. Option 2 was the same as option 1, with the addition of an information technology system known as an evidence management solution—EMS. Option 3 was to reduce the laboratory configuration to two  laboratories, at Dundee and Gartcosh, and to introduce the EMS. Option 4 was to create two high-volume processing units to service four local satellite laboratories based in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee and Aberdeen, and to introduce the EMS. The SPSA board wrote to me on 30 September recommending the implementation of option 4. The SPSA is publishing that information on its website today. On 23 September, the Parliament supported a motion in favour of option 2. While I see many merits in option 4, as recommended by the SPSA, I recognise the value of retaining some of the vital elements of local expertise that would be delivered under option 2. That is why, as a result of my decision, the Aberdeen and Edinburgh labs will not only remain open, but retain 20 scientific and fingerprint staff, compared to the 12 to 15 anticipated in the SPSA board recommendation. However, in the face of the toughest financial settlement from Westminster that the Parliament has ever faced, the need for greater efficiency is clear. That is why I have decided on an enhanced service option that is as close to option 2 as can be afforded in the current economic climate. This will see serious and urgent local biology and DNA analysis retained in each of the four laboratories. Under the SPSA recommendation, all DNA analysis would have been centralised to a high-volume processing unit. My approach recognises the value of local expertise that was central to the Parliament's support for option 2. I will explain how I came to my decision. First, I looked at what the SPSA's customers want. They said that they want greater consistency and resilience to provide fast results for day-to-day crimes as well as expert support on serious and violent crimes. My decision recognises the fundamental importance of creating a greater separation between serious and volume crime processing. Dedicated volume crime teams will bring consistency to volume crime management and ensure a continuous flow of work that is not affected by serious crime cases. Secondly, I looked at forensic drug services. Relatively few drug cases need an urgent turnaround and the recent legislative changes in the Cadder case have further increased the time window for tests. The compelling case, therefore, is to migrate volume crime drug analysis to a high-volume processing unit while retaining some scientific staff for urgent drug analysis within each service centre. Thirdly, I looked at DNA. In considering the board's recommendation it was clear to me that, although there is a case for centralising volume DNA casework, there remains a strong argument for retaining at a local level urgent DNA analysis  and biology examinations, including for sexual offences. This enhanced service option will enable the SPSA to move to a new forensic science services model that has scene examination embedded within the eight forces as they are today. It will also see the creation of two volume processing units in Glasgow—later to be at Gartcosh—and Dundee, and four strong and sustainable scientific satellite laboratories in all four current locations to provide expert local scientific support. The services that will be delivered from the local satellite laboratories will now include serious and urgent local biology analysis, including for sexual offences; local DNA analysis; limited mark enhancement; footwear intelligence; urgent fingerprint analysis; and urgent police drug analysis cases. National specialist services will remain local, with hair and fibres in Aberdeen, firearms in Glasgow, documents and handwriting in Glasgow, and toxicology in Edinburgh. The two high-volume processing units will now process general chemistry services such as paint and glass analysis and fire debris analysis; footwear comparison; full mark enhancement examinations; fingerprint identifications for non-urgent crime cases; biology and DNA analysis for volume crime cases; and drug analysis. As a consequence of the new structure, the SPSA will streamline management posts across Scotland by up to 50 per cent as part of an overall reduction of 74 posts. The reduction in posts will affect all forensic services across Scotland, not only Aberdeen and Edinburgh. The implementation of option 2 would have cost the SPSA an additional £1.4m in the next financial year compared to the cost of option 4. The enhanced service option that I am announcing will cost £580,000 more than option 4. Option 2 would therefore require the SPSA to find even greater additional savings—over £820,000 next year—from its other vital services such as training, police information and communications technology, and vital criminal justice information systems. That is a bridge too far. I believe that the option that I have outlined strikes the right balance between achieving efficiencies and retaining valuable local scientific expertise. However, in acknowledgement of the potential for structural change in Scottish policing as a whole, I have decided that a review of the effectiveness of implementing the model should be undertaken in 18 months' time and reported on to the SPSA board, so that it can monitor progress and success. To underpin the enhanced service option, I am pleased to announce a £600,000 investment in the procurement of an evidence management IT solution, which is vital to the successful delivery of  the forensic science services modernisation programme. That investment comes on top of the nearly £50 million of investment in forensic science services that is already in train through the new state of the art laboratory in Dundee and the Gartcosh crime campus. I recognise that this has been a long and difficult journey for many and regret that my decision will have consequences for individuals in the forensic science service. However, modernisation is necessary. The model that I propose will enable the SPSA to deliver a more efficient and consistent service, while ensuring that the existing laboratories remain open. I am confident that the structure will deliver the best possible service for Scottish policing and the criminal justice community and look forward to working with the SPSA on its implementation over the coming months.

Richard Baker made several points in his question. I remind him that earlier today he challenged the First Minister on cuts to back-room services in the police and the difficulties that some face as a result. As I pointed out in my statement, implementing option 2 without the amendment that I propose would have cost an additional £820,000. I did not hear Mr Baker suggest from where that money should be obtained. I also indicated that implementing the EMS IT system that he supports and on which option 2 was predicated will cost an additional £600,000 just in the coming year. We are providing that money from the justice budget. If we do not make efficiencies in the part of the SPSA where they have been identified, Mr Baker must tell us which part of the authority he wishes to reduce and where that stands in relation to the points that he made to the First Minister earlier today. It is certainly my intention, if still in situ after May next year, not to make any variation pending the review that I have called for. Matters remain as they are in that regard. There is something disingenuous in the member arguing—with crocodile tears—for something that would result in increased costs without commenting on where he would make the savings. That comes on the same day that he has made criticisms about other aspects of funding where savings are being made. The member's suggestion that there should not be a review comes as the Labour Party has decided on having one police service—without even considering the evidence that we are putting before a police board. To think that there is no relationship between forensic science and the configuration of the police service is equally disingenuous.

I thank Mr Lamont both for his question and for the spirit in which it was asked. He is quite correct: there is a clear correlation between the number of police services that we operate in Scotland and the forensic science facilities. It is not an exact match, however, as Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary, Fife Constabulary and Northern Constabulary do not have their own forensic science facilities. We have yet to decide whether there is to be a change, radical or otherwise, in police services. I know that that view is shared across the other side of the chamber and it is essential that we look at the evidence on that. The question is whether we could have postponed the decision on forensic science services. If we did that, it would not be possible to make the progress required to keep the forensic science services upgraded and maintain investment. We cannot provide the necessary level of investment without being aware of the sophistication of the equipment—drug analysis machines come at a significant cost. The investment in Dundee, and the investment that is wanted and welcomed by Labour, in particular, at Gartcosh, all comes at a cost. Dundee is open and Gartcosh is under way. I do not think that we could have postponed that. We require to make some progress to build upon a service that I accept is excellent—that is accepted by members around the chamber. We have to make progress in the climate that we find ourselves in. It will be for either me or anybody else who is in the position of justice secretary in 18 months' time to carry out a review. I can certainly give an undertaking that I will seek to be open and to publish the review. What I have said today is being published. The SPSA recommendation is on the web as we speak and it is engaged in discussions. We give an assurance that there will be a spirit of openness.

The position is not as Mr Stephen puts it. Indeed, the Aberdeen laboratory retains its expertise in fibres and other matters. For the record, let me remind him that Edinburgh and Aberdeen will not be closing, despite what he suggested—

As Mr Rumbles yet again comments loudly from a sedentary position, I reiterate that there will be 20 scientific and fingerprint staff at both Edinburgh and Aberdeen—14 biology, two chemistry and four fingerprint staff. We must take two things into account. First, we are in this position because we face financial challenges, as well as the challenge of modernising forensic science services. It is gross hypocrisy for members of parties that are in the coalition down south, which is imposing the cuts, to shed crocodile tears. Secondly, and perhaps more devastating, I think that I would have some sympathy for Mr Stephen if the Liberal Democrats down south were of the same view as he is. Down south, however, they have but six laboratories and the Liberal Democrat position in the Administration there is that they will privatise forensic science services. We are preserving forensic science laboratories in Aberdeen and in Edinburgh. The Liberal Democrats, where they are in power south of the border, propose to privatise forensic science services.

Yes, I can confirm that. Those are the job numbers. In addition, there will be, as I say, other jobs that are not of a scientific or fingerprint nature that will also be based there. Indeed, there are some costs, because there is a voluntary redundancy scheme, and we have factored in those costs. As I say, we have decided to ensure that we have the best possible forensic science service available at a time when there is a difficult financial climate.

There are two aspects to that question. First, I have made it clear that there will be a loss of 70 jobs. As I say, management jobs will be streamlined by 50 per cent. That will be dealt with by voluntary redundancy. The precise figure in each location will depend upon the configuration, which the SPSA is working out with members of staff. The point raised by Lord Foulkes would have some substance were it not for the fact that, far from championing Lothian and Borders Police, he has already decided that the force should be abolished and become part of the greater Scottish police service, with the consequences that we all know will follow. Yet again, we have crocodile tears from the Labour Party.

Yes, I can. Obviously, I discussed the matter earlier with Vic Emery, the SPSA's convener. Over the next few weeks we will discuss a budget with the SPSA. I have confirmed that we will meet the initial £600,000 that is required for EMS.  Mr FitzPatrick is correct to say that the option is not the optimum saving that the SPSA sought, but we think that it best meets the will of the Parliament in the current financial climate. Those who suggest that there should be greater saving should realise that any additional expenditure on the forensic science service would be at the expense of the budget for other aspects of policing, which budget Mr Baker and others deeply lamented earlier today.

I do not believe that the agreement will limit the number of cases that are sent for analysis. Our service agreements are worked out in conjunction with the police and the Crown. It is not only the police in Scotland who are involved; the Crown is required to produce the evidence and base its case on the analysis. We have borne in mind the requirement to deal with urgent matters. We recognise that improvements in technology are coming through, which is why we have retained four local satellite offices. Equally, there is a clear understanding that, where there is no great urgency with respect to crimes, the equipment, given its sophistication and cost, cannot be spaced out among each of the local satellite offices. There will have to be some element of centralisation, but that will provide what the police and the Crown require to continue to make Scotland safer.

I confirm that there will be 20 scientific and fingerprint staff in both Edinburgh and Aberdeen.

I cannot, because, as Mr McLetchie is well aware, redundancy costs are predicated on the length of an individual's service. However, it is accepted that, with 74 posts going, there will be costs. Some people will go through natural wastage, and some posts will go through the recruitment freeze that is currently being implemented. There is a cost factor, and a reduction in efficiencies, and I confirm that we have factored those in. It is clear that we are investing £600,000 initially in the EMS IT system that members, including Mr McLetchie, want. It is also clear that, if we do not make the changes to the position that the Parliament voted for in September, that would cost an additional £820,000. It is incumbent on those who want that to tell us where we should acquire that money.

Northern Ireland has only one laboratory, and, as I said earlier, the forensic science service that is operated by the Home Office in England and Wales has only six laboratories. Sadly, it appears that the Liberal-Conservative coalition will privatise that service.

We have said that DNA analysis will be retained locally in Edinburgh and Aberdeen. How that service is configured is an operational matter, but we are retaining the urgent DNA analysis that the police sought and which was part of where the Parliament wanted to go,  back in September. We are delivering what we can. The operational matters are for the SPSA.

We are determined to put front-line services first. That is why we will maintain police officer numbers at their current level, at least 1,000 more than when we came into power. It is  also why we are examining the options for more fundamental reform of our police service to put bobbies before boundaries and to ensure that the excellent policing we have now is sustainable into the future.

I refer Mr Butler not only to the comments that my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth made, but to the press release and comments from the general secretary of the Scottish Police Federation. The Scottish Parliament welcomed the commitments that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has made, which the police have accepted and, indeed, welcomed. Those who continually talk down Scotland and continually talk up other matters in the face of the highest-ever number of police officers in Scotland and the lowest recorded crime in 32 years should recognise a good thing when a good thing is announced.

I conjoin with Cathie Craigie in saying how excellent police support staff are. We are aware of their concerns as a result of the budgets that boards have provisionally brought in. Given the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth's announcement, many of the apocalyptic views that were voiced by some—certainly those on Opposition benches—will be shown to be groundless. Indeed, I look forward to police forces looking forward to recruiting more  and securing the position of those who give service as uniformed officers or in the back room.

Yes. The finalised terms of reference for Lord Carloway's review of law and practice have been agreed and published. A copy has been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre under bib number 52072.

I consulted Lord Carloway. At the end of the day, the remit is Lord Carloway's. We consulted him on the matter and he suggested some changes, which we accepted. It would be entirely inappropriate for me to seek to undermine the position of a High Court judge who was nominated by the Lord President to carry out a significant review into the law, practice and evidence that we have in Scotland. Obviously, Lord Carloway will take on board those from other bodies to give him advice—we will discuss that with him—and he may, or may not, choose to select Mr Brown as one of them. I would have thought that Lord Carloway will take on board those from the defence agencies, the Law Society of Scotland, police officers and others with a remit. We should accept the significant stature of Lord Carloway and allow him to get on with his difficult job, which we expect him to deal with as expeditiously as possible given its critical nature in our criminal justice system.

Effective enforcement of existing laws is part of the Government's alcohol framework for action and we encourage licensing boards to use their powers to their full extent. That is particularly important when alcohol misuse costs Scotland £3.56 billion every year, or £900 for every adult. The World Health Organisation considers that restricting availability is one of the key ways of reducing consumption and harm, and availability of alcohol can be addressed by increasing price and by restricting outlet density. The Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 requires licensing boards to adopt a proactive approach to the overprovision of licensed premises. Having established such a policy, the board is in a position to refuse an application that has been made for premises in the localities that it has decided are overprovided for. The board must still, of course, consider each case on its merits and within the context of its overprovision policy.

The member makes a valid point. I have heard about what West Dunbartonshire Council is doing. The council is acting within its remit to protect its communities from the harm that alcohol can do. It has also done extensive research into the medical harm that alcohol does and into its consequences for justice, society and the community in West Dunbartonshire. I support fully the drive and desire of West Dunbartonshire licensing board and the council as a whole to take steps to protect themselves. I do not doubt that other licensing boards will consider such measures. Where licensing boards take steps to protect their communities from the oversupply, excessive availability and—despite what has happened recently—ridiculous pricing of alcohol, they will have our full support.

I am surprised that Jackie Baillie should raise that issue. The 2005 act was  brought in by the previous Liberal-Labour Administration. There are some difficulties associated with it, but we supported it when we were in opposition because we thought that that was the right direction in which to go; if only others who are in opposition now would show the same sense and look to the national interest. We have reviewed some matters. Immediately after we came into office, we were lobbied by the police about the fit and proper person test. We reinstated that immediately, because there were issues that needed to be addressed. In the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, which was passed recently, we have taken action to deal with issues relating to licensing. We can review, consult and take all sorts of steps, but at the end of the day tackling the problem of alcohol abuse in Scotland requires three Rs. First, alcohol must be consumed responsibly; we are on a journey in that regard. Secondly, it must be promoted responsibly; action has been taken in that area. Thirdly, it must be priced responsibly; shamefully, action has not been taken on that issue.

Thirty-one of the 33 recommendations have been implemented. Of those, nine were implemented prior to 10 May 2007 and 22 have been delivered since then. We are unable to implement recommendation 20, requiring housing applicants to declare that they are registered sex offenders, as that would not be compatible with the Scottish Parliament's duty to ensure that all legislation that it passes is compliant with the European convention on human rights. We expect recommendation 12 to be delivered in 2011.

Mr Martin raises a variety of matters, and I pay tribute to him for the manner in which he has supported Margaret Ann Cummings. I acknowledge the progress that has been made, collectively. The situation is regrettable. The Government sought to establish whether we could avoid the impediment that has been placed upon us, but the legal advice was clear that that would not be compliant with the ECHR. The matter clearly causes concern, especially to local authorities and to those who deal with housing applications. The member's point regarding the tragic death of the young Mark Cummings is clear. We must recognise that there other ways in which we can now carry out monitoring, through sexual offences prevention orders and multi-agency public protection arrangements. It would have been preferable had we been able to pursue matters in the way that emerged from the general  review. I can assure Mr Martin and the Parliament that there are other ways of ensuring that the police co-operate with housing associations, which, in turn, should co-operate with social work departments. The issue was not simply to do with the address that Leggate was living at; one of the clear problems arising from that case was the failure to have joined-up communications between the various organisations concerned, all of which have not just a statutory obligation but a moral obligation to look after the safety of our youngsters. Progress has been made, despite the difficulties that we have faced as a result of the impediment to bringing the matter to fruition.

No, the Scottish Government has not been consulted by the UK Government over its reported plans to change electoral law in response to the European Court of Human Rights decision on convicted prisoners having the right to vote.

The Scottish Government has always made its position clear. We were not consulted by the current UK Government on its pronouncement, but in prior discussions the Scottish Government made it clear that it did not agree with the proposal to give prisoners the  franchise. The situation in Scotland has always been that people who are remanded, who are innocent pending a trial, have the right to vote, but people who have been convicted of a criminal offence, whether it is serious or otherwise, face consequences as well as the imposition of a penalty by the court. I cannot comment on the particular circumstances of the ward in Dumfries to which Elaine Murray referred. I do not think that there will necessarily be a great rush among the fraternity to take matters up. The member can rest assured that the Government disagrees with the UK Government's decision and that previously, when there was a consultation, we clearly, unambiguously and specifically expressed the view that we did not agree with the approach.

The Scottish Government has announced a fully independent review of law and practice in the wake of the decision in Cadder v Her Majesty's Advocate. The review will be led by Lord Carloway, who is a senior High Court judge, and will encompass many of the issues that are addressed in the 2010 act. The review will report in sufficient time to provide the option of legislating during the 2011-12 parliamentary year.

I will deal with the member's questions in reverse order. Yes, the Law Society of Scotland and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland were fully canvassed on the matter, and the chief superintendent who represents ACPOS in that regard is ensuring that police training is brought up to speed. Thanks to the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland, guidance changed in the summer and there is already implementation in relation to many matters. The specific change in the 2010 act is the increase in the maximum period of detention, to ensure that the police can do their job and balance the rights of people who face accusations in relation to serious offences with the needs of the  police and the need for our communities to be protected from crime. ACPOS and the Law Society of Scotland have been in discussion for a considerable time. I discussed the matter with Professor Alan Miller at a meeting of international human rights commissioners, which was hosted in the Parliament—I think that that was the first United Nations-supported event that we have held here. I made it clear to Professor Miller and to most of the representatives and dignitaries at the meeting that the Government fully supports human rights, as do the people of Scotland, but we think that human rights means the right not to have one's family starve before one's very eyes, the right not to have one's country disappear under rising sea levels and the right to greater access to truth and justice. The position of members who appear to think that the extension of the period of detention from six to 12 hours correlates with such issues seems preposterous. I have just dealt with a question on the right to vote of people who are convicted of serious offences, including the sexual abuse and murder of youngsters, and a question about the right of people who are convicted of a serious sexual offence not to have that information routinely made available to housing associations that deal with them. As I said at the meeting of international human rights commissioners, in the context of what we mean when we talk about human rights, some people in Scotland should get things in proportion.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will make a statement on the budget to Parliament next week. I have had full discussions with him, not simply on the Cadder case but on the other challenges that face the Scottish Government, and the justice directorate in particular, as a consequence of the problems arising from the cuts that were initiated by the Labour Government in London and which are now accelerating under the Conservative-Liberal coalition. The figures in the financial memorandum to the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention  and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 2010 are as Mr Kelly said. However, as matters become clear, it is being recognised that the doomsday scenario that some predicted is not coming to fruition. That said, no one should underestimate the difficulties that will be caused as a result of a decision of the UK Supreme Court, which is not meant to deal with criminal appeals in Scotland. That decision will have not just financial consequences, but significant consequences for the law of Scotland; that was never meant to happen and it is a matter that will require to be addressed.

No; we will discuss Lord Carloway's remit with him. Clearly we will not direct him, but once the remit has been fine-tuned and agreed with him, we will make it available. The problems that have to be faced south of the border are predominantly due to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 system that is operated down there. The Administration here, supported by ACPOS and others, has made it clear that although we might have to accept some of the directions of travel as a consequence of the Cadder case, we will certainly not accept the bureaucracy that seems to be consequent south of the border. We consulted the appropriate stakeholders, including the Law Society of Scotland, the judiciary, the police and relevant members. I do not know how the Scottish human rights commissioner defines his role and, as I have just said to Mr Smith, I discussed that with him. I have to say that, when we are hearing about allegations of British soldiers using torture in Iraq, and other similar matters, I am surprised that Mr Miller and, indeed, Mr Brown and Mr Smith, seem to be so vexed by the increase in detention hours from six to 12 when they have failed to comment on matters that are much more fundamental to human rights.

I welcome the Advocate General's consultation on devolution issues and acts of the Lord Advocate, and his willingness to consider change in this important area. The First Minister and I have both written to the Advocate General to highlight the serious problems the current settlement is causing and to raise a number of wider issues arising from the Cadder case and more generally. In particular, we wish to re-establish the High Court of Justiciary as the highest criminal court in Scotland and to stop that role being undermined by large numbers of supposed devolution issues being referred to the Supreme Court. I also want to see Scotland able to present its case directly to the European Court of Human Rights in cases that have such an important impact on our justice system.

I am happy to do that. My letter to the Advocate General has been lodged in the Scottish Parliament information centre and is available for anybody to view. I have had a discussion with the Advocate General, in conjunction with a meeting with the Lord Chancellor south of the border, prior to his raising his consultation, so I accept the genuine willingness and direction that he has shown. However, there is a significant constitutional matter that has resulted in the significant problems that we discussed earlier. I assure the member that I am happy to keep him and other members informed. As a Government, we believe that we are being severely disadvantaged. The consequences are severe, and the whole nature of how our appeal system is supposed to operate has been undermined by people using devolution minutes.

The decision was given at 9.45 am on the Tuesday. To ensure that no problems arose for our police in protecting our communities from serious, dangerous offenders, we introduced emergency legislation the following day. Considering the nature of the decision, and its significance and seriousness, we acted appropriately. I am glad that Ms Craigie voted for it at the time; I am surprised that she is querying it now.

I reiterate my thanks to all those involved today—not simply to members, who have been delayed and stayed late, but to the staff in the Government, in Opposition parties and in the Parliament in particular. I will clarify a couple of matters. All members of the Government—and indeed all members in the chamber—accept the justification for signing up to the ECHR. We disagree on why it is contained in the Scotland Act 1998, imposing powers and obligations on us that are not replicated elsewhere. It is, therefore, not the ECHR that we view as the problem. In the chamber, we are, perhaps, occasionally gobsmacked by some interpretations of it, just as people outwith the chamber are sometimes outraged about payments that are made in respect of slopping out or other such issues. Members share concerns, but nobody doubts the requirement for the ECHR. As I have said, the issue is not the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights on Salduz but the interpretation made by the United Kingdom Supreme Court.

Well, we do not know. What we do know is that, in October 2009, a court of seven judges, presided over by the Lord Justice General and assisted by the Lord Justice Clerk, considered the case of Salduz v Turkey and held that the system under Scots law was perfectly compatible with the ECHR. The difficulty that we now face is that the UK Supreme Court has taken a decision that it is incompatible. It has turned Scottish criminal law on its head.

Reference has been made to the Scottish judges.

However, as was pointed out, Mr McLetchie, the self-same judges—Lord Hope and Lord Rodger—sat in Scotland for more than 30 years. I started practising in 1980 and they were on the bench then. Indeed, they were in law officer positions and they did not see any problem. That point has been much more eruditely pointed out by Lord McCluskey. Something or other seems to have happened between when they sat on the  bench or as law officers in Scotland and when they took on the—I was going to say ermine, but I will not say that as they appear in their lounge suits down there. We do face a challenge and we are grateful to others for rising to it. I regret that Patrick Harvie does not view the matter as significant. A fundamental change was wreaked upon the Scottish legislative position yesterday.

No. Time is moving on. The fact of the matter is that there is a fundamental change—lawyers will now require to be in for interviews with detainees. As I have said, that changes matters. It has always been the case that the scales of justice have to be balanced. That is why, as soon as that became required within Scots law, we required to act to deal with other consequential matters, including the lengthening of the period of detention. Finally, let me deal with the question of the Liberal Democrats. I understand that they intend to vote against the bill. As I pointed out earlier, it is rather remiss that they do not seem to have any care or concern for the vulnerable who are affected south of the border but they do seem to worry about those who are affected by the change here. [ Interruption .]

I say quite clearly to Mr Rumbles that the next time I meet the Scottish Police Federation or the police in Grampian, I will point out to them that I believe that police officers in Scotland do not detain people on a whim or a fancy and that we have the checks and balances of the procurator fiscal acting in the public interest. For him to express the view that, somehow or other, police officers the length and breadth of Scotland are out arresting innocent people—

—is frankly a ridiculous, scurrilous attack on hard-working officers who often put their lives on the line. Mr   Rumbles can rest assured that we will be transmitting this debate to the Police Federation. In winding up, I reiterate my thanks. I regret having to introduce the bill, but it is necessary because of what happened south of the border, which was pronounced upon at 9.45 yesterday.

For goodness' sake.

Has the member made any representations to his colleagues in Westminster about what will happen when people are warned about, and sometimes detained for, making false  applications for social security benefits because they did not understand the form? Does it concern him that people could lose their benefits, or is this a case of him being more sympathetic to those who are charged with serious offences than to those who are the poorest and most vulnerable?

That is pathetic.

Yes.

I thank members for their forbearance; it has been a long day and a fairly gruelling couple of days. I am grateful to members, as this is an important matter that we must address. I put on record my thanks to all the staff involved, especially those in the bill drafting team. The bill had to be drafted at breakneck pace. Although preparations were made and scenarios were planned for, details were not available or known about until 9.45 yesterday—[ Interruption .]

Members of the bill team, the justice department, my private office and people in the Parliament have worked above and beyond the call of duty to ensure that essential and necessary legislation is passed. They have the Government's thanks for the efforts that they have made to ensure that we have been able to deal with these matters. There has not been the usual delay of many weeks, if not months, since stage 1, so many of the issues have already been discussed. Given the time, I will not seek to inflict those points yet again on Parliament. Suffice it to say that the Government did not wish to find itself in this position, which is the result of a decision by the Supreme Court. We have had debates about constitutional matters, which will be continued elsewhere. However, we are grateful that the Parliament has worked with us to respond to the decision in the way that is required.

I struggle to understand the point. We are having to change things—the matter was raised with us by the criminal law committee  of the Legal Aid Board. Previously, there would always have been a nominated solicitor. The Legal Aid Board and legal aid lawyers do not wish to be troubled in the middle of the night on many an occasion, and this is at their request—they are asking for the arrangements to be changed so as to involve a directed solicitor. That is done on the agreement—

If I could just finish the point. One of the worries that lawyers used to have—and I practised in that profession myself—was that if they did not have access and could not deal with the situation, they might lose their client to somebody else. It is fair to say that the legal profession is now striking a balance: lawyers do not wish to be disturbed at all hours of the night to deal with their clients, so there will be a solicitor who is directed by the Legal Aid Board. However, that solicitor will not necessarily be the one who will appear should the person subsequently be brought into court. It will be a matter of the Legal Aid Board making that direction, and that would be done with the consent of the criminal lawyers, but on the basis that the person who attends at the police station is not necessarily the person who will be the lawyer thereafter. I do not know whether that clarifies the point for the member.

The assumption is that it will be a private consultation, unless there is some good reason for things to be otherwise. That good reason might come from the client—the individual who is detained—who might not want to wait for two hours, say, for the lawyer to come and see them. They might be happy to take their chances, and they might not have much to say, so they might ask simply to get on with it rather than wait. Sometimes, they will be happy to speak to their lawyer on the phone rather than waiting two hours for them to arrive, and to discuss the situation that way. There might be occasions involving force majeure or whatever, when the lawyer cannot get there and time ticks on. Such situations are a matter of balance. There is the ultimate caveat that, if any admission is made, it will not be a factor that is considered at the trial before any presiding sheriff or at any appeal. It is not a matter of either/or—it is a matter of circumstances. The initial view is that the right of access is there, but there can be circumstances that overcome it.  Pauline McNeill has reminded me of the question about constitutional matters and what aspects the Government had worked on beforehand regarding matters going before the Privy Council and the House of Lords. When we instructed Professor Neil Walker to carry out an investigation into questions around the Supreme Court and ultimate appeals in Scotland, he looked into that aspect, and it is contained in his report. The matter was flagged up to us by the Crown. The issues have been canvassed, and we accept that the change in the law of Scotland is a significant one. It has been brought upon us, and the Government sees, with perhaps the same heavy heart that Paul McBride and Lord McCluskey referred to, a pyrrhic victory on the part of those who view the developments as a great advancement of civil liberties in Scotland. It might very well be so, if that is how people see it—I have to say that I do not see it that way. The downside could be significant, and it could be a change for the worse. That is where we are, and we have had to deal with the situation. We have provided what is necessary within the European convention on human rights; we have balanced the provisions with the extension of periods of detention; we have ensured that those who are required to attend are provided for with legal aid funding; we have dealt with the question of the certainty of appeals; and we have dealt with matters in respect of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission. The Parliament, especially those members in other parties who have some concerns, have the assurance that all those matters will be reviewed by Lord Carloway. They will have to be the subject of primary legislation after May 2011. If Lord Carloway or others flag up some issues, there is the possibility of returning to the matter. I do not see that as being the situation, however. The bill is a temporary fix that allows us to deal with the consequences of Cadder v HMA. In due course, the Parliament post 2011, however it is constituted, will have a bill dealing not simply with the aspects that we have touched on today but with deeper, more fundamental matters. At that stage, many of us might ask whether it was worth the candle as far as Cadder v HMA was concerned. However, this is the position that we find ourselves in. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The Government is happy to accept the amendment. I have had an opportunity to speak to both the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Crown Office, which confirm that it merely puts on the face of the bill what is common practice. Mr Graham from ACPOS made it clear that the police would utilise the power only in exceptional circumstances, but we are happy to state that in the bill. Patrick Harvie can rest assured that agents will use the amendment to challenge the practice that he describes, in the few instances where that happens. Doubtless the High Court will set guidance and guidelines at that stage. We cannot be too precise—I have every sympathy with Mr Brown in that regard—and will have to wait and see what exceptional circumstances arise. However, we accept the spirit in which the amendment has been lodged. The amendment confirms what is happening in reality. Mr Brown and Mr Harvie can be assured that the police and the Crown already acknowledge that but are happy for it to be stated in the bill.

I understand members' concerns. We have come to the Parliament with emergency legislation only reluctantly. We said at the outset that we did not wish to be in this position. However, the decision that was published at 9.45 yesterday has brought us to this point, and we are required to act. As I said, it would have been preferable if we had been able to take more time, but I think that the points that Richard Baker made are correct. Like him, I do not think that amendment 27 is necessary. The Government is doing its utmost to ensure that there is a full discussion of the relevant matters, whether that is with ACPOS or the Lord Advocate. Equally, we are giving an assurance that Lord Carloway will deal with the matters in the bill and with many others. As I said, those who are welcoming a great advancement of civil liberties in Scotland may very well reap what they sow. I can only refer them to certain articles, whether by Paul McBride or Lord McCluskey, about what the outcome of this situation might be. I do not necessarily see the ruling as representing a great advance for civil rights in Scotland. Richard Baker is also correct to say that we cannot tie the hands of a future Administration, although we can argue over who that should be. We have given an undertaking that Lord Carloway will come back to Parliament on the issues, which means that they can be debated and discussed after May 2011 and that the next Administration can consider them at that point. However, if a situation arose in which, for example, the required legislation were to be dealt with as part of a wider bill that took longer than expected to pass, we might end up in a situation in which the sunset clause wiped out what we will pass today before the new legislation could be enacted. We cannot afford for that to happen. That would be fundamentally dangerous, but the situation could arise as a result of the timetable of any future Administration or because the legislation was tied in with other issues. In the interests of good governance, and with the assurance that Lord Carloway is going to review matters and that, as all members have accepted, the status quo that we create today will be in place only temporarily, until we can reflect on it as a community and legislate on the issues at a later date, I urge members not to support amendment 27.

Amendments 24 and 25 are almost diametrically opposed by amendment 26. Although we have more sympathy with Mr Aitken, the fact that we have two conflicting proposals makes us think that our suggested course of action is the one that members should initially follow. I will deal first with Christine Grahame's amendment 26. James Kelly was correct to make the points that he did. Lord Hope and Lord Rodger made it clear in their judgment that there are difficulties and that we require finality and certainty. As members will know if they have had the opportunity to read the judgment, those difficulties are predicated not on matters relating to the Supreme Court and Scotland or the position of the SCCRC but on matters that are almost universal to other jurisdictions. That is why the major case that they referred to was from the Supreme Court of Ireland—the case of A v The Governor of Arbour Hill Prison. The Supreme Court of Ireland made it clear that we have to have finality and certainty and that matters cannot subsequently be vastly changed, with the great difficulties that would follow. That is required in any jurisdiction and is not related to any one case or specifically to Scotland. It is what all sensible jurisdictions do to ensure that we have finality and certainty. I agree with James Kelly on those points. To reassure Christine Grahame, I point out that the interests of justice cannot be overridden by the additional test. It is not meant to be an either/or; the bill introduces an additional and parallel test. We are saying to the SCCRC that, as well as looking at the interests of justice, it should also bear in mind the requirements for finality and certainty. On the question of judges, I can also assure her that the judge who considers a referral from the SCCRC will always be different from the original trial judge. She can have no doubts about that. I have some sympathy with Bill Aitken's points and where he is coming from, but the current provision in the bill is reasonable and proportionate. We believe that the existing provision is and will be acceptable to the High Court. We also have great faith in and trust the High Court's judgment—it is not likely to act in a contrary manner. We have great sympathy for it, and we think that it will bear in mind all the issues. We are happy again to give an undertaking that the provision will be reviewed by Lord Carloway, which provides an appropriate balance in relation to the positions taken by Patrick Harvie, Robert Brown and Christine Grahame. The bill provides an interim measure to bring in a parallel test so that the test is not simply the interests of justice. We provide for the requirement for finality and  certainty that Lords Hope and Rodger correctly flagged up in their judgment, but we undertake that the provision will be reviewed by Lord Carloway and could be amended thereafter.

I will be happy address that point when we come to the next amendment. I think that the convener would rather that I hold my fire until then—unless he wishes otherwise.

I understand the points that Richard Baker made. Yesterday, when we held the meeting subsequent to the announcement, I said that I would encourage discussion—indeed, ACPOS is also quite willing to discuss matters. There is legitimate reason to ensure that we get right the provisions. Equally, I know that Mr Baker  has had discussions with the Lord Advocate, who is monitoring the matter. Again, she will be more than happy to co-operate. Finally, we give the assurance that Lord Carloway will review the matter. The Government feels that it is necessary to resist amendments 8 to 10 and we support Bill Aitken's comments in this respect. The six hours that Robert Brown proposes in amendment 8 is simply not enough to deal with serious cases. We have information from ACPOS on a variety of scenarios that have occurred since the introduction of the Lord Advocate's guidelines. We have been told of instances, including of multiple accused or people being held in different geographic areas, and of solicitors who have turned up to see multiple accused and who have refused to deal with them collectively—which is understandable in many instances. Nonetheless, the six-hour time limit was threatened in all of those. Six hours is entirely inappropriate. The scales of justice have been tipped. The requirement is now for a solicitor to be present for the interview. A change to the period of detention therefore needs to be made and the period before review that we propose is shorter than that which applies in England and Wales. In many instances, the safeguards that we propose are similar to those in England and Wales; in some instances, they go beyond them. I turn to amendment 9. As Richard Baker correctly flagged up, we do not believe that we can wait. The amendment would require us to wait for royal assent and to bring to the Parliament regulations under affirmative procedure. As Dave Thompson correctly pointed out, we could be approaching Christmas before we could do that and, in the interim, no one could be detained beyond the 12 hours. As I said, serious criminals could evade capture or jurisdiction. As Dave Thompson said, if someone was detained in Portree or Inverness and forensic or ballistic evidence was required, the 12 hours could be up by the time the information became available. That is unacceptable—

I need to make progress. Safeguards are appropriate. As I said, Lord Carloway will review the matter. Delay is entirely unacceptable. We need the legislation and we need it now.

What we are trying to address is serious legislation of fundamental affect to the people of our country. The pedantry and nomenclature that Mr Rumbles is employing ill befits him. I turn to amendment 10. The period of detention that we propose before review is shorter than that which applies in England and Wales, I remind Mr Brown and Mr Rumbles. The position that we suggest for Scotland, which ACPOS supports given the review that it has undertaken, are 12 and 24 hours. The 12 hours can be extended by an officer of at least inspector rank and only in serious cases of an indictable nature. The situation in England and Wales under the UK Government—the Liberal Democrats are part of that coalition Government—is a mandatory 24 hours that can be extended by an officer or someone of similar rank to 36 hours. A magistrate can extend the period to 72 hours, but a magistrate is not even on a par with a sheriff in Scotland. Mr Aitken's points on the difficulties in accessing sheriffs are correct. We require to work with the Lord Advocate who will work with the Parliament and the police to develop the guidelines. We need sheriffs to focus on what is their best use of judicial time. We also need to ensure that unnecessary matters do not interfere with the due process of law and we need to let the police get on with their investigations. The bill strikes the correct balance. The scales of justice have been tipped by the Supreme Court's decision in Cadder v HMA. We must ensure that the police are armed equally to the solicitors who are there to assist the accused. That is why I oppose Mr Brown's amendments.

Of course there is merit in what Robert Brown asks us to do, but the issue is covered by the existing proposals. The issue is about providing the right balance between ensuring that there is access to a solicitor and allowing the accused to make an informed choice on certain occasions as to whether a solicitor's presence is required. There will be cases in which the accused will be reluctant to wait. As Mr Aitken said, the lawyer might have to come from Inverness or Fort William to Portree, but the accused might well decide that they do not want to wait that long and might say, "Can we just get on  with it and get it over with?" However, he will have to have the opportunity to take advice. The solicitor might say, "Don't be so daft—wait until I get there," or they might say, "That's fine—this is what I advise you to do and if you want to get on with it, feel free to do so." That is one example. There will be instances in which somebody is not sure whether they need advice. In some instances, they will not need advice, but they should at least have the opportunity to speak to a solicitor and be told what they think. The accused might be persuaded that they need advice or be satisfied that they do not. There are other practical matters. For example, there could be force majeure. There could be a landslip on a road that means there is no access. Such things occasionally happen in Scotland. The time limit would be expiring and it might be that the matters could be dealt with by telephone. Equally, as I am sure all members know, we are looking to move towards the use of new technology, such as Skype and videoconferencing or whatever. We must take it into account that, in some instances, as well as a telephone call being offered, some other new form of technology might be available. There is a legitimate question to be raised, but I hope that Mr Brown accepts that the issue is about allowing an informed choice for the accused, while ensuring that he has the opportunity to access a solicitor. If, because of the circumstances or by his own choice, he does not want to access a solicitor, the police can press on.

The accused will have access to a solicitor, apart from in the situations that we have already discussed in relation to amendment 2. The police would ask the accused whether he wanted to speak to his agent or whoever. That is a matter of discussion between the suspect and the police. The police would not say that it is a phone call only. In some instances—if for example the suspect declined—the police would ask the accused whether they wanted to clarify anything and inform them that they could speak to a solicitor. The accused might just want to get on with it, but the police, for good reason—to minimise appeals—might say, "Actually, you should speak to the solicitor in the first place." Some of the issue must be left to common sense and discussion, with the balance that matters can be appealed.

That has to be a matter of balance. I talked about force majeure. If a solicitor is on their way but there has been a landslip on the A-whatever-it-is and he cannot come, he can speak to the suspect on the phone. I do not think that it would be legitimate if justice were to be circumvented in that situation. As I said, if the process is not satisfactory, that will be borne in mind by the procurator fiscal when matters are reported and, ultimately, the issues will be clarified by the High Court. It cannot be an absolute mandatory choice for an accused to say, "I'm not doing anything other than having a solicitor here," if, for example, there are good reasons why a solicitor cannot get there in time and some alternative method has been suggested. That said, it is clear from where the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland is heading in its guidance that police will ask the accused how they want to deal with matters. There must be some flexibility and pragmatism to take into account a variety of eventualities. Those eventualities will be rare, but they might well arise.

I welcome the spirit in which Robert Brown has lodged amendment 1. However, it is a technical amendment that we believe would achieve nothing in practice, and it might cause confusion. The term "sent" is consistent with the wording in sections 14, 15 and 17 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, and to use a different term in the current bill would be likely to cause confusion. Mr Brown himself will have been—if I can put it in inverted commas—"sent" intimation from his clients in custody. The process is well established; the bill simply uses the legal term for what takes place in a variety of ways. It is custom and practice, and we do not seek to change that in any way. A change of the nomenclature would disturb a pattern that is already settled in the 1995 act.

I can understand why, at first glance, Robert Brown would have raised his eyebrows and seen some cause for concern, but the provision is necessary. It replicates a high test that is already contained in section 15 of the 1995 act, under which intimation can be delayed. It is nothing new because it is already in that act. I point out to Mr Rumbles that it will be exercised  only in compelling circumstances but will be necessary in some serious cases. I assure him that it is ECHR compliant.

Not at the moment. Moreover, I do not know whether Mr Rumbles had read the judgment, but I doubt it—

It was published at 9.45 yesterday.

Lord Rodger accepts at paragraph 95 that there may be compelling reasons to restrict the right, and he quotes a similar matter. Amendment 2 would take away the ability of the police to delay access to a solicitor. There are instances in which the interests of justice could be jeopardised, somebody could evade capture, some further witness could be threatened, or vital evidence could be interfered with. Such cases are very rare. They are few and far between, but the provision replicates what we already have in section 15 of the 1995 act to ensure that we protect the interests of justice. It is an extremely high test that has been used but sparingly by our police. That is why it is necessary.

By all means.

The Government just does not accept that. Indeed, I argue that Mr Rumbles is in danger of putting the police at a disadvantage and jeopardising victims, witnesses and, in the most serious cases, the opportunity to apprehend and detain people and ensure that they are brought to justice.

I am grateful to members for their contributions. It is appropriate to touch on three matters that have been raised in the debate. First is the reason for the urgency; second is the action that is being taken and why it is being taken now; and third is the extension of the period of detention. On the urgency of the situation, the judgment is clearly not as cataclysmic as one of the scenarios that we planned for. Had the judgment been retrospective, it would have been calamitous—that is accepted. That said, the decision is not simply prospective. There are current, pending and live appeals, so the consequences are still severe. We already have 3,420 devolution minutes relating to the Cadder case, but thankfully, according to the  Crown Office, the serious cases number only 120. However, we should not underestimate the significant changes that require to be made to Scots law. The consequences—for victims, the courts, the police and everyone else—require us to act urgently. The world changed at 9.45 am yesterday. Moving to the action to be taken, we require to clarify some of the points that Pauline McNeill and other members have made. As the First Minister correctly said, the normal situation in most jurisdictions is that there is a final court of appeal. That court of appeal in Scotland is the High Court of appeal, in which the case of McLean v HMA was dealt with. The First Minister was also quite correct to say that when the Scotland Bill was being considered and it was envisaged that human rights would be part of it in the context of the ECHR, nobody anticipated that solicitors would seek to take appeals on criminal law matters to the Supreme Court, which had not even been envisaged at that juncture. However, we find ourselves having to take action, as happened with Somerville—I was grateful to members, whatever their party, for bringing in the one-year period of limitation, because without that protection from ECHR challenges we were exposed. Equally, in the current circumstances, people can use a devolution minute to deal with matters that are fundamentally meant to be dealt with by the criminal law and the highest court in Scotland. On Pauline McNeill's comments, I think that the First Minister made the position clear. The question is whether other jurisdictions are affected and find themselves challenged in respect of the ECHR. The answer is, of course, yes, because those who sign up to the ECHR accept that it is binding. We accept that it is incumbent on us—indeed it is part of our founding principles—to abide by the ECHR. However, other jurisdictions have the opportunity to go to the European Court of Human Rights, put forward their case and reflect on matters. Such an opportunity is precluded for the Government and law officers of Scotland. The decision of the UK Supreme Court was based on an interpretation of a Strasbourg decision. It was not a decision of Strasbourg on Scots law, so we do not have the opportunity to go to Strasbourg. Bill Butler suggested that we should have addressed matters after Salduz v Turkey in 2008. It is clear that matters relating to Salduz v Turkey were considered in McLean v HMA in October 2009, when, as Stewart Maxwell said, the High Court of Scotland, presided over by the Lord Justice General, who was supported by his deputy the Lord Justice Clerk and by five other High Court judges of significance and stature in Scotland,  found that Scots law in relation to the period of detention and lack of access to a solicitor was not incompatible with the ECHR. I do not know whether Mr Butler was suggesting that we should have second-guessed the High Court's decision before October 2009 or that after 2009 the Government should have unilaterally said, "Well, the Lord Justice General has got it wrong." It would be scandalous for a justice minister to second-guess, never mind criticise, a decision of a supreme court sitting on a criminal appeal matter in Scotland.

No. I do not have time. The period of detention clearly requires to be addressed. First and foremost, let us remember the circumstances and where we are being taken by the UK Supreme Court, which is down the road to replicating the position south of the border under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. South of the border—a Labour Government presided over this situation; I used to meet Jack Straw and others—the period of detention is initially 24 hours, and on cause shown and by request of a senior officer to another senior officer it can be extended to 36 hours. At 36 hours, the case can be put before a magistrate and the period of detention extended to 72 hours. In Scotland, as I said, there has been a significant change, with a lawyer being in for the interview that takes place. We simply seek to strike a balance by extending the period to 12 hours. Only on cause shown and in the most serious cases and indictable matters will that period be extended. It will not be extended on the basis that a breach of the peace or anything like that is being investigated. However, in cases such as attempted murder, rape and serious assault, there can be forensic and ballistic investigations. Mr Brown should consider that. If someone has been detained for 12 hours in a rape case and forensic and other investigations are taking place, must the person be released because we have not managed to secure a report of significance, which would allow an officer to put questions of fundamental importance to the accused? Is the person to be liberated just because he has been detained for 12 hours? The question is how the extension is to be signed off. South of the border it is simply a matter of going to an equivalent senior officer. To require the issue to go before a judge or a justice of the peace seems to me to undermine the police investigation. It is a matter of balance, which is why we have introduced the bill as a matter of urgency. The scales of justice require that we acknowledge the importance of having a lawyer in  for an interrogation during an investigation. Equally, we must remember the rights of victims and ensure that a fair balance is struck for those who police our communities and prosecute. If there is no extension, we undermine that balance.

Yesterday, the United Kingdom Supreme Court issued its decision in the case of Cadder v Her Majesty's Advocate. The case considered the practice in Scotland of the police interviewing detained persons in a police station without ensuring that they have had access to legal advice. The Supreme Court decided that that practice was contrary to the European convention on human rights, changing decades of law in Scotland and overturning an earlier Scottish appeal court ruling by our highest court of criminal appeal just last year. The idiosyncrasies of the Scotland Act 1998 mean that Scotland is uniquely susceptible to the effect of ECHR challenges in criminal cases. Normally, in criminal matters, the Scottish court of appeal has the final say. However, this route of raising devolution issues is undermining its final authority. I will make clear to the UK Government our view that the centuries-old supremacy of the High Court as the final court of appeal in criminal matters must be restored.

I am happy to advise that the Lord Advocate is happy to discuss such matters with any member in relation to any requirements for stage 2. If Mr Rumbles wishes, the Lord Advocate, as the senior law officer and prosecutor in Scotland, will explain why the Crown holds that view. Equally, we predicate our view on information from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. I would think that, if Mr Rumbles spoke to any police officer in his constituency, he would be advised that the scales of justice require to be balanced. When they are changed in one direction, in the interests of the rights of the accused, they require to be balanced  in the other direction, in the interests of the rest of our community.

There have been many meetings throughout the preparation period to discuss the difficulties that we knew would come, details of which were made available to us only at 9.45 yesterday. Obviously, those meetings included the Law Society, which represents the bulk of solicitors in Scotland. Also included were representatives from ACPOS, the Scottish Police Services Authority, the Crown and so on. I cannot confirm whether any of the other organisations that have been mentioned were contacted but, as I said previously, we cast our net widely to ensure that those who are part of the legal family—the court, the prosecution, the police and the defence—were all taken into account and had their views brought in. We need to respond to the implications of the decision. I have announced my plans to establish a judicially led review of the law and criminal procedure in Scotland. However, we cannot wait for that to conclude. We need to act now. The bill has four main aims. It will enshrine in statute a right to legal advice for suspects who are detained and questioned by the police. It will give us the necessary powers to ensure adequate provision of state-funded legal advice to suspects. It will extend the existing maximum six-hour period for detention to 12 hours, with the possibility of further extension to 24 hours, along with appropriate safeguards. Finally, it will make provision in relation to cases that occurred prior to the Cadder decision. The provisions on legal advice create a right for suspects who have been detained to have access to advice from a solicitor before and during questioning by the police. That is necessary in order to bring statute into line with the Supreme Court judgment.

Children have never been treated in the same way as adults, and that will continue to be the case. Children are viewed in a special category as are, for example, those with learning difficulties. Clearly, they will be dealt with  differently. Such matters are dealt with in the ACPOS and Crown guidelines. Children are dealt with according to their nature and are subject to the provisions around detention periods. However, they would usually be dealt with in the presence of a responsible adult, and that will continue. The bill makes provision to ensure that we have the necessary powers to make the right to legal advice for suspects effective in practice. Section 2 will therefore amend the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 to give the Scottish ministers a regulation-making power to allow state-funded legal advice to be made available to suspects in certain circumstances without reference to the financial eligibility criteria. Section 3 relates to the detention period. The six-hour maximum has been in place since 1980. Advice from ACPOS, the SPSA and the Crown is that the establishment of an automatic right to consult a solicitor places intolerable strain upon the six-hour limit. We believe that an immediate extension of the limit to 12 hours, with the possibility of extension to 24 hours, is essential to maintaining the effectiveness of police investigations. It will also assist with the practicalities of giving access, particularly in remote and rural locations.

Those safeguards are that the investigating officer will not be present; that the provision will be used only in relation to a serious crime; and that the officer who is present will be of an inspector grade or higher and will not have been involved in the case. Those are appropriate safeguards and they mirror those that are in place south of the border. As I said earlier, the parties' business managers and justice spokespeople will have opportunities to discuss the guidance with ACPOS as it is produced. To repeat, an extension to 24 hours will happen only in exceptional cases and only when a senior police officer confirms that it is needed. Justice requires checks and balances. The final sections of the bill relate to appeals. The Supreme Court emphasises the importance of finality and legal certainty in concluded criminal cases, and the judgment takes us a long way towards that objective by ruling out statutory appeals on these grounds in concluded cases where time limits have elapsed.

Lord Hope and Lord Rodger referred to those matters, and advised that they should be dealt with so that there was not a back route by which people would seek to bring through the SCCRC cases of some vintage that would not be brought in through the front door of the High Court of appeal. That is appropriate where an appeal was made timeously or the relevant point was made, but we must balance matters. According to the Crown Office, there could be up to 120 appeals outstanding among the live cases that are currently affected, so we need to ensure that we protect the validity of those judgments and provide some certainty. The bill applies the principle of finality through the remaining common-law appeal route and to consideration of cases by the SCCRC. That is why we have introduced section 7, which relates to the issues to which Lord Hope and Lord Rodger have referred. It makes clear that finality and certainty are essential for legal judgments, but it does not preclude the possibility of other factors being taken into account: it simply requires the SCCRC to take that factor—along with others—into account to decide whether a case should proceed through that body. I urge Parliament to endorse that approach. We must ensure that we have the requisite checks and balances; when the scales of justice are tilted, it is necessary that we balance them. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill.

I propose that the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill be considered under the emergency legislation procedure. If Parliament allows the bill to be dealt with under that procedure, I will explain the background in more detail in the stage 1 debate. For now, I will outline why the bill should be handled under that exceptional procedure. The need for the bill stems from the judgment of the United Kingdom Supreme Court in the case of Cadder v HMA, issued yesterday, which decided that the practice of police interviewing detained persons in a police station without allowing them access to legal advice is contrary to the European convention on human rights and therefore Scots law. That overturned decades of Scots law and overruled the decision of the highest criminal court of appeal here in Scotland just last year. We did not choose this situation, but we are required to address it. There are three main reasons why I believe the legislation needs to be passed under emergency procedure. First, the judgment affects current practice in detaining suspects. That is at the heart of our justice system, with tens of thousands of detentions taking place every year. The ruling of the UK Supreme Court, notwithstanding the decision of our High Court of criminal appeal in 2009, means that, as we stand here, our statute is incompatible with the ECHR in a key part of the justice system. In my view, we must act immediately to correct that. Although the Lord Advocate's guidance provides some protection in individual cases, it is a poor substitute for a specific and identifiable right in statute.

I think that we might do. Clearly, the police operate under section 14 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. As the member knows, we are not entitled in Scotland to have legislation that is contrary to the ECHR. Accordingly, there is a possibility of challenges that could strike down the basis on which the police operate. We are in a situation in which 1,000 or so people are detained every week. Without new legislation, there is the danger that matters could be struck down and that we could be left in a position in which we have no right of detention, so I believe that it is essential.

Of course the Lord Advocate's guidelines are followed: the police accept the instructions and act as directed by our senior law officer. The law that stands in Scotland is section 14 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. The police are correctly taking actions on the basis of the wise and sound counsel given by the Lord Advocate, but at present we face the possibility of detention being struck down. In fact, we could find ourselves in the position of not having the power to detain, full stop. That would be a retrograde step that would damage the rights of those who are the victims of crime, never mind the safety of our communities.

There are two matters to consider. First, the guidelines were introduced on an assumption of what the decision that became available only at 9.45 yesterday may or may not have been. They were wise actions taken by the Lord Advocate to protect the nature of convictions in cases that are outstanding. They are guidelines only: they are not the statute that currently stands, which is why we are required to act. Secondly, are we certain that we will not be subject to challenges? If only that were the case. Because of the lack of protection that this  Government and Parliament have, we face challenges on each and every thing. It is feasible to envisage a situation in which the bill, if it is passed, will be the subject of challenge yet again by a small industry out there that seems to think that it can take public funds, in many instances, and go to the Supreme Court, bypassing the High Court of appeal in Scotland. There is a clear necessity to take action. The creation of a right of access to advice from a solicitor cannot stand on its own. If we are to create such a right, we must also act immediately to put in place the means to give effect to that right and to maintain an effective system of police investigation. I therefore believe that it is necessary to act immediately to revise the maximum period of detention and to provide powers to adjust legal aid to make that work. Finally, the bill contains provisions to ensure that we give effect to the court's intention that closed cases are not reopened.

Certainty and finality are important principles. It is vital that we move immediately to apply time limits to certain types of summary appeals and ensure that the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission takes account of those principles. Passing the bill today will show that the Parliament is committed to maintaining the ECHR compatibility of Scots law; that we intend to give practical effect to that right; and that we want to maintain an effective, balanced system of police investigation. It will also signal our intention to bring certainty to concluded cases as quickly as possible, which is very much in line with the spirit of the judgment. The bill is longer and more complex than emergency legislation that has been passed previously in the Parliament; however, for the reasons above, I believe that the bill must be seen as a package, all the elements of which are critical to maintaining an effective system of justice in Scotland and must be included. For those members who are conscious of the adage of legislating at haste and repenting at leisure, I offer the reassurance that, although we are required to act as a result of a UK Supreme Court decision, all these matters will be subject to further consideration in Lord Carloway's review of law and practice, which will start very soon. I move,  That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill be treated as an Emergency Bill.  Motion agreed to.

We are building on our record funding of victim support organisations, introduction of victim statements and extension of the victim notification scheme by reviewing provision for victims in order to further enhance their role within the criminal justice system. Separately, we are also reviewing support for witnesses.

I do not know the precise proportion, but I can say that we put £4.2 million into Victim Support Scotland in 2010-11. That is a record amount, which was warmly received by the organisation when I hosted and made the opening speech at its international victim support conference earlier this week. I know also that Victim Support Scotland is the envy of many other victim support organisations elsewhere in the world.

Today's debate is about tribunals and the wider landscape of administrative justice. It may seem a dry subject but it is an important one when we consider that more people appear at a tribunal than in court. This might not be the most riveting debate, but it certainly is fundamental, and I am grateful to all those who participate. I welcome the position taken by the Opposition, and I confirm that we will accept all the amendments. Overall, tribunals deal with considerably more cases than the civil courts, and those who serve on and work for them do an excellent job. In some respects, tribunals have been the Cinderella of the justice system, with fragmented and inefficient administrative support, sometimes with inadequate training for members, and disjointed judicial leadership and authority. I am announcing two important developments that allow tribunals to take their place at the centre of Scotland's justice system. First, I will outline the path that has led us to the announcements. In 2001, the Leggatt review of United Kingdom tribunals found that too often tribunals were daunting to users, underresourced, inefficient and not sufficiently independent of Government sponsors. Sir Andrew Leggatt recommended that tribunals be brought together into an independent, coherent, professional, cost-effective and user-friendly system. Leggatt's report later led to the unification of UK tribunals into a single structure with a judicial senior president. That was a big step, but it did not deal with Scotland's devolved tribunals and took no account of our separate legal system. In 2008, a group led by Lord Philip looked in more detail at tribunals in Scotland. The report concluded: "The present tribunals system in Scotland is extremely complex and fragmented" and it "does not meet the key principles of independence and coherence". Those conclusions were later endorsed by the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution. Options identified by Philip were considered by the Scottish committee of the Administrative  Justice and Tribunals Council. It recommended that Scottish tribunals should be brought together in an integrated structure. As a minimum, the support for Scottish devolved tribunals should be integrated and ideally, it suggested, there should be a new Scottish tribunals service to support tribunals that deal with both devolved and reserved matters. I can announce that we have made substantial progress. On 1 December, we will establish a Scottish tribunals service as a delivery unit within the Scottish Government. It will initially bring together administrative support for five tribunals: the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland, the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland, the private rented housing panel, the Pensions Appeal Tribunals for Scotland, and the Scottish charity appeals panel.

I will come to that. Obviously, Mr Brown's point is correct—there is supposed to be a separation of powers. We are simply getting the procedure right, and I take on board the caveat that he adds. The change will save money through more efficient use of staff offices and tribunal venues. It will also improve the service to smaller tribunals, with better information technology and financial management systems as well as enhanced administrative support. We know that it is just the first small step on a big journey. The real prize is for all tribunals in Scotland to form an integral part of the Scottish justice system. That will take several years, but we now have a golden opportunity to make it happen. Kenneth Clarke, the Lord Chancellor, recently announced plans to create a unified judicial structure for England and Wales. He said in his statement that he was entering into discussions with the Lord President and me about the prospect of the responsibility for judicial leadership of tribunals transferring to the Lord President. That proposal also raises the question of the administration of reserved tribunals transferring to the Scottish ministers. We believe that that should happen. The independence of the Scottish legal system is not even a matter of devolution: our courts have been separate and distinct from the time of the union, whether dealing with Scots law or legislation made by the UK Parliament. With regard to Mr Brown's point, as a Parliament we have already endorsed positions that separate the judiciary. To an extent, we seek to replicate what the Lord Chancellor  seeks—correctly—to do down south. I assure Mr Brown that we do not seek to expand the justice directorate's empire. Putting tribunals alongside the courts as a core part of the Scottish justice system is unfinished business that we now have the chance to complete. That is not just about giving more responsibility to Scotland—welcome though that is, as members would expect me to say. It is an opportunity to deliver better justice for the people who depend on tribunals to protect them. For the first time, devolved and reserved tribunals can be part of a coherent Scottish system with clear judicial independence and leadership—I give Mr Brown that assurance. We hope that we can deliver significant efficiencies by bringing together the administrative support for the 40 or so tribunals that operate here. We can reform the appointments system and we can consider how civil courts and tribunals can work together and learn from each other. I met the Lord Chancellor just a few weeks back and I made it clear that we welcome his approach. Our respective officials will work closely together to consider the details of how the change might be brought about. There are many complex issues to resolve and the UK Government will want to be reassured that having two tribunal structures will not lead to inconsistencies in the application of UK law. I have no major concerns on that score—the Scottish courts have managed to apply UK law for 300 years without great problems arising. At recent question times, I have been asked about matters such as road traffic law. That involves UK law, but we have managed to apply that in two separate jurisdictions. We will work closely with the Lord President to establish what form of judicial oversight is best for Scottish tribunals. Fortunately, the AJTC has undertaken the important work that Lord Philip initiated and is consulting on a detailed range of options for developing a Scottish tribunals service. Its thinking will be important and I look forward to seeing its report. I will be more than happy to share that with others, to ensure that we get the system right and that it is appropriate for Scotland in future years. We will consider the work in the context of our response to Lord Gill's civil courts review, which we will publish later this year. Lord Gill did not specifically consider tribunals, but we need to look at the two issues together. We are determined to preserve what is best about accessible, user-friendly and specialist tribunals. Tribunal hearings can be more inquisitorial and members can work with the parties to identify the issues that are at hand,  rather than oversee an adversarial contest between lawyers. Often, such an inquisitorial approach best suits the delivery of justice for our people.

That point is valid. I know that Mr Brown has appeared before many tribunals, as have I. Some are legalistic; some are not. That is a matter of balance. Sometimes, the system must be legalistic. Mental health tribunals can have a significant impact on individuals' civil liberties and employment matters can involve significant costs. That is why we must be flexible and pragmatic. I welcome the support from around the chamber. We are on a journey that will take some time but will serve our people best. Some aspirations have been difficult to maintain, as subjects such as employment law have become more complicated—Mr Brown commented on that. Tribunals exercise a judicial function and need to have the skills and authority to do that properly. The principles of accessibility and informality need to be preserved. Far from tribunals becoming like courts, I think that many in the Parliament believe that courts could in many instances become more like tribunals. I will say a few words about the children's hearings system. It is a unique system and an important part of Scotland's integrated approach to child care and justice. Unlike most tribunals, children's panels do not have a legally qualified chair and, although the 2,500 panel members are specially selected, trained and monitored, they are lay and unpaid volunteers. The hearings system is the subject of legislation that is before the Parliament and is undergoing a specific programme of modernisation and reform, building on its undoubted strengths. In years to come, there may be opportunities for the Scottish tribunals service to work with the bodies that support children's hearings to deliver a more efficient or better service, but that is for another day. Nothing in the work that we are doing is intended to affect the provisions of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill. These reforms are part of a wider vision of a modern justice system that is fair, independent, efficient, timely and coherent. I ask the Parliament to support the motion in my name. I welcome the support that has been given and the nature of the debate that is taking place. The matter may be perceived as extremely dry—especially by members of the media, who are absent from the chamber—but it is of fundamental importance. We are embarking on a journey. The Government  does not view this as a political or ideological matter. We are happy to co-operate with all parties that are represented in the chamber, as we currently co-operate with the Lord Chancellor and the Lord President. I move, That the Parliament believes that justice delivered by tribunals is an integral part of the Scottish justice system; welcomes the Lord Chancellor's invitation to the Scottish Ministers to consider with him proposals to devolve responsibility for tribunals operating in Scotland, and further notes and welcomes moves to create an integrated Scottish tribunal service.

Papers presented to the last meeting of the Scottish policing board on 13 September by the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland showed that efficiency savings alone are unlikely to be sufficient to meet the scale of financial challenges beyond 2012-13 and recommended further work to explore other options to release additional savings. I welcome that work, which will be taken forward with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and policing partners, and I look forward to hearing the initial findings at the board's next meeting on 6 December.

I do not have that power. The letter to police board conveners points out that it would perhaps be more appropriate to have contracts for periods of three years rather than five years, as has been the norm. My interpretation of the letter is not the same as Mr Smith's. We were faced with a report from ACPOS indicating that 25 per cent of police expenditure goes on the eight force headquarters. Given the financial pressures that we face, it is hard to argue that that is sustainable, and the situation requires  to be investigated. The Administration has formed no view on the matter but, with the support of the Scottish policing board, we are proceeding to consider it in greater detail. I advise Mr Smith that COSLA gave its approval—and Jenny Dawe was present at the meeting that I attended on Monday.

The ECHR has been incorporated into Scots law, and the Scottish Government therefore takes it into account in considering any possible changes to the law. Any question as to whether a specific provision of Scots law is incompatible with the ECHR would be for the courts to determine.

As Ms McNeill may be aware, the position regarding the Lord Advocate's guidelines goes back to the case of Cadder v HMA, which raises an ECHR matter relating to the case of Salduz. It is a matter of great concern. The difficulty for this Government is that we do not have the protection that other Governments have, whether south of the border or elsewhere, because of the incorporation of the ECHR into the Scotland Act 1998. The matter is going through the Supreme Court, whose decision we require to accept. No decision has been made yet, but we have to prepare for any eventuality. The Government is taking action in consultation with the Lord Advocate and in conjunction with senior police officers, the Law Society of Scotland and other lawyers' representatives. We are taking steps to prepare for what the decision might be, which might require emergency legislation. We will discuss that with the members in the chamber and others. At present, the Lord Advocate's guidelines ensure that we are compatible with the ECHR and with any stricture that might be laid down, and any interpretation that might be given, by the Supreme Court.

As part of the formal planning process, a pre-application screening notice was submitted in August 2010. Public consultation will take place with community groups on 20 October and an open public presentation will be made on 21 October.  The Scottish Prison Service aims to submit an application for planning permission in principle in November 2010 and, subject to securing that permission, it anticipates awarding a construction contract in around 2011, with a view to opening the new prison in 2014. HMP Aberdeen will close following the opening of HMP Grampian.

There are two aspects to what is happening: the Peterhead aspect and the Aberdeen aspect. I will deal with the Peterhead aspect first. The plans concern operational matters, and the SPS must ensure the safety of prisoners and the security of the staff who work with them. It is appropriate that steps are taken to wind down Peterhead prison; it would be inappropriate to leave that to the very last moment. Given the nature of the offenders involved—the prison houses serious sex offenders, who are some of the most dangerous offenders in Scotland—the matter is better dealt with operationally by the SPS than by any other body. It is appropriate that the SPS begins the process early to ensure the security of staff and prisoners, and of the communities in which the prisoners are placed. I make no apology for saying that the plans are an operational matter for the SPS, but I can tell members that the SPS discussed the plans with me, and I fully support them. On Craiginches prison, we hear Richard Baker yet again requesting a spending commitment. We can build as many prisons as he likes, but if we do so we cannot build houses, hospitals and schools. The Government's priority is to replace Peterhead and Aberdeen prisons with HMP Grampian. Beyond that, we will look after honest, law-abiding citizens and deal with their needs.

Absolutely. I welcomed the invitation from the governor of Craiginches to meet some of the women prisoners who were on training for freedom to try to break the cycle of reoffending that so blights Scotland. The whole purpose of HMP Grampian is to have a community-facing prison so that women are not uniformly sent to Cornton Vale and young offenders to Polmont and to ensure that those who have to be incarcerated because of the offences that they have committed and the danger that they pose are located closer to their communities and families in an attempt to break the cycle of reoffending. We all know that what breaks that cycle for offenders is, in the main, having the opportunity to go back to a home, maintain contact with family and reintegrate into the community that they left.

No, I cannot. Awarding contracts usually means going through formal tendering procedures. It would be entirely inappropriate for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to go into quasi-legal and commercial matters that are best dealt with under planning and commercial contracts legislation.

Scottish Prison Service staff in the closed and open estate work closely together to ensure that all those prisoners who meet the criteria for open conditions and who would benefit from the open estate regime are located there at the most appropriate point of their sentence.

I accept the spirit in which Mr Brown asks his question. We all recognise that there is underuse, and the figure of 60 per cent is correct. However, I think that the situation is the result of the Scottish Prison Service being a victim of its own success. Quite correctly, procedures have been tightened up. When I had to stand in this chamber and make a statement about Robert Foy, everyone was extremely concerned about which categories of prisoner were held in the open estate. It is not a question of the underuse of the open estate; it is a question of its appropriate use. We would like more use to be made of the open estate because when there is undercapacity it is clear that we are not getting the best benefit from it. I think that Mr Brown will agree that we all learned from the consequences of the Robert Foy case. We have to ensure that prisoners who go to the open estate are capable of meeting the criteria. We cannot guarantee the safety, security or law-abiding actions of all such prisoners, but we must recognise that the criteria have been brought in to try to ensure public safety, and I do not think that they should be varied or reduced. If the Scottish Prison Service can increase the use of the open estate but keep the criteria to preserve public safety, I will be more than happy. I give an assurance that the matter is under constant review by the Scottish Prison Service. We welcome Mr Brown's support for the open estate but, as I said, we have to recognise that the criteria have been correctly tightened for reasons of public safety.

There has been significant success, which again comes down to the action taken by the Scottish Prison Service. The Robert Foy incident was horrendous for the victim and the community and we had to take action. A review was requested, and it was carried out by Professor Alec Spencer. I return to the point that I made to Robert Brown: to some extent, underuse is perhaps a perverse result of the Scottish Prison Service's success in reducing the number of absconds. That has come at a price, in that fewer people are going to the open estate. The reason for that is that people are not meeting the criteria, because it does not look as if they can be trusted, and public safety must be paramount. I welcome the results on absconds, although they have come at that price, and I assure the member that the Scottish Prison Service has always acted in such a way as to ensure that public safety is paramount.

Reforms of the High Court and summary justice have resulted in faster justice and many victims being spared the stress of giving evidence. A review of sheriff and jury procedures was recently completed by Sheriff Principal Bowen, who made proposals for achieving similar benefits. Although good progress has been made, there is scope to improve efficiency and effectiveness in the summary courts, and work is going on at national and local level. The Government has also delivered higher police numbers, a falling crime rate and record investment in support services for victims and witnesses.

I assure the member that that has always been the Government's direction of travel. We supported such an approach when we were in opposition. The issue cannot be tackled in one legislative measure; it is about changing not just laws but culture and attitudes. The Lord Advocate deserves great credit for her service to the current Administration and the previous Administration in that regard. I cannot comment on a particular case but I am happy to assure the member that I will investigate the matter. If it is appropriate for us to meet, I will be happy to do so.

No. Chief constables are responsible for operational matters in their force area, which would include arrangements for making information on road accidents available to landowners or their agents.

No. I can understand the frustrations felt by Mr McGrigor's constituents, but let us be clear. First, I cannot direct the police. Secondly, we are talking about reserved law—the Road Traffic Act 1988, which as I recall came in under a Tory Government. It states that it is the  legal responsibility of the driver of the vehicle to report any accident that causes damage to property. That would be to the landowner, but if the driver did not know the landowner it would be to the police. The police have an obligation and, when they know the landowner or the landowner requests it, they usually go out of their way to provide information such as the name of the driver and the vehicle's registration. Under data protection requirements, however, they cannot provide any information beyond that, such as a personal address. To me, this appears to be a matter of the police trying to be as supportive as they can of those in rural communities. There are instances when the police might not have provided the information and might not be aware of the landowner, but my understanding and experience of the police is that they will try to co-operate. Let me say to Mr McGrigor that I cannot direct the police. If he has difficulties with the legislation, I am more than happy to argue with the Home Secretary or the Lord Chancellor that we should devolve road traffic matters to this Parliament and deal with the issue ourselves.

I reiterate what we agree on: the excellent service provided by the forensic science and fingerprint service, to which Mary Scanlon referred in relation to incidents in Orkney and to which others referred in relation to incidents in the city of Edinburgh and elsewhere. I know how grateful the Lord Advocate was to the service when forensic science played a fundamental role in ensuring that justice was done after the recent tragic murder of Moira Jones in the city of Glasgow. It is appropriate that we put on record once again our support for forensic science staff. It is regrettable that Nicol Stephen, as a former Deputy First Minister, should seek to traduce those who work within the justice department, whether at St Andrew's house or elsewhere. We as a Government think that we are blessed and well served by all those who work within justice, whether at local or national level, in agencies, as part of the police or Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, in prisons or anywhere else. Mr Stephen's comments were unfortunate and disrespectful to those who previously served him. However, let us also accept that there have been difficulties. I refer both to the genesis of the SPSA, which happened, of course, under a  previous Administration, and to the initial consultation. As I said, as a Government, we accepted that the initial consultation was not done appropriately, and we ensured that the SPSA went back and did it again. I reiterate that we have made no decision. Matters are on a steadier keel under Vic Emery—

I made it clear at the outset that I am prepared to listen to anyone who seeks to correspond with me and that I will await the report from the SPSA. I will take cognisance of that and I will take on board the views of the chamber. As I said, I am prepared to take representations from elsewhere. Clearly, Mr Allen falls within that category. I would have thought that that was self-evident, but for the avoidance of doubt, I reiterate that, if Mr Allen or anyone else at Lothian and Borders wishes to speak to me, I am more than happy to hear them. As I said, the SPSA came into being under the previous Administration. At the time, the Parliament felt it necessary to set up such an authority; we agreed with that. Clearly, changes are coming, and we require to address them. Some of them are financial, and we are required to take them on board. It is regrettable that Labour has come—certainly, its front-bench spokesmen have—with the argument that it is simply no fair that somehow or other the report has not reached my desk. They are immensely upset about that. The report will come, but it is not here and it is not with civil servants. I am assured that it has just not arrived. I do not know whether it has been despatched or not. The fact of the matter is that I do not have it. [Interruption.] I say to Mr Rumbles that the Lib Dems may say that they would have acted differently, but I think that I have to read the report. I assume that is not going to be two sides of A4—

No. Mr Rumbles has had his chance to speak—and usually from a sedentary position. I will read the report and give it the consideration that it deserves. I will take into account the points that others have made. We  should recognise that the changes also have to be taken into account. It is appropriate that John Lamont and Robert Brown are keeping a more open mind on the subject. Brian Adam made a significant and sensible point in his speech. As he said, we should remember that I will get the report from the SPSA on the four options. [Interruption.] I say to Mr Rumbles that I do not have to accept any recommendations. He and Mr Stephen may feel that they are required to accept the report as gospel—

No. I will accept no interventions, sedentary or otherwise, from Mr Rumbles. The fact of the matter is that I will await the report, I will consider it, I will take account of the positions that are stated in representations, and I will then make a decision. We have to accept that the SPSA is affected by matters, the first of which is the significant financial challenges that we face. Mr Pringle articulated the Lib Dem position, which is that savings can come from a cut in police numbers. We do not view that as a sensible strategy. The SPSA could make cuts elsewhere, and I listened to the points that the Tories made in that regard. However, let us look at the arguments that the Tories and the Lib Dems in particular have made about the matters that we are debating. The Home Secretary south of the border has announced that the Security Industry Authority may be abolished. The UK Border Agency took unilateral action at Stranraer and Cairnryan that had a fundamental effect on justice in Scotland. I say to David McLetchie that I recall no one discussing those decisions with us—there has been no consideration of them. I view the decisions as extremely detrimental to the safety and security of communities from the north-east to the south-west of Scotland. I will take no criticism on these matters from members who represent the coalition forces south of the border.

Whether statements are made is a decision not for the Government but for the Parliamentary Bureau.

If Mr Baker wishes such a statement, no doubt he will arrange for that to happen, and, as a member of the bureau, Mr McLetchie will deal with the matter. The SPSA has to address matters. We face significant financial challenges. We can cut police numbers, we can cut the SPSA—

No. I am coming to the end of my time. We must also recognise that forensic science has moved on. How we deal with these matters is subject to change. Some will be scientific changes and some will be innovative and significant changes that come from those who work within the SPSA, who have driven forward the boundaries of forensic science. Equally, as Mr Brown said, we have made legislative changes, in the length of detention, for example, and change has come from Supreme Court judgments. All of that has an impact on how we conduct forensic science.

I will take that on board. If the chamber feels that a parliamentary statement should be made, I am more than happy to make one. Mr Baker and Mr Rumbles frequently ask for parliamentary statements. A limited amount of time is available—[Interruption.] We can discuss and debate the matter—

I have made no decision. I will listen to representations from outside the chamber and from within it, and I will act accordingly to ensure that our communities are safe and secure.

If we were to go down the centralisation route, how many more miles would it be from Livingston to Gartcosh than it is from Livingston to Howden Hall?

Perhaps Mr Macdonald when he was a minister acted differently, but I would have thought that it is my duty to read all the recommendations in the report without having a closed mind and, thereafter, to make my decision having taken into account the views that Mr Macdonald and others have expressed. To do otherwise would be a dereliction of my duty. I require to read the report in full and to balance that with other matters.

I begin by stating what we agree upon. The forensic science and fingerprint service in Scotland is truly outstanding. Representatives from the Aberdeen and Edinburgh laboratories are in the public gallery and I pay tribute to them as well as to the Glasgow and Dundee laboratories. Many crimes in Scotland, serious and minor, would go undetected and unprosecuted, without a conviction or closure, were it not for the service and dedication of the staff. I pay tribute to them. It is absolutely accepted that this is my decision, and we do not seek to hide that. I make it clear, however, that no decision has been taken and that the SPSA has not yet submitted to the Scottish Government its plans for the future delivery of forensic science.

The short answer is no, I cannot, because I am not responsible for that board—I am not responsible for those matters. I can assure the member that I do not have the recommended option. Not having it, self-evidently I have not yet seen the recommendation and I cannot possibly reach any decision. Although it is clearly too early for me to enter into any detailed discussions about the SPSA's options, I am here to listen to the various views that I am sure will be expressed in the debate. I assure all colleagues in all parts of the chamber representing all parts of Scotland, including Mr Baker and Mr Kelly, and also the staff who are present in the public gallery, that, when it comes to considering the SPSA's proposals, I am willing to take on board its views along with those expressed by chief constables, police boards and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service.

That is gross hypocrisy on the part of a Liberal Democrat member who is one of the people who set up the SPSA. I supported the setting up of the SPSA, although that was under the previous Administration. The SPSA had a difficult birth and everybody recognises the difficulties that there have been and the changes that have taken place. It was at the request of this Government that further consultations were carried out. We were not satisfied that appropriate consultation had been undertaken previously. To the credit of the chief executive and the chair of the SPSA, that was done. I assure Mr Rumbles that I have not received the recommendation and I have had no opportunity to read it. I will not make a judgment until I have had the opportunity to see the SPSA's recommendations and to take on board the views that are expressed in today's debate or in any other submissions that might be made.

I must make some progress. Members have my assurance. That might not have been how matters were conducted under the previous Administration, but it is most certainly the way in which we seek to conduct matters. I reiterate my gratitude for the hard work and dedication that has been shown by all the expert forensic staff in the SPSA. I understand the concerns that have been expressed by some affected staff in my own constituency and in letters from numerous members of the Parliament. I reiterate that the SPSA was established in 2007 under the Labour-Liberal Administration, with cross-party support in the Parliament, reflecting a shared ambition to deliver better and more efficient police support services, including in forensic science. It is right and proper that the SPSA has undertaken a forensic modernisation review at this time. We expect no less, as it is clear that forensic science has moved on significantly. That is down to the efforts of science and to individual contributions that have been made by members of staff—it is they who have driven forensics on significantly.  The development of more effective and efficient services across our justice system remains the purpose of the SPSA. In the current financial climate and in the difficult times to come, its role is more important than ever. When it began its work, the SPSA inherited forensic science laboratories in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow, which have been developed and adjusted over a long period. Speaking in a previous debate on SPSA forensic services in January last year, my colleague Fergus Ewing made it clear that the laboratories were far from ideal, and that "urgent investment" in Scotland's forensic science capacity was needed. That is why we are building the crime campus at Gartcosh, something that Mr Baker seems to wish had been done yesterday, so as to accelerate things. We have also fully funded the construction of the new state-of-the-art forensic science laboratory in Dundee, which I opened earlier this year. The two new labs will provide the SPSA with the capacity to meet ever-increasing demand for the analysis of forensic evidence and they will provide police forces and procurators fiscal with faster turnaround times and a more effective service.

Yes. A variety of matters have been on-going at the Aberdeen lab, including the police expressing a desire to have space returned to them, given that the lab is located within the police headquarters. What lies at the heart of today's debate is what the continued improvement of the SPSA forensic service will mean for the existing laboratories. My position is simply that we must ensure that the service that is delivered to every police force and every procurator fiscal is consistent, high quality, rapid and value for money. After all, we should bear it in mind that not every police force has a forensic laboratory on its doorstep, and no one is suggesting that the ability to fight crime in Stirling or Stranraer is compromised as a result.

It seems to me that in places such as the Western Isles and the west Highlands, it is arguable where one should go for forensic services; the choice is made on the basis of what  is most effective. [Interruption.] Liberal Democrat members seem to be talking about centralisation but, on their watch they seem to have had no desire to provide a forensic science facility in the Northern Constabulary area or in Dumfries and Galloway, so "cant" and "hypocrisy" are words that spring to mind. [Interruption.]

The process of modernising the forensic service should not discount any options to achieve the goal that I have set out. Of course, the need to deliver services more efficiently is more pressing than ever. Although we have delivered 1,000 additional officers and crime in Scotland is at a 32-year low, we face huge budgetary challenges, from which the SPSA is not immune. The damaging Westminster cuts make it imperative that Scotland secures economic powers and financial responsibility. It is all very well for suggestions to be made about how we can expand forensic services, but given that the money for that has to come from the SPSA budget, Mr Baker and others will have to say whether money should be cut from the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency's budget or from the broader justice budget, which would result in fewer police. Is the proposal for less money for police or less money for the SCDEA?

The member talks about significant savings, but given the size of the cuts that are coming down the line, which were started by Labour in Westminster and have been accelerated by the coalition down south, matters require to be dealt with. When the Parliament debated the modernisation of forensic services in January 2009, it focused on the future of the Aberdeen laboratory. Since then, the SPSA has set about gathering views and evidence on how it could better meet the national needs of all Scotland's police forces and procurators fiscal while at the same time generating the best efficiency for the public purse. I understand that the SPSA board has now considered the findings from that exercise. Mr Kelly kindly told us about the note that he received in that regard. I emphasise that I have not yet received the board's recommendation.

All that I can say is that I have not received the SPSA's report. We are open to recommendations. I will be happy to take on board the Parliament's views, as will the SPSA. I will also be happy to receive representations from members who are present on behalf of others. We are in listening mode. We have not made a decision. We will receive the SPSA's recommendation and will ensure that the excellent forensic science service that is provided to communities across Scotland continues to be provided. I pay tribute to the people who provide that service and will listen to them in due course. I move amendment S3M-7045.2, to leave out from first "believes" to end and insert: "notes that the recommendation for the future structure of the service has not yet been made by the SPSA Board to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and that the cabinet secretary, in making the decision, should listen to the views of the Parliament, and further notes the valuable work done by SPSA's expert staff across Scotland and the positive way that they have engaged in this process."

Has that not been rebutted by the SPSA? The press release that the member put out last night has been challenged by the SPSA. The SPSA have told the member that those figures are not correct but he has persisted—through the media and again today he seems to have repeated a libel.

The Scottish Police Services Authority delivers forensic science services to all eight police forces and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service on a national basis. The SPSA is committed to creating an improved and responsive national service and has been carrying out extensive engagement with stakeholders over the past 18 months as part of its forensic modernisation programme. I anticipate that the SPSA will submit proposals for the Scottish Government's consideration later this month. We will carefully consider its proposals before reaching a decision.

The member will accept that it would be entirely inappropriate for me to prejudge what has still to go before the board of the SPSA and, ultimately, to come to me. What he can be assured of is that I recognise the commitment made by everybody in the forensic science service wherever they are located, the extremely high standards that they have, and the intention of everybody to ensure that we maintain the excellent service that we have in Scotland.

I have not made any decision. It would be entirely inappropriate for me to do that. I have had the opportunity to see service centres throughout the country. Equally, I have had the opportunity to open the new centre in Dundee and I recognise the significant improvement that goes with the quality of the equipment that comes through new science. However, as I said, I have made no decision and I recognise the skills and talents that exist in the service wherever in Scotland it is currently located.

I say to Lord Foulkes that, actually, I intend to go in with an open mind. As I said, I am not prejudging the decision. I await the report that will be signed off and sent to me from the SPSA. I will consider it on its merits, together with representations that may come from elsewhere.

Firearms legislation is the responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. The deployment and use of Tasers is an operational matter for chief constables. Scottish ministers have no role in promoting legislation on Tasers nor in authorising their use. It is for chief constables to ensure that Tasers are deployed in accordance with the law. However, our police are highly professional and we trust them to make sound judgments on the use of Tasers.

No, we have no intention of carrying out such research. The research to which the member referred relates to matters across the Atlantic ocean, and we do not believe that it is relevant here. We have great faith in our police and we believe that they act proportionately and legitimately. Tasers are necessary for the protection of others as well as for the protection of officers in difficult circumstances. Our position is clear. Tasers are weapons defined as firearms under section 5(1)(b) of the Firearms Act 1968. Section 54 of that act does not apply section 5 to Crown servants. In effect, that exempts Crown servants, of whom the police are one, from the whole of section 5, which contains a requirement for Scottish ministers and others to provide authorisation for the purchase, possession and use of Tasers. Therefore, the police do not need any authorisation from Scottish ministers to use Tasers, although we are, as a Government, aware that they have been used. When they have been used, their use seems to us to have been proportionate, reasonable and done for the protection of both officers and other civilians.

As I explained earlier, the Scottish Government has no role in setting policy on the use of Tasers by police forces in Scotland. Policy and legislation on Tasers are reserved to Westminster and their deployment is an operational matter for chief constables.

No, it does not mean that. That is a claim that I have never made. I can only repeat what I said earlier. In respect of Crown immunity, section 54 of the Firearms Act 1968 does not apply section 5 to Crown servants. The police are Crown servants, which means that the police are exempt from the whole of section 5, including section 5(1), which contains a requirement for Scottish ministers and others to provide authorisation for the purchase, possession and use of Tasers. Basically, we have no control over what they do. Clearly, if an officer or a force acted inappropriately, whether with a firearm or with a Taser, they would face potential action. However, the Government is required to sign off regulations relating to individuals; we do not have any requirement for police officers to be in touch with us.

We should remind ourselves that we are dealing with the final stages of a huge bill. Everyone who has spoken has correctly paid tribute to those involved. What I am most aggrieved, surprised and perplexed by is the position that has been taken by Labour and the Tories. Richard Baker said that more divides than unites us. I have been looking at the bill again. It is one of the biggest bills that we have ever brought to the Parliament. There are nine parts to it, and many sections in it have not been contentious at all. However, because Labour and the Tories disagree with the votes of Parliament so far on a presumption against short sentences and on knife crime, whole swathes of the bill are to be ignored. For petty party politics, Labour and the Tories are jeopardising many provisions. Let us consider what Labour and the Tories want to vote down: provisions on serious organised crime to tackle the Mr Bigs in the city of Glasgow—not just the wee neds, but the people who hang around and sometimes apparently, if rumours are to be believed, corrupt even those in the body politic. They want to vote down those provisions. There are provisions on articles banned in prison. We know that hits are sometimes organised from prison, but we will seek to deal with mobile phones in there. There are provisions on indecent images of children, but Labour and the Tories do not want to take action against them. There are provisions on extreme pornography, but they do not want to take action against that. The bill includes foreign travel orders to prevent the perverts and paedophiles in our communities from going away, whether to Thailand or anywhere else, to carry out abuse. Labour and the Tories want to vote down those measures simply because they did not get their way earlier in stage 3.

I am more than happy to discuss that with the member afterwards. We must have appropriate laws, and such things have been dealt with by the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. Sadly, there are individuals in our communities who would perpetrate such offences. Huge swathes of the bill are not contentious and will change criminal procedure in Scotland—which needs to be changed—for the better. We have not even debated many of the bill's provisions, which have, correctly, gone through unchallenged. Yet, Labour and the Tories say that they will vote down legislation that would make our communities safer, protect our children from sexual perverts and protect our communities from serious organised crime, simply because they did not get their way. As we keep being told, we are a minority Government; therefore, this is not something that we have foisted on the Parliament. Let us be clear: there are aspects of the bill that the Government has had to bend to the will of Parliament. For example, the position that we have reached on the sentencing council is not the position that we started out from. Nevertheless, we recognised the merits of what was put forward and the pragmatism of what can be achieved and we agreed with that. We began with a presumption against sentences of six months or less, but we accepted that, to get the bill passed and make the progress that we needed, we had to change that to a presumption against sentences of three months or less. We are grateful to Robert Brown and Patrick Harvie for the positions that they have taken on that. It is not a matter of our forcing or foisting anything on the Parliament. Let us be clear: the decisions on knife crime and on sentencing that we made earlier were not made by an autocracy or enforced by me; they reflected the will of Parliament and a majority vote of the SNP, the Liberal Democrats, the Greens and Margo MacDonald. Those decisions have not been foisted on the Parliament by some corrupt autocracy; therefore, it is a strange position that the Labour-Tory coalition has got itself into. When those parties do not get the wee things that they want, they are prepared to bring down the whole bill because they are opposed to it. There is something perplexing in the society that we live in  when Ken Clarke is much more liberal in his policies not simply than Jack Straw, but than the Labour Party north of the border. The bill contains some contentious elements and things that people disagree with, and there are matters that the Government has had to accept—that is democracy. Equally, in a democracy it is incumbent on each of us to protect our children and our communities. If Labour and the Tories vote against the bill, they are voting against clear policies and legislative progress that would make Scotland much safer and stronger. We can continue to disagree on matters such as sentencing and knife crime—that is why, as a Government and as a body politic, we will have elections next year. However, they should not jeopardise the interests and safety of our communities simply because of that.

It is utterly preposterous for Mr Baker to suggest that, if the bill falls, we can pass emergency legislation on all those matters before the Government ceases to be in government, next year.

Is Richard Baker really suggesting that we could pass emergency legislation on serious organised crime, indecent images and child pornography? Frankly, that is utterly ridiculous. Sometimes, members must accept the decision of Parliament. The Government has had to accept it both in government and, in the past, when we were in opposition. Labour had eight years in government and never addressed any of those matters.

Labour had 13 years in government, as Nicol Stephen correctly points out, yet it took no action on those matters. The fact is that Labour is failing to address what is necessary. It is a good bill that will make Scotland safer and stronger. There are areas on which we divide and disagree, but we must recognise that it has been voted on by Parliament and promoted not simply by the SNP, the Liberal Democrats and the Greens, but by police officers, the violence reduction unit and those who are in the front line of Scottish policing. I commend the bill to Parliament.

I am pleased to open the stage 3 debate. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. It was necessary to obtain Crown consent for the bill on the basis that part 9 of the bill makes amendments to the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, for which Crown consent was needed. Some fifteen months ago—in March 2009—we introduced the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill into Parliament. It would be appropriate at this juncture to give thanks to all those who have been involved in what has been a substantial bit of legislation, particularly the bill team and the convener and members of the Justice Committee. I am aware of the great periods of time that had to be given to investigating matters that are very complex, as we discovered earlier today, and matters that are deeply sensitive, as we experienced this morning. The bill as introduced contained provisions relating to around 80 different topics. After stage 2, that number has grown to around 100 topics. The bill is a comprehensive piece of legislation that takes forward the Government's priorities to reform our justice system by providing measures that strengthen, simplify and modernise it. Despite disagreements over some of the content of the bill, we had some excellent debates this morning, as would be expected. I place on record my thanks for all the work that was done by everybody involved. With a bill this size, it cannot have been easy. One of the Government's key priorities is to tackle serious organised crime. For too long, these crooks have terrorised and brought misery to Scottish communities. That is unacceptable and we are fighting back, but we require to have the appropriate legislation. Serious organised crime is very wide ranging and constantly evolving, and any response needs to reflect that. The four new measures on serious organised crime—the statutory aggravation and the offences of  involvement, direction and failure to report—should be seen as a package of measures that will strengthen the hand of law enforcement agencies and the Crown Office to have better, more effective tools and more flexibility to tackle organised criminals at all levels and make it easier to prosecute individuals who organise others to commit crimes. We have introduced a power of retention of fingerprints, palm prints and other physical data for a limited time from those who have been prosecuted for but not convicted of a serious violent or sexual offence. That correctly brings the laws for the retention of fingerprints, palm prints and other physical data into line with the current laws on DNA retention. We believe that the forensic data provisions in the bill are proportionate and fair; they strike a balance between the needs of the justice system, the protection of the public and the rights of the individual. We are committed to supporting children's rights as a key strand that underpins our activity to improve outcomes for all Scotland's children and young people. Raising the minimum age of prosecution from 8 to 12 is an important move, which addresses key concerns about the very young age at which children in Scotland can currently end up in the criminal justice system. It also brings us into line with most of Europe and strengthens our commitment to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. We have provided a statutory regime for disclosure of evidence in criminal proceedings. It is a long-established rule in the Scottish legal system that the prosecutor has an obligation to give the accused notice of the case against him and to tell him what charges he faces and what evidence the Crown intends to bring to prove the charges. Any exculpatory material should be identified and given or disclosed to the accused or the defence. A fair trial demands that, and rightly so. We are glad that the Parliament has generally welcomed our proposals on that. The provision is deeply complex and it will have to be scrutinised, but we believe that it provides the right balance.  We appreciate the different opinions in the chamber on community payback orders. I hope that everyone recognises the desire of all members to break the culture of recidivism, to end reoffending and to ensure that paybacks are made. We all want to work together to achieve the goal of ensuring that we punish offenders but address the areas of offenders' lives that need to change and which fuel much of their offending. On short custodial sentences, we have advanced a proposal that has evidence, experience, and expert support on its side. We recognise that the proposal has divided the  chamber, but it has been passed and we need to work at it. As I said earlier, we will work with the judiciary on the matter. I can only remind those who are aggrieved at the decision that it is a matter of a presumption. The Government position is clear: when a sheriff believes that that presumption is overturned, they will have our full support. We are about empowering our judiciary. We believe that the evidence on the subject is clear. As I said earlier, the reconviction rate after two years for offenders who receive community service orders is 42 per cent whereas, for offenders who receive short custodial sentences—whether of six months or less, or of less than three months—the reconviction rate after two years is around 74 per cent. The experts are clear. When David Strang, the chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police, spoke for the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland at the Justice Committee last year, he said: "the likelihood of reoffending is less with a community sentence than with a repeat short prison sentence. ACPOS welcomes that proposal in the bill."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 26 May 2009; c 1930.]

I do not have the information in front of me that would allow me to drill down to which groups were identified. As I said, the research shows that those who are given a tough community sentence are less likely to reoffend—I refer to the three fifths who do not reoffend as opposed to the three quarters who do. Clearly, if we were to drill down, we would find individuals with deeply troubled lives. Part of the community payback order is meant to ensure sometimes that people do tough work. Equally, though, for many young women offenders, for example, we have sometimes to address underlying problems, which may not be simply physical but may be to do with child care—

Twenty per cent of the order can be aimed at addressing underlying problems such as alcohol, drugs, low-level mental health or educational failure. This is a positive bill that drives forward. We appreciate that there are areas on which the chamber is divided, but the areas on which members are united are much greater. I hope that we can get the support of others to make our communities safer and stronger. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill be passed.

No, I do not think that it does. What matters is the point that Bill Aitken made. Under sections 130 and 132, if the police wish to bring matters to the board's attention, they can do so, and if the board has concerns, legitimate or otherwise, it is entitled to request information. We do not need reports to be made irrespective of whether they are needed or wanted. That would not be useful to the board and it would represent a waste of police time. That is why the Government maintains that sections 130 and 132 will be operationally effective and cost effective. I therefore ask Paul Martin to withdraw amendment 164 and not to move amendment 165.

We concur with what has been said. We have been grateful to work with Capability Scotland and Lord Foulkes to ensure that the amendment works within the existing framework of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. We support amendment 163 and hope that the Parliament agrees to it.

We must strike the appropriate balance between the needs and wants of our communities, the requirements that are placed on the police and the amount of information that can be dealt with by a licensing board that is charged with the responsibility of deciding whether to grant an application. Amendments 164 and 165 would impose an unnecessary burden on the police in respect of antisocial behaviour reports, as a report would be required on all premises applications, even when the licensing board and the police considered it unnecessary. That would be reporting for reporting's sake. Sections 130 and 132 ensure that, when an application for a premises licence is being considered, the police may choose to supply the licensing board with information about antisocial behaviour in the vicinity of the premises. In addition, the licensing board may choose to request such information from the police.

We are content that amendment 198 will tackle the concerns that we previously shared with members of the Justice Committee and many arts organisations. The amendment that Sandra White moved at stage 2 could have led to the performing arts being caught  by a licensing regime that is designed to regulate lap-dancing bars. We understand and agree with Sandra White's wish for communities to be able to regulate lap dancing and, where there is sufficient evidence, to refuse to license venues that provide that type of entertainment. Therefore, we will support amendment 198.

We have some sympathy for the concerns that the Subordinate Legislation Committee expressed and that Rhoda Grant has articulated. We share the committee's view that it is for Parliament and not the courts to make provision in substantive criminal law. It is not our intention that section 115 would be used in that way, and we do not imagine that the High Court would do so. However, we accept that the section is not restricted to criminal procedure and practice—and necessarily so. This is the first time that disclosure has been put on a statutory footing. We need flexibility to enable the High Court to do everything that we think it is likely to require to do to regulate court practice and procedure in order to ensure that the scheme works efficiently. Moreover, the provision is needed to remove any doubts that might arise as to the scope of the  powers. For example, part 6, as amended at stage 2, makes provision for the duty of disclosure after conviction where there are no live criminal proceedings. It also enables applications to be made at that stage to the court for non-disclosure on public-interest grounds. Although we are quite clear that such matters are still criminal procedure because of their direct relationship to the fairness of the accused's criminal trial, we are conscious that in such cases there are no longer criminal proceedings and believe that it is necessary to leave no room for possible doubts. There has been too much historical uncertainty on disclosure, so part 6 is designed to put an end to that. Agreement to amendment 194 would lead to uncertainty, not only over what rules can and cannot be created, but over what rules may or may not be the subject of parliamentary resolution. We do not agree that the power that is contained in section 115 is entirely open. What the bill proposes is limited to aspects that are required to give full effect to the part 6 provisions on disclosure—no more, no less. I assure Parliament that the intention is only that rules of court may be developed that regulate court procedure and practice and that such rules should not stray into making provision on the substantive criminal law. Although we have sympathy with where members are coming from, I ask Parliament to reject amendment 194.

I thank John Lamont for raising the issue with me. Members have received correspondence on it—Robert Brown and Bill Butler referred to that—but he stepped forward to raise the matter and the difficulties that were coming for the archery world cup. The Government acknowledges that there is a gap. The purpose of the knife dealers licensing scheme is to make it more difficult for non-domestic knives to fall into the wrong hands. It is not meant to interfere with legitimate sports. We do not dispute that there is a problem; the question is what to do about it. We can seek to legislate in the bill, but we face the difficulty that if we are to address the issue for the forthcoming archery world cup, the measures that we could pass in the bill would not come into force in sufficient time because of the timing of royal assent. However, I assure John Lamont in particular, and all other members, that we recognise the problem. We can address it by regulation and use the powers that we have under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to provide for the further exemptions that are necessary. I am more than happy to assure members that we will do whatever is necessary to introduce the appropriate legislation to deal with the oversight and gap that we are all agreed upon without endangering our communities.

I appreciate how complex the issue is. I also appreciate Bill Aitken's comment that, notwithstanding the Justice Committee's comments, matters increased exponentially. We have not departed lightly from Lord Coulsfield's recommendations, which were fully consulted on. The provisions that we have brought forward are broadly the same in effect as those that apply in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Those places have, as Mr Brown quite correctly said, a different system, but we are basically fleshing out our own system. We are just ensuring that the balance is the same. I appreciate that our provisions are complex and, to an extent, I apologise for the complexity. However, it was felt necessary to have these complex provisions, which will ensure that justice is served and that the Crown is aware of what information it must provide. As I said, if it could have been done in a simpler, shorter form, we would have done so. However, the provisions will ensure that justice is done. I do not think that Robert Brown's amendments are required.  Amendment 98 agreed to.

Amendments 117 to 141, 143 to 145, 147, 149, 151, 152 and 154 to 159 relate to sections 102 to 113 concerning the procedure for the making and determination of applications for non-disclosure of information on public interest grounds. The amendments extend those sections so as to make them apply in relation to duties to disclose information that arise after the original proceedings have concluded. Those amendments and amendments 111, 113 and 160 to 162 are related to sections 96B to 96G, which were inserted into the bill at stage 2 and set out the duties of the prosecutor after the conclusion of the original proceedings and in the course of appeals. The amendments are necessary to ensure that applications for section 106 and 106A orders, and ancillary orders, can be made by the prosecutor or by the secretary of state. Section 113 makes general provision in relation to applications to the court for orders under sections 106 and 106A and for review of those orders. Amendments 154, 155, 157 and 158 extend section 113 so that it also applies where the application or review relates to a disclosure duty that arises after the original proceedings are concluded. Amendments 119, 120, 139 and 141 are technical amendments that extend the scope of those provisions. Amendments 111, 113, 121, 145, 147, 149 and 152 are also technical amendments that widen the definition of "accused" to include "appellant" or "other person", in certain cases. Amendment 151 is a technical amendment to clarify when criminal proceedings come to an end for the purposes of disclosure post conviction and in appeals. Amendments 160 to 162 are technical amendments to ensure that references to "accused", "appellant" or "other person" should be taken to include his or her solicitor or advocate where appropriate. I move amendment 111.  Amendment 111 agreed to.  Amendment 112 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

All the amendments in the group are necessary minor and technical amendments to part 6 of the bill, concerning the disclosure of evidence by the prosecutor to accused persons in criminal proceedings. Amendments 96, 97, 101, 102 and 104 extend the definition of "conclusion of the proceedings" where it appears, in certain sections of the bill, to include circumstances where the accused is convicted and then appeals against the conviction before the expiry of the time that is allowed for the appeal. The amendments are necessary because they complete the picture as to what "conclusion of the proceedings" means. Amendments 150 and 153 amend sections 111 and 111A, also in relation to the meaning of the term "conclusion of the proceedings". Amendments 193 and 109 amend sections 85 and 92 to ensure that they apply to the whole of part 6, rather than just to some sections. Section 96F sets out the prosecutor's duty of disclosure in cases in which the accused has been convicted and does not appeal the conviction. Amendment 107 seeks to clarify the duty of the prosecutor under section 96F by making it clear what the reference to "earlier proceedings" means—they are the proceedings in which the person was convicted. Amendment 108 is consequential to amendment 107. Amendment 142 will extend the definition of non-attendance order that is provided in section 106B(5). Amendment 146 will amend section 107B(4) to make it clear that special counsel must not communicate with the accused's representative about applications or appeals in which special counsel has been appointed unless the court has given permission. Amendments 110, 112, 114, 115 and 116 seek to alter the order of the provisions so that the general provisions come after all the provisions to which they apply. I move amendment 193.  Amendment 193 agreed to.

Amendments 98 to 100, 103, 105, 106 and 148 are Government amendments that seek to make minor and technical amendments to provisions in part 6 of the bill that deal with disclosure of information in criminal proceedings. Amendments 103 and 106 are necessary to avoid duplication of effort so that when the prosecutor is required to disclose information under any of the relevant provisions of part 6, he or she need not disclose the same information more than once. Amendment 98 will remove similar provision from section 89 in consequence of amendment 103. Amendments 99 and 100 seek to amend section 90 to clarify that, in solemn first instance cases only, the prosecutor need only provide certain specified information. Amendment 105 is a minor technical amendment to section 96, which seeks to insert a reference to a provision concerning defence statements that was added at stage 2. Amendment 148 deals with the interplay between the prosecutor's statutory duty of disclosure and the effect on it of a court order for non-disclosure of certain appeals by the prosecutor or secretary of state against section 106, section 106A and ancillary orders. The amendment is necessary to make it clear that until the appeal is determined or abandoned, the prosecutor must not disclose the information in question, in order to protect the public interest at stake until the court has made a final determination. Robert Brown's amendments deal with two different but related aspects of part 6—defence statements and court rulings on materiality—which  are highly technical and complex matters. I am aware that the Solicitor General for Scotland has discussed those issues with various people, and I have no doubt that he will have explained things much more eloquently and confidently than I could have done but, given the complexity, I will try to explain what we are doing. On defence statements, we accept that sections 94, 95 and 95A deal with highly technical procedural matters, but the underlying principles at their heart are simple. The accused provides a defence statement, in the light of which the prosecutor considers whether anything further needs to be disclosed. If the prosecutor decides that no further information needs to be disclosed and the accused is dissatisfied with that decision, he can apply to the court for a ruling on whether the information needs to be disclosed. We accept that the provisions are detailed, but that detail is necessary to set out clearly for accused persons what they are required to do. There can be no room for uncertainty here. Our position on the need for defence statements is simple and twofold. First, the provisions of the bill as drafted are designed to ensure that all that should be disclosed to the accused for them to receive a fair trial is disclosed. That is absolutely fundamental. We cannot risk something not being disclosed inadvertently and through no fault of the prosecutor because they did not appreciate, and could not have appreciated, its significance. That is not fair or just. Requiring defence statements in solemn cases is the best way confidently to secure disclosure to the accused of all the information that needs to be disclosed to him and, as a result, a fair trial. It is also a more efficient and effective way for justice to be delivered. Secondly, if the defence seeks additional information, it should be required to provide some information to explain the materiality and relevance of the information that is sought. If the defence is to challenge lack of disclosure, we believe that it must be required to explain why it is challenging it and, in doing so, must refer to the aspects of the accused's defence to which it says that the information is material and relevant. The issue is one not of payment, as the Glasgow Bar Association suggested in its submission, but of proper argument being made in what is, after all, an adversarial system. We recognise the complexities in these matters, and I am aware that Robert Brown has lodged amendments to deal with particular issues. He suggested at stage 2 that these provisions are unnecessary, and that the court would have implicit powers to rule on disclosure or perhaps even to request a review of new information.  However, we are creating an entirely new statutory regime, and if we wish the court to have particular powers, or if we want remedies to be available to parties in criminal proceedings, we need to set them out as part of that regime. I am conscious that Robert Brown has not lodged similar amendments with regard to sections 96D and 96H, which apply the equivalent scheme in relation to disclosure and appellate proceedings. It is difficult to follow the logic in that. If the procedure is necessary in the course of an appeal, it must also be necessary in the first instance. The prosecutor has duties of disclosure at both stages, and although those differ in substance, the underlying principle—namely, to ensure that the accused has disclosed to the prosecutor all that is required to secure a fair trial—is identical. I therefore urge members to reject all the amendments lodged by Robert Brown. I am happy to give further clarification beyond that which, I hope, the Solicitor General has already managed to give. These provisions are about ensuring that we provide balance. The matter is complex and technical, but we need to ensure that in an adversarial system, the system is equitable to the prosecutor and to the defence. I move amendment 98.

Nobody disputes that human trafficking is a heinous offence or that prostitution is a deeply complex matter in which people are  abused and women are frequently the victims. Johann Lamont is correct that we have to take action. That is what we are doing, but we must ensure that we do not legislate in haste and repent at leisure in relation to this complex matter. The committee has already taken evidence form a variety of sources. Indeed, the police and others have been wary about what we should do. What are we doing? First of all, significant action was taken in the previous parliamentary session to deal with on-street prostitution. There was to be further investigation into off-street prostitution and that, to some extent, is what we now seek to do because, after all, human trafficking tends to be off street by nature. We introduced the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009, which brought in measures to ensure that we tightened up the legislation, so action has been taken. In the bill, action is being taken to increase the penalties for those who brothel keep because the levels of brothel keeping that were being dealt with were entirely unacceptable. We must also recognise that the Equality and Human Rights Commission is undertaking an inquiry into human trafficking, which is chaired by Baroness Helena Kennedy. She has undertaken to include in that inquiry an investigation into off-street prostitution. The Government has taken action. Let us see what Helena Kennedy concludes. The issue is deeply complex but I assure Johann Lamont and others that, if Helena Kennedy highlights matters that require legislation, we will not hesitate to take the necessary action. Let us listen to what Helena Kennedy and others come back with and take appropriate action then.

We appreciate the spirit and intention behind what Robert Brown's amendment 190 seeks to achieve. However, as Richard Baker said, this sensitive matter has already been discussed and debated quite extensively by the committee during stage 2. It appears to us that we should leave matters as they are. On this side of the chamber, members of my party are prepared to consider moving on from where we are at some future stage. However, given the sensitivity of the issue, it should be dealt with not through subordinate legislation but through the full majesty of primary legislation, which is more appropriate. On that basis, while recognising the spirit of what he is trying to achieve, and following the full discussion that we have had today, I ask Robert Brown to withdraw amendment 190.

Amendment 80 is a technical amendment that provides that it shall be competent to libel a charge of assault or abduction with the aggravation that it was committed with the intent to commit rape, by reference to the statutory offences of rape and rape of a young child at sections 1 and 18 of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009. There is some uncertainty as to whether a court would accept as competent and relevant a charge that the accused committed the common-law offence of assault or abduction with the intent of committing the statutory offence of rape or rape of a young child. For the avoidance of doubt, the amendment is intended to ensure that the Crown will continue to be able to charge the offences of assault and abduction with the aggravation that they were committed with the intent of committing  the offence of rape when the common-law offence of rape is repealed and replaced with the statutory offences in the 2009 act. I move amendment 80.

I echo James Kelly in paying tribute to Rhoda Grant, whom we thank for raising the issue. Like him, I pay tribute to Ann Moulds. We seek to address two matters, one of which is stalking, which is entirely unacceptable. We need to ensure that statutory provision to tackle that is in place. As I said, we thank Rhoda Grant and Ann Moulds for raising the issue and for their co-operation thereafter. The second issue is ensuring that breach of the peace covers incidents that occur in a non-public place, such as officers being abused because of their service, which they should not have to endure, or cases of domestic violence when no witnesses are about. I assure James Kelly that we recognise the fears that individuals and the Justice Committee were correct to express. Amendment 63, which is an amended version of a stage 2 amendment, restricts the offence to "Threatening or abusive behaviour". Removing the reference to distress will ensure that we do not inadvertently criminalise conduct that should not be criminal and which we do not intend to catch, while providing prosecutors and the police with a power that is wide enough to deal with the other matters. We are aware of and have taken on board the concerns of some in the Christian community and we have changed what was proposed in the stage 2 amendment, which we did not move. I assure James Kelly and the whole Parliament that we have taken the appropriate action to deal with stalking and with breach of the peace offences in domestic violence situations or against police officers. We continue to guarantee that  those who have Christian views can express their views without coming before the courts.

I understand that amendment 188 seeks to deal with one of the most serious consequences of the Harris v Her Majesty's Advocate judgment, but I do not think that it is necessary if the Government's amendment 63 is agreed to. There is also a difficulty in retaining reference to behaviour that is likely to cause distress, which was the reason for removing it from the Government's provision.  Amendment 188 is too narrow; what the Government has drafted is better. Finally, the provision allows only for prosecution on summary complaint with a maximum sentence of 12 months' imprisonment, but we may wish to proceed further. I move amendment 63.

Although we understand the reason for amendment 13, we do not think it appropriate or necessary. The Solicitor General has already spoken to Robert Brown on the issue but I will try to further clarify matters. We should be clear that the normal rules of corroboration still apply to the underlying offence that would incur a statutory aggravation. The current provision requires a single source of evidence to establish the aggravation. That is in line with the common law on aggravation and with previous statutory aggravations, such as the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Act 2009. If amendment 13 were accepted, it would require corroboration for the aggravation to apply. However, if the fiscal had more than one source of evidence establishing an accused's involvement in serious or organised crime, he would likely be seeking a conviction on one of the substantive offences in sections 25, 27 and 28. Therefore, the amendment would make the statutory aggravation meaningless and devoid of any practical use. Robert Brown is, correctly, concerned that an offender might receive a sentence where the aggravation could be more severe than the original sentence. All that this section does is require the sentencing sheriff or judge to record the aggravation and to take it into account in determining the appropriate sentence, and to indicate whether and how the sentence is different to the one that would have been imposed if the offence were not aggravated. That is a matter for  the court to determine after hearing all the facts and circumstances of the case, but the starting point in determining the sentence will be the index offence and the appropriate sentence for that offence. I invite Robert Brown to withdraw amendment 13. The issues are technical and complicated. As I said, the Solicitor General has spoken to Robert Brown already—and doubtless did better than I have just done—but I hope that I have supplied additional clarification.

Amendment 63 creates an offence of threatening or abusive behaviour. It is intended to address the uncertainty about the scope of the common law offence of breach of the peace that arose as a result of the appeal court's decision in Harris v Her Majesty's Advocate. In that case, the court ruled that a public element to the offending behaviour is required for the offence of breach of the peace to be committed. Although the judgment does not affect the majority of breach of the peace cases, which take place in public, we are concerned that it will make it more  difficult for the criminal law to intervene, where that is appropriate, in domestic abuse cases that involve threatening or abusive behaviour but in which there is no evidence of physical violence that would enable a charge of assault to be libelled, as such cases often lack an obvious public element. The incoming president of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents expressed concern at its annual conference in May that the decision has also made it much more difficult to prosecute people who are abusive towards police officers, especially when the abusive behaviour takes place in private. Amendment 63 provides a statutory offence that is intended to ensure that conduct that could have been prosecuted as breach of the peace prior to the decision can continue to be prosecuted. It provides that it shall be a criminal offence for a person to behave in a threatening or abusive manner that is likely to cause fear or alarm to a reasonable person where the accused either intends to cause fear or alarm or is reckless as to whether their behaviour will cause fear or alarm. Unlike in the common law offence of breach of the peace, it does not matter whether the conduct takes place in private or in public. In lodging amendment 63, we have taken account of the Justice Committee's concern that the stage 2 amendment on the matter was too widely drawn and risked interfering with a person's right to freedom of expression. The offence in amendment 63 is more narrowly defined in that it applies only to behaviour that would cause a reasonable person to feel fear or alarm and does not refer to distress.

No, I do not think that that would be a specific example. I am talking about people who, for example, shout abuse at policemen when no other members of the public are present or shout abuse in their home as a form of domestic violence. As I say, amendment 63 seeks to deal with situations in which the public are not present and, in that respect, soliciting is a separate issue. Instead of applying only to any behaviour which "would ... cause a reasonable person ... fear or alarm" the offence will require that the accused's behaviour is "threatening or abusive" to ensure that we focus on the accused's behaviour as well as the effect that it is likely to have on a reasonable person. We have also included a defence that would allow an accused person to show that their behaviour was, in all the circumstances, reasonable.  Amendment 63 also seeks to provide the police and prosecution with the power to act in respect of criminal conduct that had previously been prosecuted as a breach of the peace and which lacks the requisite public element without unreasonably restricting a person's right to freedom of expression. The common law offence of breach of the peace is not affected by this amendment and remains available as a charge in suitable cases. Indeed, the president of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents has expressed the association's support for this amendment which he says is "necessary to protect police officers from threatening and abusive behaviour in line with our duty to protect the communities that we serve across Scotland." Amendments 64 to 78 are intended to ensure that the new statutory criminal offence of stalking, the result of amendments lodged at stage 2 by Rhoda Grant and agreed by the Justice Committee, operates as robustly and effectively as possible. My officials discussed the amendments with Rhoda Grant before lodging them and they have been shared with Action Scotland Against Stalking's Ann Moulds, who has led the campaign for legislation to tackle stalking and who has confirmed that she is content with them. Following concerns expressed by the Crown Office about the requirement in the new offence to prove that a victim suffered "psychological harm" as a result of stalking activity, amendment 64 seeks to amend the new offence to provide that A stalks B where A's course of conduct causes B to suffer "fear or alarm". The Crown Office considered that the original provision could prove to be a significant barrier to prosecution, especially if the courts determined that it was necessary to provide evidence that the victim suffered a mental illness as a result of this activity. By contrast, the courts are familiar with the test of "fear or alarm" because a similar one is used to determine whether conduct constitutes breach of the peace. It is conduct that causes "fear or alarm" that is the essential harm that we are seeking to criminalise. Amendments 65, 66 and 76 make changes that are consequential on amendment 64. Amendments 67 and 68 are technical amendments. Amendment 67 seeks to amend section 31B(5) to refer to a "course of conduct" rather than a "course of action" and amendment 68 seeks to provide that the list of activities constituting "conduct" for the purpose of this offence is exhaustive rather than illustrative. That is appropriate because of the catch-all provision in section 31B(6)(i). Amendments 69 through 75 seek to make minor amendments to the list of examples of conduct in section 31B(6). Amendments 69 and 70 seek to amend section 31B(6)(b) to include attempts to  contact a person—for example, by leaving voice-mail messages on a person's phone or sending e-mails that may or may not be read—and to remove references to the means by which such contact may be made to ensure that future technological developments do not result in the provision becoming outdated. Amendment 71 seeks to amend section 31B(6)(d) so that it refers to "monitoring" rather than "tracing" a person's use of the internet, e-mail or other electronic communication. We consider that reference to be clearer. Amendment 72 is intended to simplify the drafting of section 31B(6)(e) while ensuring that it continues to apply to all premises and places, whether public or private. It is important to remember that the list of activities set out in section 31B(6) may in themselves be entirely innocent. The offence is committed only if these activities are undertaken with the intention of, or with recklessness as to the possibility of, causing fear or alarm and actually have that effect. Amendments 73 and 74 seek to amend section 31B(6)(g) to ensure that it applies to the giving of "anything"—not only "offensive material"—to B or any other person. Again the offence will be committed only if there is an intention to cause fear or alarm, or recklessness as to the possibility of causing fear or alarm, and that is achieved. We are aware of stalking cases in which material that is not objectively offensive but which, in context, may cause a victim of stalking fear or alarm is given or left so as to be brought to the victim's attention. Amendment 75 seeks to amend section 31B(6)(h), replacing "keeping B or any other person under surveillance" with "watching or spying on B or any other person", as the original drafting could appear to be an example of a course of conduct while the other examples in section 31B(6) refer to individual acts. Amendment 77 is intended to increase the maximum penalty on summary conviction from six to 12 months to reflect the greater sentencing powers of summary courts. Amendment 78 provides that the offence of threatening or abusive behaviour is an implied alternative to the offence of stalking. That means that, in circumstances in which someone is charged with stalking but the court is not satisfied that the accused committed the stalking offence but is satisfied that the accused committed the offence of threatening or abusive behaviour, it may convict of that offence.  We assume that amendment 14 seeks to ensure that the stalking offence does not inadvertently criminalise otherwise lawful public protest or industrial action. We share Robert Brown's concern that we should be careful to ensure that we do not inadvertently criminalise legitimate, lawful public protest or industrial action. The right to peaceful protest is a cornerstone of our democracy. However, the difficulty with amendment 14 is that it creates an ambiguity. It is unclear whether it is the individual's course of conduct, the public protest or the industrial action that must be reasonable. If, as we think Robert Brown intends, it is the course of conduct that must be reasonable, we do not consider the amendment to be necessary. The offence already contains safeguards that ensure that it could not be used to prosecute people engaged in lawful public protest or industrial action. However, it is possible to interpret the amendment as creating a defence, even if the accused's course of conduct is not reasonable, provided that the public protest or industrial action is reasonable. That cannot be right, because it would mean that those intent on unacceptable behaviour could use legitimate public protest or industrial action as a cover for such behaviour. Legitimate public protest and industrial action should be peaceful and about making a point; they should not be about causing fear or alarm to those who may have different views or who simply happen to be in the place where the protest or industrial action is taking place. Where such fear or alarm is caused, that would in any case almost certainly constitute a breach of the peace under common law and so would not be otherwise lawful under the terms of the amendment. Furthermore, the stalking offence already contains a defence that the accused's conduct was reasonable in the circumstances. That would be a matter for the courts to determine. I hope that I have reassured Robert Brown that the safeguards that are contained in the stalking offence are sufficient to ensure that it could not be used to prosecute people involved in lawful public protest or industrial action. As I said, we think that amendment 14 creates an ambiguity. I turn to amendment 188.

Let us be clear: there is a problem in Scotland with knife crime. We recognise that. Far too many families are bereaved, and we pay tribute to those who, despite their loss, have campaigned to try to make things better. In particular, we pay tribute to John Muir and others who have sought to make changes, which are working in Greenock and Inverclyde, where problems are still far too prevalent but progress is being made. We have to take action, but it is a question of what we do and what works. As I said earlier, more people are being stopped and searched, fewer are carrying knives and those who do face tougher and longer sentences. That is appropriate. Equally, we must ensure that we do not have any knee-jerk reactions that would impact in other ways. If we spend money on prisons by locking everybody up, we cannot pour money into the no knives, better lives campaign, diversionary initiatives and education. Those things cost money, but what has been shown in Greenock and Inverclyde is that matters are working and progress is being made. Margaret Curran made various points, but I refer to John Carnochan, who is on the front line and who asked, "If we give somebody two years in jail the first time they're caught carrying a knife, what do we do the second, third and fourth time? Do we operate a three-strikes-and-you're-out system?"  That is why we have to listen to guys such as John Carnochan and do what is right. We have a problem in Scotland; let us ensure that we tackle it. Let us listen to those on the front line. Patrick Harvie was mocked and sneered at by some on the Labour benches, but there are frightened wee laddies who carry knives. They have to face the consequences of their actions, but I can tell members this: putting them in prison would not improve them or change the situation. Indeed, it would probably make matters worse. Let me quote Sheriff John Herald, who sits at Greenock sheriff court. He said: "I have spent many years going on about possession of knives in this town, the damage they can do and what people found with these items can expect to happen when they appear in this court." Sheriff Herald is no shrinking violet. He continued: "There have been four cases today involving possession of knives and four cases where I haven't sent anyone to prison. No doubt that will attract some criticism ... But there are times where campaigners wanting mandatory sentences for people found in possession of knives do not understand that all cases must be looked at and considered on their own merits." Sheriff Herald would have my full support in giving somebody four years simply for possessing a knife. He has a track record in making it clear that there is a problem in Inverclyde and in taking action and imposing severe sentences when necessary. However, he also recognises—as does Patrick Harvie—the case of the frightened wee laddie. Labour members should also think about the situation of the soldier who has served in Iraq, who has come home from Helmand and who is self-medicating—he has problems with alcohol. He picks up a knife at a party or in the house but does not use it. Would they give him six months in prison at Her Majesty's pleasure? Or would they allow Sheriff Herald and others to remember the service that that soldier has given to Queen and country? Six-month mandatory sentences bring manifest injustices not simply for frightened wee laddies, but for those who suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder.

It is both. The issue is changing the culture that exists in Scotland that somebody is actually quite a nice fellow, but it was the drink that did it. I have no doubt that such people have redeeming qualities but, at the end of the day, it was not the alcohol that did it; it was the individual. We must stop tolerating that excuse  and we must make it clear to those who defend offenders that that excuse will not be tolerated. We must also make that clear to the judiciary, as they have to be part of the process. We fully accept that being drunk is not a defence in Scottish law. However, having practised for 20 years in the courts in Scotland—Robert Brown has practised here also—and having listened to the Lord Advocate, who knows more than anyone about what goes on in the courts of Scotland, I know that a litany of excuse is put forward daily that it was the drink that done it. No it was not. Let us make it clear and drive home the point that we will not tolerate violence, domestic or otherwise, or antisocial behaviour because someone simply went out and got bevvied. I move amendment 2.

I concur with Stewart Maxwell's comments. Voluntary intoxication is continually rolled out as an excuse. I have not practised in the Scottish courts for more than 11 years, but it was prevalent as an excuse then and I have heard from the Lord Advocate that it continues to be used on a daily basis. Is it accepted within the law? No, but as Richard Baker accepted and Stewart Maxwell said, there are times when the law must try to trigger a cultural change. We must put on record the point that it is entirely unacceptable to use alcohol abuse as an excuse whether for low-level domestic violence or for more serious offences. Sadly, that excuse is rolled out by lawyers and accepted by individuals, even if in most cases it is rejected officially by the judiciary.  I say to the Liberal Democrats and the Tories that the genesis of this matter was not simply the comments made by the Lord Advocate; the first person to challenge me on the issue was Chief Superintendent John Carnochan of the violence reduction unit, who recognised—as my predecessor Cathy Jamieson recognised, to her credit—the clear link between booze and blade in Scotland. If we are going to reduce violence in Scotland, whether in the home, the street or our communities, we need to tackle the problem of alcohol. Therefore, we need to drive home the message that alcohol abuse will not be viewed as an excuse. That is why John Carnochan raised the issue and why the Lord Advocate supports amendment 2. If the head of the violence reduction unit and the chief prosecutor and law officer are saying that we have a problem and that there is an issue that needs to be tackled, we should trust their judgment and back them.

Amendment 3 will remove section 24B, which was inserted at stage 2 to provide for mandatory minimum sentences for knife possession offences. We are doing more than ever before to tackle knife crime. Tougher sentences and tough police action are taking weapons off our streets. That goes hand in hand with groundbreaking initiatives to educate young people about the dangers of knives. The results of that work are demonstrated in statistics that show that recorded crime last year was at its lowest level in nearly 30 years and that violent crime was at its lowest level since 1986. Our courts are handing down tougher sentences for carrying a knife—the average custodial sentence for knife carriers increased from 116 days in 2003-04 to 217 days in 2007-08. Mandatory minimum custodial sentences for knife carriers—a one-size-fits-all approach—are not the solution. We are not the only ones who say so. Strathclyde Police's chief constable, Stephen House, has said that mandatory minimum sentences are not the answer. I have referred to John Carnochan, the head of the national violence reduction unit. I do not think that he would mind my describing him as a hard-bitten Glasgow detective. In his evidence to the Justice Committee, he said: "Jail doesn't work, we need early intervention, restricting access to alcohol and knives."  We should listen to those who are at the front line of the fight against knife crime. John Muir and Chief Constable David Strang gave evidence to the Justice Committee on 23 March. Despite their divergent views, a clear message about the importance of education and prevention emerged from that session. We need to pursue a twin approach of education and enforcement and we need to give our courts the discretion to consider the circumstances of each case that comes before them. We need to give our judges sufficient discretion to sentence individuals, not offences. It would be more appropriate for the Scottish sentencing council to consider the appropriate disposals for people who are found carrying knives or other offensive weapons in public and to produce guidelines on that. We should remember that, under the current law, a sentence of four years can be imposed simply for possessing a knife. When the police have, by the grace of God, intercepted somebody who was out to create mayhem, why would we wish to restrict a sheriff's ability to impose a four-year sentence and instead impose a mandatory six-month sentence? The Government will support fully any sheriff who feels that giving the maximum sentence is necessary.

We must consider the facts. More people are being stopped and searched—almost 250,000 in Strathclyde alone. Fewer people are carrying knives. Of those who are caught with knives, more are going to prison and for longer. Yes, we accept that we in Scotland have a problem with knife carrying. The solution is tough laws and visible enforcement but also education and allowing those in the front line—whether they are police officers or the judiciary—to use their discretion. Let us remember that progress is being made—the number of knife offences has reduced. That is against the background of the lowest recorded homicide rates in Glasgow in 10 years and in Edinburgh in 20 years and the lowest recorded crime rate in Scotland in 30 years. There is a journey to travel, but we are taking action against the booze and the blade. Mandatory  sentences would create injustice. Let us leave it to our judiciary to impose the appropriate sentence for the appropriate individual and the appropriate crime. I move amendment 3.

First, I thank Patrick Harvie for his eloquent and sensible contribution. I say to him that all the evidence shows that we have the right direction of travel. We are trying to achieve results on a matter of great discussion and debate in our communities. We have to take practical, pragmatic steps, and that is why we reserve the right to come back, subject to the will of the Parliament, to seek to extend matters if we can show the doomsayers that Scotland has not collapsed and that we are beginning to deal with the issue. I turn now to the particular issue of domestic violence that Johann Lamont raised. Do we have a problem in Scotland with domestic violence? Yes, we do. Can it be solved by prison sentences alone? No, I do not think so. Do those who commit serious and violent offences deserve to go to prison? Absolutely. Is that where they will go? Definitely. However, with regard to domestic violence, in Scotland we have a real problem with a culture of violence and machismo. Frankly, the rhetoric from the Labour-Tory coalition seems to be that we are going to sort it out by getting ramped up, tooled up and tore in. Nothing is going to change the culture of violence in Scotland less than taking that kind of attitude. Why is there a presumption against short sentences? [ Interruption .]

Nigel Don has already answered that question, but I will tell the chamber again. One only has to meet the likes of Sheriff Raeburn, who sits on the domestic violence court in Glasgow. She has said that there are instances in which it is appropriate for someone who has breached a probation order that she has placed on them to be given a short, sharp shock and to be put away to give the family some respite. I accept that argument. There will be domestic violence cases in which the presumption is overturned and rebutted, because the sheriff will tell the accused, "Your behaviour's out of order. The wife and the bairns are entitled to some peace and quiet, and you are going to prison." Whether that sentence is two weeks or three months, that sheriff will have the full support of this Government and this chamber. The presumption against short sentences does not  overrule such an approach. Instead, it ensures that we tackle the root causes of minor offences—alcohol, low-level mental health problems and drugs—instead of allowing this machismo culture to go on. In concluding, I make it quite clear that this direction of travel is supported not just by the liberal coalition that members have referred to but by my friend Henry McLeish, who is a former Labour First Minister, and the current United Kingdom Secretary of State for Justice, Ken Clarke, who, given his attitude to the national health service as a member of Margaret Thatcher's Government, cannot be viewed as a liberal. That coalition of McLeish and Clarke shows that people are recognising that, to make our communities safer, we need to break the cycle of offending, tackle the root causes of that offending—which, as I have said, are alcohol, drugs and low-level mental health problems—and do what works. What works can be seen in the statistics: three quarters of those who are given short prison sentences reoffend within two years. Those people go back into their communities to continue the cycle of offending and to keep going into and out of prison with, as Robert Brown and other members have pointed out, the Prison Service unable to do anything other than contain them. It is quite right to contain some of those who perpetrate domestic violence, but those who have other problems need to have them addressed in the community. Nevertheless, it is quite clear what works: tough community sentences allied to measures to deal with underlying alcohol and drugs issues and mental health problems. With such an approach, three fifths of offenders do not reoffend, as opposed to the three quarters of offenders who reoffend when given short prison sentences. That is why this is our direction of travel. This bill is about making our communities safer and, as their wise counsel shows, Ken Clarke, Cherie Blair and Henry McLeish support our approach. I press amendment 61.

Amendment 2 seeks to reinsert in the bill a section that provides that at the point of sentencing an offender, a court must not consider it a mitigating factor that the offender was voluntarily intoxicated at the time the offence was committed. The provision forms part of our comprehensive framework for action to rebalance Scotland's relationship with alcohol. There remains a very strong link between alcohol misuse and offending, particularly violent offending. My predecessor, Cathy Jamieson, quite correctly referred to a booze and blade culture. The key issue is the astonishingly high level of offending associated with alcohol. In spite of the understanding of the courts that the excuse of too much bevvy should not mitigate the sentence, there is evidence that, time and again, voluntary intoxication is being put before them as a mitigating factor. In her evidence to the committee, the Lord Advocate said: "Day in, day out, notwithstanding the understanding that it does not mitigate, solicitors continue to put it before the courts in mitigation that their client would not have carried out the crime if sober. That is particularly prevalent as an excuse or as a form of mitigation in domestic abuse cases." The provision does not prevent the courts from considering other mitigating factors when sentencing an offender. Whether in cases of domestic violence or antisocial behaviour, we do not want to hear the litany of excuses that are rolled out in Scottish courts day in, day out. We do want to hear that it was the drink that done it—it was not.

Amendments 33, 34 and 35 clarify the court's powers in respect of making a CPO under proposed new section 227A(4) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, by providing that the court may make such an order only where the offender has been convicted of an offence that is punishable by a fine, or by a fine and imprisonment, and where the court has decided not to impose a custodial sentence or a CPO under proposed new section 227A(1). They also provide that the court may impose a CPO under the section instead of, or as well as, imposing a fine, and they clarify that the court may impose one or more of the listed requirements in such an order. It is clear from the wording of proposed new section 227A(1), when it is read in context, that a CPO is meant to be a genuine alternative to prison. For the purposes of our separate amendment to create a presumption against short sentences, the court must take into account proposed new section 227A(1) as an alternative to imposing a short prison sentence. In effect that means that, where the court decides that a short prison sentence is the only option, it must first rule out a CPO as being inappropriate in the case. I move amendment 33.  Amendment 33 agreed to.  Amendment 34 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]--and agreed to.  Amendment 35 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

The majority of the amendments in the group are minor or technical in nature and seek to provide consistency of language or greater clarity of meaning. They will not change the meaning of the provisions to which they relate. The group also includes a number of consequential amendments. Some will simply repeal references to "probation", as a consequence of the introduction of the CPO. The majority, however, will amend provisions in the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 that relate  to appeals, and provide explicitly for an appeal against a sentence imposed for breaching a CPO. I move amendment 36.  Amendment 36 agreed to.  Amendments 37 to 44 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

In some sections of the bill that relate to CPOs, the provisions as drafted would limit the powers of the court in comparison with the provisions in the 1995 act that they are intended to replace. That is not the policy intention, so amendments 46 and 57 seek to rectify the position. The other amendments in the group are technical or will remove provisions that are to be replaced. I move amendment 45.  Amendment 45 agreed to.  Amendments 46 to 50 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.  Amendment 10 not moved.  Amendments 51 to 53 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

Amendment 54 provides for the court, following a request to move to another local authority area, to amend a CPO by removing or amending any specific requirement that cannot be supervised in the new local authority area, which might otherwise have prevented the order from being transferred. I move amendment 54.

I understand where Mr Kelly is coming from, but I agree with Bill Aitken. Mr Kelly's approach would work against people who were seeking to improve themselves. People must do the time for the offence that they have committed. However, if they move to get away from bad company, for example, it would be perverse to force them to go back to the area from which they had moved to try to break the cycle of reoffending. What matters is that offenders do the hours of work that they are required to do because of the damage that they have done. It is their right and entitlement to move for whatever reason. However, they will have to do the time whether they do it in the community in which they first resided or one to which they move.

Amendment 61 will impose on courts a presumption against imposing custodial sentences of three months or less unless they consider that it is the only appropriate way of dealing with the offender. The presumption against short custodial sentences has, of course, already been the subject of much debate; indeed we saw only yesterday support for the approach from none other than the Secretary of State for Justice south of the border, Ken Clarke. He is not alone because, last summer, in "Do Better Do Less: The report of the Commission on English Prisons Today", the commission's president, Cherie Booth QC, said: "Scotland has taken a courageous lead in the UK by taking serious steps to address its prison crisis" and that "more widespread use of effective community sentences would both allow us to reduce the use of prison and allow for reinvestment of resources into local communities to cut offending." On Robert Brown's amendment 61A, the Government shares his concern that the community payback order should be adequately funded, that its operation should be effective and properly monitored and that the long-term benefits arising from the new approach should be clearly demonstrated. We have already provided £9 million of extra resource to local authorities to improve the performance of the community service  system and to prepare for the community payback order. I acknowledge the representations of Liberal Democrat MSPs to me on that issue.  Robert Brown will understand that at this stage in the budget cycle I cannot offer additional commitments on funding. I am, however, willing to commit the Government to ensuring that, as soon as possible after the bill is given royal assent, a community payback order working group, led by the Scottish Government and involving key justice stakeholders, will be established. The group will play a full part in the Scottish Government's reducing reoffending programme. It will monitor preparation for the community payback order before it is brought into force and will , once it is in force, ensure that the kind of information that was mentioned by Robert Brown is regularly gathered and analysed. Those data and the group's conclusions will be provided to ministers and to Parliament to help to inform future decisions, including decisions relating to funding for community sentences. I note in particular Robert Brown's concern that the impact of the community payback order in reducing reoffending should be captured in the group's work. I confirm that that will be the case. Further, I would be happy to update the Justice Committee on the Scottish Government's preparation for the community payback order, including the progress of the working group, prior to any court's being able to make a community payback order and prior to implementation of the presumption against short sentences, should Parliament agree to that. I hope that reassures Robert Brown that the issues that he has identified will continue to be a focus of work as the community payback order is introduced and I hope, on that basis, that he feels able not to press his amendments. Amendment 187, in the name of Patrick Harvie, seeks to replicate the Scottish Government's original proposal to create a presumption against short sentences of six months or less. Although I am pleased that he supports the principle of the presumption that we brought forward when the bill was introduced in March 2009, we have been over this ground many times already. In the spirit of co-operation and of allowing Parliament to move on with a clear mandate, I call on Patrick Harvie not to move amendment 187, but instead to join us in taking a first step in the right direction by supporting the presumption against sentences of three months or less. We believe that the operation of the presumption will be effective and that evidence will be forthcoming to demonstrate that.  The Government's amendment 61 creates a power for ministers to amend the period to which the presumption applies by secondary legislation—subject, of course, to the will of Parliament. That is the pragmatic way to move the matter forward and I call on Patrick Harvie to support it. If, however, he wishes to press amendment 187 to a vote, we will abstain. Amendment 12 seeks to introduce a further reporting requirement, but its plan for a report five years from now and its broad remit means that it is not very useful to Parliament. I am sure that Parliament will want to hear regularly and in detail from ministers about the impact of the measures. Instead of waiting five years, we should be engaging now with all the stakeholders on getting and publishing regular performance information; indeed, we are the first Scottish Government to conduct an audit of performance information in the operation of community sentences. After stage 2, I offered to write to the Justice Committee setting out how we are doing that. I wrote to the convener in such terms on 3 June, and offered to meet members of the committee to discuss that work if that would be helpful. Amendment 12 is bureaucratic and will be unhelpful to Parliament. We resist it. Amendment 62 seeks to ensure that the position of children who are detained following a conviction on indictment has the same safeguards as already exist for young offenders. By that, I mean that courts should be required to give their reasons for considering that a period of detention is the only appropriate disposal, and the court will be required to enter its reason for that decision in the record of proceedings. We all share the desire to break the current situation on reoffending in Scotland, which damages many of our communities. The evidence is there: three quarters of people who are given short prison sentences will reoffend within two years, whereas three fifths of those who are given tough community payback orders do not reoffend. This is about making our communities safer. In a time of tight budgets, it is about ending the free-bed-and-board culture. I commend the views of Cherie Blair and Ken Clarke. I move amendment 61.

Amendment 9 would define the purpose of a community payback order is to pay back to the community that was affected by the offending behaviour and to support the offender in addressing the underlying causes of his or her offending. We understand and support the intention behind the amendment, but we continue to have reservations about it. In our response to the Justice Committee's stage 1 report, we made it clear that the name "community payback order" is based on the wider definition of payback that is assumed in the  Scottish Prisons Commission's report. Every requirement that a court can impose in a community payback order is designed to pay back to the community through unpaid work or by addressing offending behaviour and its causes. Therefore, every community payback order—whatever requirements it contains—will meet the purposes that Robert Brown's amendment describes. The extra text that would be inserted by the amendment is not needed to achieve that. We are concerned about the drafting of amendment 9, which requires that the offender "pay back to the community adversely affected by the conduct of the offender". That implies—perhaps unintentionally—that every community payback order must provide payback to the community in which the offence was committed and could give rise to several problems. An offender might commit an offence in an area other than that in which he or she lives. If they had to travel a considerable distance to comply with the requirement, the time to complete the order could well overrun and difficulties could arise with social workers' responsibilities to supervise offenders. Requests for transfers to another local authority area, which are allowed for in other community sentences, might become more difficult if the court had to take account of a need for the offender to pay back to the community that had been adversely affected. For all those reasons, we resist amendment 9. Amendment 10 proposes new section 227VB of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which would provide for the Scottish ministers to specify in a statutory instrument standards of compliance for community payback orders. Ministers already specify standards for the operation of community sentences. Work is well under way to revise the national outcomes and standards for criminal justice social work, which will be published later this year. I know that Robert Brown is interested in the standards, so I will say that they are being revised in consultation with the Association of Directors of Social Work and will include comprehensive guidance on community payback orders, including guidance on the immediacy and frequency of a social worker's contact with an offender and on the level and intensity of supervision. The standards will underline the fact that, for example, unpaid work placements should begin within seven days of sentencing. They will also make it clear that the interventions of criminal justice social work services, through all the requirements of a community payback order, should be designed to support effectively the individual's efforts to desist from offending. In addition to those non-statutory standards, powers are already in the bill to make rules in connection with the undertaking of unpaid  work. Those are contained in new section 227O(2A) of the 1995 act. Unfortunately, the requirements that amendment 10 proposes are so broad, ill-defined and unclear about who they bind as to be unworkable. For example, under paragraph 2(a) in the amendment, who is responsible for ensuring prompt delivery of community payback orders?

Under paragraph 2(b), it is not clear how matters would be set out. Further, there are no principles or purposes. Amendment 11 imposes reporting requirements. We already have matters on which local authorities and Government report. Our position is that the amendment is unnecessary. Indeed, these matters can already be brought back to the chamber and the Parliament. I invite Robert Brown to withdraw amendment 9.

Amendment 8 would require the Lord Justice General to be consulted on the sentencing council's business plan. Nothing in the current provisions would prevent the Lord Justice General from being consulted on that but, for the sake of clarity, I note that we recognise the principle that lies behind Robert Brown's amendment and are happy to support it. We believe that Scotland must have the appropriate framework in place to ensure fairness and justice in sentencing. We are grateful to the Justice Committee for the time that it took to examine the matter in detail and we feel that the amendments that were made at stage 2 to the sentencing council provisions addressed the concerns that had been raised about judicial independence and the role of the council in existing criminal justice structures. The sentencing council will operate as an advisory body, with its guidelines being approved by the High Court.  In balancing the membership of the council, it is key that we ensure that it commands legitimacy in the eyes of both sentencers and the public. However, with the High Court's role in giving the final approval to draft guidelines, we believe that it is even more important that the concerns of the wider criminal justice community and the public are represented at the drafting stage. We believe that it is key that the non-judicial members of the council have a sufficient voice at the drafting stage, in light of which we support Stewart Maxwell's amendment 171. Amendment 172 would ensure that the process for the appointment of the lay members of the council is the same as the process for the appointment of the legal members. We are not clear why there should be unequal requirements for the appointment of different members. All the members of the council will have equal status. It will not be a case of setting the legal and lay members against one another. We envisage a collaborative approach to the drafting of guidelines and would like all the council members to be appointed on the same basis to assist in that process. We therefore support amendment 172.

Another major step in the process of reviewing criminal procedure in Scotland was completed on Friday 11 June when Sheriff Principal Edward Bowen CBE presented me with a thought-provoking and very thorough report on his review of sheriff and jury procedure. I thank Sheriff Principal Bowen for his substantial work and for delivering his report within the agreed timescale. It is clear from reading the report that, in conducting the review, Sheriff Principal Bowen adopted a hands-on approach, meeting and canvassing views from a large number of practitioners who are involved with sheriff and jury procedure. That approach adds considerable weight to the proposals that are made in the report. I commend him for making recommendations that respect the principles of a fair and effective justice system and which have regard to the needs of the largest and smallest courts in Scotland. In commissioning the review, I was aware of the widespread view among sheriffs and practitioners that the procedures for managing such business needed to be re-examined. However, I note that when launching his report Sheriff Principal Bowen commented that the picture revealed to him in conducting the review was not wholly one of doom and gloom, with the existing system showing remarkable ability to absorb a significant increase in business and continuous efforts being made in various places by sheriffs, court staff and practitioners to bring about improvements. I was encouraged to note the efforts that were identified to improve practice and bring about cultural change, both nationally and locally, by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, sheriffs, practitioners and the Scottish Court Service, and I agree with the sheriff principal that "substantial improvements can be made within the existing legislation and structural frameworks". It is a strength of the Scottish legal system that those who work in our courts continue to strive to improve the way procedures work. Although I am heartened to hear those positive points, we should not be tempted to think that the system needs only some minor tweaking, as it is  clear from the report's proposals that fundamental changes to procedure and practice are needed to deal with the root causes of the problems that were rightly identified by the sheriff principal. The first problem that Sheriff Principal Bowen highlights is the pressure that is put on the system by the significant change to the landscape in the sheriff court with regard to how serious cases are dealt with. He says: "The role of the sheriff in dealing with serious criminal cases has changed dramatically over the last 2 decades. The change has been both in terms of volume and in the complexity of cases proceeding by way of indictment". Increasing the sentencing powers of sheriffs has, understandably, resulted in more complex cases being prosecuted on indictment in the sheriff court. That is what was intended, and some measuring of the impact of the change was one of the issues that I had in mind in commissioning the review last year. Sheriff Principal Bowen found that sheriff and jury indictments had increased from just over 3,000 in 1988 to just over 8,000 in 2008. An area of further challenge is the rising number of cases in which the accused is remanded in custody pending trial, which is up 62 per cent in the four years to March 2009. I cannot address all of Sheriff Principal Bowen's recommendations today. His report contains 34 recommendations and extends to 145 pages. It helpfully details the current procedures, provides detail on the volume and disposal of business, identifies problems and provides proposals for improvement. I welcome the fact that Sheriff Principal Bowen's first recommendation attempts to improve the experience of victims and witnesses. Indicting cases to a first diet only, with trials being fixed once the court is satisfied that the case is actually ready for trial, would provide huge benefits to victims and witnesses, including police and forensic expert witnesses, who would not make unnecessary arrangements to attend court, only to cancel such where the accused pleads guilty at the first diet. Some of the costs that are associated with the current situation are the human costs of worry and stress—addressing those issues will help to breed confidence in our legal system—while others relate to the best use of our police officers. Sheriff Principal Bowen diagnoses communication as an issue that contributes to first diets not functioning as they should—that is, as a clearing house for trial sittings. His view is that first diets are routinely continued to allow negotiations and discussions to take place between the Crown and the defence due to a lack of earlier engagement between the parties. Everyone welcomes the dialogue and discussion between the Crown and the defence, but the issue, as  correctly analysed by Sheriff Principal Bowen, is how and when they take place. First diets should serve a critical role as a gateway for cases going to trial, and parties should ensure that they respect that element of court proceedings. The sheriff principal had no doubt that failings in first diet are caused by a combination of issues, such as parties not engaging prior to that point and the overall pressure that is caused by the volume of business being squeezed into the system. To improve communication in sheriff and jury procedure, Sheriff Principal Bowen recommends the introduction of a compulsory business meeting, to be fixed when the accused first appears on petition and held prior to service of the indictment.

The purpose of the compulsory business meeting is to focus on the issues that might appear in the indictment. Those are matters that can relate to what Sheriff Principal Bowen has recommended. The system of serving an indictment before having discussions leads to witnesses being instructed and cited unnecessarily. We need to focus. The Government is not standing on ceremony, and it is willing to discuss and debate these matters. Perhaps there could be some dovetailing, but the principal point that Sheriff Principal Bowen makes is that parties should get together to see what they can agree on. If the case proceeds to a trial, people can agree on what that trial will be for and witnesses can be sure that they will need to attend on a date that is set for the trial. Equally, if we know how someone is prepared to plead, we can tender something to which we know that they will plead, rather than having to make amendments. There is some logic in Sheriff Principal Bowen's recommendations on that issue, but the purpose of his review and this afternoon's debate is to flesh out such matters. Sheriff Principal Bowen recommends that a written record of the CBM is prepared and made available to the sheriff prior to the first diet. That would move proper engagement to an earlier stage in the proceedings and seems to be a sensible way forward. The Scottish Government will consider in more detail how that approach would work in practice by modelling the impacts on the system and the costs.  It is clear that if parties are compelled to communicate earlier in proceedings, there is scope to bring forward pleas of guilty even before the first diet stage. Increasing the number of early guilty pleas has many benefits: it removes cases from the system, which frees up court and human resources to focus on the remaining cases. If we take together Sheriff Principal Bowen's proposals to introduce a CBM, to fix the trial date for a case once it is known that the case will go to trial and to extend the time limit between service of the indictment and the first diet, it is clear that we need to examine the existing time limit of 110 days for an accused person to be remanded in custody pending trial. Sheriff Principal Bowen makes a substantial case for the time limit to be extended to 140 days, which deserves serious consideration. I invite members to study the arguments and evidence that he provides. Any changes to time limits will be a matter for the Parliament. It is not a decision to be taken lightly, but I am aware that the issues in the system have moved on since we last considered time bars for the High Court. I did not support extension then, but I have found the case that has been made to be highly persuasive and I urge other members to give the recommendation serious consideration. A couple of recommendations highlight Sheriff Principal Bowen's breadth of thinking in conducting the review. He recommends that legal aid should be reviewed to incentivise early resolution of cases. I wish to encourage pleas of guilty at the earliest possible stage, so we will closely examine how legal aid could support that. Sheriff Principal Bowen suggests extending the use of television links between prisons and courts, and highlights the administrative and environmental benefits. I agree that extending the use of TV links would reduce disruption to prisoners and could provide a welcome saving in costs, both financial and to the environment. I will ask relevant interests to examine that suggestion with a view to finding the best solution and addressing any concerns.

I am happy to consider that issue. There is a significant problem at Cornton Vale, which is exacerbated given that it has a national locus. Many members have raised issues concerning female prisoners who have been transported in less than salubrious circumstances.  There is a lot of merit in Stewart Maxwell's proposal, and I am happy to discuss the issue with the Scottish Prison Service and the courts administration. In considering the way ahead on the proposals, I am pleased to open the debate and will listen with interest to contributions from members throughout the chamber. We will examine the recommendations carefully in conjunction with our criminal justice partners. Lord Gill's review of civil courts also impacts on the business in the sheriff court. The civil court and sheriff and jury recommendations are intertwined, and we will progress them together under the overall stewardship of the recently established making justice work programme. Scotland has much to be proud of in its criminal legal system and the people who work in it. Sheriff and jury procedure is a significant part of that system, and it is imperative that we take the opportunity to reform sheriff and jury procedure and to provide procedures that will ensure that we have modern effective Scottish justice, drive up public confidence in the system and achieve efficiencies where that can be done without interfering with the interests of justice. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the report on the Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure conducted by Sheriff Principal Edward F Bowen CBE TD QC and believes that the people of Scotland deserve a modernised sheriff and jury procedure that promotes the interest of justice in an efficient way, serves the interest of victims, witnesses and jurors and is fit for purpose in the 21st century.

There has been only routine contact between Scottish Government officials and Libyan Government officials relating to the supervision of Mr al-Megrahi's licence under section 3 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993.

Mr al-Megrahi is terminally ill. I hope that, when he dies, it offers some closure to victims, families and those concerned with the Lockerbie tragedy, wherever they reside. Doubtless it may even offer some satisfaction to some, perhaps even including Lord Foulkes.

The Government has always made it clear that we will be more than happy to co-operate with any authority and jurisdiction that is capable of carrying out some investigation. There are clearly matters that cause concern to many, whether within Scotland or elsewhere. The Government remains open to providing whatever information we can and co-operating with whoever, whether it is the UK or indeed the United Nations.

As I said at the time, I stand by the decision that was made.

The common performance management platform will bring together information from several different areas of policing, including crime, custody and road traffic collisions. My understanding is that some of that information will be available to all forces and to the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency later this year, with other source systems being added during 2011 and early 2012.

As Mary Mulligan no doubt understands, this extremely complex project aims to bring together information from eight different police forces and many different aspects of policing into one place. Such a complex and technical project is beyond the normal skills and resources of police forces and requires interaction with the Scottish Police Services Authority. I assure Ms Mulligan that all those who are in charge of the project, whether at the SPSA or at the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, are doing everything that they can to bring it in as speedily as possible. When the system comes in later this year—albeit only in part—I am sure that it will add to the information that is available and will contribute to making Scotland a safer place.

The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service does not hold details of the occupation of those who are reported for prosecution on a particular charge, therefore the information requested is not available.

We discuss such matters regularly with the Scottish Prison Service and, indeed, with the Prison Officers Association. I think that we are remarkably well served by the POA and the SPS in Scotland. I can confirm to Ms Smith that we have been advised that, since 1999, three prison officers suspected of supplying drugs to prisoners have been charged. Although those cases were investigated by the police and/or progressed to court, none resulted in a conviction, but all three prison officers were dismissed by the SPS. I am aware of the report about the situation south of the border, to which Ms Smith referred. The SPS and the POA treat the matter with the utmost concern. In every instance there will no doubt be some who will be corrupted, but, in the main, the SPS serves our country remarkably well. The member can be assured that anyone involved in such matters will be dealt with most severely, if not by the courts, certainly by the institution that manages our prisons.

Two factors should be mentioned. On modern scanning chairs, yes, some new equipment is being introduced. Equally, sometimes the old-time religion works well: the sniffer dogs that the SPS employs do a remarkably good job not simply in finding drugs that prisoners possess but in tackling the problems that the SPS faces in dealing with visitors, suppliers and other workers. I assure the member that the Government takes the matter extremely seriously. The Minister for  Community Safety is involved in the drugs aspect. When we are dealing with drugs, we are dealing with serious organised crime, and for that reason I established the serious organised crime task force, which includes not only the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency but the Scottish Prison Service. There might be the odd instance of a girlfriend passing drugs to a boyfriend or vice versa, but many of the people who seek to transport drugs into prisons are serious organised criminals. For that reason, we established the task force. Yesterday, I was delighted to announce that, in one year, more than 600 people have been detained and brought to account, that drugs worth £40 million have been seized and that significant assets in excess of £5 million have been recovered by the Crown and are being ploughed back into our communities.

In 2008-09, 18 per cent of those convicted of handling an offensive weapon received a custodial sentence of six months or less. The number of people who have been caught carrying a knife is down 11 per cent since 2006-07, and the average custodial sentence for those who are caught has increased by two thirds since 2006-07, and is now more than eight and a half months. The reduction in knife carrying should come as no surprise, given this Government's record, including record investment in youth diversionary activities through the cashback for communities scheme, record investment in the national violence reduction unit and record numbers of police officers on the streets.

We must first consider the facts. More searches are being carried out than ever before—more than 250,000 in Strathclyde alone. Fewer people—albeit still too many—are carrying knives, and the system is dealing ever more severely with those who are. The system is working. We have a significant cultural problem with knife carrying. However, Ted Brocklebank would do well to consider that, if we are going to change the culture in Scotland, as the First Minister and others said earlier today, the battle that we face is not only against the blade; it is against the booze. It is about time that the Tories stepped up to the mark with regard to changing not only the culture of knife carrying but the machismo culture that goes with alcohol abuse.

Absolutely. It was a pleasure to be with Chief Constable House in Dundee yesterday, because his statistics show not only a 16 per cent reduction in knife carrying last year but a 12 per cent reduction in serious assaults. The hard work of officers in Strathclyde Police has resulted in a 32 per cent reduction in the number of handling an offensive weapon crimes in the force's area since 2006-07. We should remember that that is against a backdrop of the lowest recorded levels of crime in Scotland in almost 30 years, the lowest homicide rate in Edinburgh in 20 years and the lowest homicide rate in Glasgow in 10 years. There is a problem, but things are working. Further, as I said, it is not simply about tackling the blade; it is also about tackling the booze.

I have done so because I take the advice of Chief Constable David Strang,  Chief Constable Stephen House and Chief Superintendent John Carnochan of the violence reduction unit, all of whom have argued that the proposal by Mr Baker and others would not work. We do not need an unseemly bidding war, with six months from Mr Baker, two years from Mr Brocklebank and four years from Mr Bain, the member of Parliament for Glasgow North East—yes, four years he said, simply for carrying a knife. Why not add a zero to that or two zeros and let us get on with it? We have to support the measures that are working—tough enforcement, more stop and searches, visible enforcement in the courts and ploughing money back into diversionary activities to ensure that kids are given the opportunity to be all that they can be. Members can say what they like, but the record speaks for itself. In Strathclyde and elsewhere, progress is being made.

The Police (Scotland) Act 1967 sets the legislative framework for policing in Scotland. It defines governance arrangements for policing, and those are carried out through the tripartite agreement. The Scottish ministers set the strategic direction for policing and provide a share of the required resources through police grant; police authorities set the overall budget, monitor performance and hold their chief constable to account; and chief constables are responsible for managing their budget and delivering operational policing for their force area.

The Scottish ministers do not have legislative powers to direct the police on operational matters. We have no competence to issue guidance on the use of firearms, including Tasers, since the matter is reserved to Westminster. For the same reason, the Scottish Parliament has no power to legislate on that. In 2004, the Scottish ministers in a Labour-Lib Dem coalition supported trials of Tasers in Scotland, which led to the operational use of Tasers starting in 2005. Mr Brown might have been dealing with matters expeditiously then, but what we are seeing now is a bit of cant and gross hypocrisy. Members can rest assured that, when officers are in situations in which they and members of the public face danger, they will have the Government's full support in doing what is necessary. The matter is an operational one, but Tasers are used proportionately and legitimately by hard-working and brave Scottish police officers to defend themselves and other citizens in our communities. We will make no apology for that and we will never interfere in it.

Absolutely. We must realise that much of the argument by Amnesty International on the issue is based on information from the United States of America. I admire a great deal of things in that country, but I do not admire many of its law and order approaches. If we are to have a study and to criticise the police, that should be based on what takes place here and not on routine firing in Phoenix, Arizona or anywhere else. The argument is predicated on misinformation. I agree whole-heartedly with Mr Aitken that Scottish police officers act legitimately and proportionately in circumstances in which they or members of the public face danger. A Taser was recently used in West Lothian, when a member of the public was incarcerated by a man with a knife. The police have made no apology for that and I certainly make no apology for it. The officers who were involved acted appropriately and correctly, and in that they have my full support.

As the First Minister said to the chamber on 20 May 2010, the Government has provided record levels of funding to strengthen the system of community service and to speed up  start and completion times. That is the right preparation for the new community payback order, which has been welcomed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and is having an impact. The audit of community sentences that was carried out in November 2009 showed that 286 offenders commenced their work placement within seven days for that month, compared with only 85 offenders in the same month the year before.

We are working with partners and stakeholders in the Association of Directors of Social Work, local authorities and community justice authorities. As I said in my initial answer, the latest statistics show that offenders are being sent out to repay their debt to the community more quickly than ever before, with the majority starting manual labour within seven working days. The figure has risen to 63 per cent in 2009, from just 19 per cent in 2008. More are also finishing within the 12-month time limit, with 62 per cent of all local authorities in 2009 ensuring that offenders completed their community service orders within 12 months, compared with 50 per cent in 2008. We believe that, fundamentally, those who have committed low-level offences and do not require to be incarcerated for the safety of our communities should not be given free bed and board, courtesy of the taxpayer, for seven days, 14 days, three months or whatever. They should go out and do some hard work to make our communities better and safer by clearing snow for the old ones, building cycle paths and so on.

Sentencing decisions in individual cases remain a matter for the sentencing judge, who has heard all of the facts and circumstances of the offence and the offender and is able to take into account any factors that he or she considers to be relevant. We believe that Government has a responsibility to ensure that the appropriate framework is in place in Scotland to promote fairness and justice in sentencing. In light of that, we are taking forward work on the creation of a Scottish sentencing council, which will be tasked  with creating a system of sentencing guidelines for Scotland. Those proposals are being taken forward in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.

Absolutely. I can also advise Mr McLetchie that consideration of the matter is continuing in the High Court. In a recent appeal case—Her Majesty's Advocate v Graham, which might not be known to Mr McLetchie because it took place only on 27 May—the advocate depute for the Crown invited the court to issue guidance on the sentences that are appropriate for offences involving indecent images of children. That related to the giving of a significant discount. The member will be glad to know that the court widened the scope of the appeal in the light of the Crown's request that it should provide guidance on the matter, and the Lord Justice Clerk confirmed that he entirely agreed with the view that judicial guidance on sentencing for such offences is now opportune. Mr McLetchie has raised a valid point. It is being dealt with—quite correctly—by the High Court, but I assure him that it will also be dealt with by the sentencing council.

I pay tribute to Hugh Henry's work when he was a minister and since then to promote and pursue protection for workers. All workers who are going about their daily lives providing valuable service to the public should be free from the threat of violence. An attack on a person who is at work in our communities is an attack on our communities. Hugh Henry gave clear examples of that. Abusing someone while they are serving the needs of the public through their work is not acceptable. We all know that, tragically, this is not a new problem. Steps have been taken in the past to address the issue. As Hugh Henry said, in opposition we supported the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill. We must all remain vigilant in tackling the issue, which is why the Government extended the coverage of the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 so that doctors, nurses and midwives are offered protection whenever they are on duty. We also need practical solutions. The work of the Scottish Business Crime Centre is just one example of that approach. We have continued the support that previous Administrations gave the centre, by providing more than £750,000 of funding to the SBCC since 2007. The funding has helped the SBCC to continue its long-standing work with the police and the business community to provide practical advice on how to develop crime reduction and prevention strategies for businesses. Such strategies include the work with retailers and the police on the retailers against crime programme, which operates in 20 towns and cities and enables intelligence to be gathered by and shared among more than 600 stores in Scotland. Members will be aware of USDAW's excellent work, and in particular the freedom from fear campaign, which Hugh Henry mentioned. Since the campaign's launch in 2002, it has done much to ensure that workers can go about their working lives free from fear of attack. USDAW's annual  respect for shop workers event, which most recently took place in November 2009, has also helped greatly. Workers who provide a service to the public are the life-blood of our communities. They are often paid low wages and they should not have to suffer as a result of society's wider problems. The criminal law has an important role to play. That is why we will carefully consider the details of the proposed workers (aggravated offences) bill, when it is introduced in the Parliament. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and the courts take very seriously cases that involve attacks on people who were going about their daily working lives. We expect no less of the courts, which deliver. The common law of assault and the common law of breach of the peace offer protection to everyone in Scotland, including public-facing workers. Depending on the seriousness of the offence, maximum penalties all the way up to life imprisonment are available. In a recent case, an assault on a Glasgow taxi driver resulted in sentences of six years and 45 months being handed out to the two assailants. It is not clear that the proposed bill can provide for tougher sentences, given the range of penalties that are already available under the common law. However, as I said, we will carefully study the detail of the bill when we see it.

I am grateful for Hugh Henry's intervention and, as I said, we will study the bill. We accept that sentencing is but one part of the solution to the problem. Other matters are referred to in amendments to the motion. We must consider how we tackle the issue. I think that there is a consensus in the Parliament that the problem that Mr Henry is trying to tackle is entirely unacceptable. We need to come up with a solution, so that we can protect workers, punish the people who perpetrate attacks and break the cycle that has gone on for far too long, down the generations. I will be happy to discuss the matter with Mr Henry. We need to look at the causes of attacks on public-facing workers. Far too often, alcohol plays a part in attacks. Mr Henry was right to say that the people who sell tobacco and alcohol should be protected. Equally, people who perpetrate attacks while they are under the influence of alcohol  should be dealt with. That is why it is critical that we rebalance Scotland's relationship with alcohol. The facts are stark. Some 45 per cent of prisoners were drunk at the time of their offence. Some 70 per cent of assaults presenting at emergency departments might be alcohol related. Our relationship with alcohol is out of kilter and alcohol misuse affects every community, age group and socioeconomic group. There is a particular impact on public-facing workers. The cost of alcohol misuse in Scotland is £3.56 billion per year—that is £900 for every taxpayer. That is why we need to put aside party politics and go where the evidence takes us to address a societal issue that has a significant role to play, as well as considering the nature of legislation and sentencing in providing protection for public-facing workers. We cannot be seduced by the false premise that our problem with alcohol is only about young people or the most harmful drinkers. We need a culture change that complements other work in helping to protect everyone—including and in particular public-facing workers—from attack as they go about their daily lives, whether they be taxi drivers, bus drivers or shop assistants in Edinburgh or elsewhere. Indeed, Mr Henry mentioned Portobello, which is in my constituency.

Violence against women is entirely unacceptable. There is a cultural problem there, and equally there is a cultural problem of violence in Scotland. That is why the Government is seeking to change the culture in two aspects of Scottish society. One is our out-of-kilter relationship with alcohol, and the other is the cult of machismo. I would have thought that Johann Lamont would accept the requirement to tackle both those aspects. Refusing a sale of alcohol is a potential flashpoint for retailers. That should not be the case. The law prohibits the sale of alcohol to anyone who is under 18 and to anyone who is drunk. In recent years, much has been done to help the licensed trade to raise standards, but we need to go further to rebalance our relationship with alcohol. We commend the decision that was taken by previous Liberal Democrat ministers to introduce mandatory training requirements for all staff who are selling alcohol. Although many retailers already had training arrangements in place, the mandatory training requirements that came into force last year play their part in helping staff to  deal with situations that can lead to disturbances and violence. Many retailers operate challenge 21 or 25 schemes to help their staff to refuse sales. I know that such schemes have been promoted and championed by Mr Baker and others. They help to create a barrier between the member of staff and the customer, as the member of staff can make it clear that a decision to refuse a sale is not simply a personal choice for them. Although challenge 21 and similar schemes do not change the law on underage sales, they are a helpful tool, which is why we are making provision in the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill to require age verification policies in all premises. That will help to bring all retailers up to the same standards as those who already have age verification in place. To reverse the damage that alcohol does to Scotland, and the problems that are faced by public-facing workers in particular, we must strive to get to a point where alcohol is responsibly promoted, responsibly priced and responsibly consumed. Scotland's relationship with alcohol affects every age group and every community and we need to try new, evidence-based approaches. Parliament should not be afraid to try new approaches. We all have a responsibility to put the health and safety of all of the public, not just public-facing workers, above party politics. It is greatly disappointing that the Labour Party chose to oppose the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill on the day it was introduced, before it heard any evidence as part of the parliamentary process. As was noted by experts at the time, Labour has found itself on the wrong side of the argument for the wrong reasons. We hope that Labour will accept that one way of reducing alcohol-related violence and harm, which are at the root of much of what Mr Henry is seeking to resolve—and we support him in that—is to reduce consumption, and that the most efficient way to reduce consumption is to increase price. Common sense suggests that Labour should be supporting minimum pricing and the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill more generally. At Christmas and new year, I did an event with Lothian Buses in Edinburgh. What was the major issue for Lothian Buses and the safety of its workers? Workers and management told me that it is people who are under the influence of alcohol abusing staff. Yes, we must look at vigorous and tough enforcement, but we also have to address the underlying problem of the role that alcohol plays in driving violence and disorder.

I do not dispute that at all. However, there are three strands to this—the three Rs. Alcohol must be consumed responsibly and it must be promoted responsibly, but Mr Baker should recognise that it must also be priced responsibly. As long as there is cheap discounted alcohol—in Edinburgh and all across Scotland it is cheaper to buy strong alcohol than it is to buy water—there is something fundamentally wrong. That is why two thirds of those who are accused of homicide were drunk or on drink and drugs at the time of the alleged offence; why there are almost 1,000 casualties, including 30 fatalities, on Scottish roads as a result of accidents involving alcohol; and why 62 per cent of domestic abuse cases involve alcohol. Violence is never acceptable. The person who commits a violent act, whether it is an act of physical violence or verbal abuse, is responsible for his or her actions. We politicians should seek to address what may give rise to the abuse of and attacks on public workers. Our Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill seeks to do just that, which is why we ask all parties to unite in supporting all the measures in our bill. We will be more than happy to look at the measures in Mr Henry's proposed bill. I move amendment S3M-6350.2, to insert at end: "by accepting that a comprehensive approach to changing Scotland's relationship with alcohol is required, which includes effective enforcement of existing laws and innovative, evidence-based policies."

This Government's commitment was to provide 1,000 extra police officers during this parliamentary session. That is the pledge that we gave at the Scottish election and we have delivered on it. The latest published figures show that as at 31 December 2009, there were 17,273 police officers in Scotland, which is an increase of 1,039 since March 2007. A visible police presence is a key part of our drive to make Scotland's communities safer. Those additional officers are working right now to keep our streets safe. Just last week, the chief constable of Strathclyde released figures showing that there has been a decrease of more than 10 per cent in the overall amount of recorded crime in Strathclyde, with significant inroads being made into tackling violent crime. Nationally, recorded crime is now at a near 30-year low and clear-up rates are continuing to improve. In delivering 1,000 additional police officers we consulted, discussed and agreed with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland that the officers would be phased in over the four years of this parliamentary session: 150 in 2007-08, 462 in 2008-09, 189 in 2009-10 and the final 201 in 2010-11. Those additional officers are being delivered at a time when a large number of officers are retiring from the service due to there having been a recruitment bulge in the late 1970s. Some 3,603 new officers have been trained at the Scottish Police College since March 2007. I am grateful for the efforts of chief constables and the Scottish Police Services Authority in recruiting and training that huge number of officers. The Scottish Government has already met in full the costs of 801 officers who were recruited by the end of March this year and we are absolutely committed to continuing to pay for those officers during 2010-11. On the final 201 officers who are to be recruited during 2010-11, we have made it clear to police forces that we will provide the funding when the additional officers are in place. Meanwhile, police funding is at a record level of £1.4 billion in 2010-11. Additional calls for funding have been met, including funding fully the new pension arrangements, which means that police  forces no longer have to meet the costs of pensions from their annual running costs. Police funding is now £235 million a year more than the previous Government provided, which is an increase of 20 per cent. All that is at a time when we are facing £500 million cuts in planned expenditure this year. Let me be clear: this Government is providing the costs of the recruitment, training and salaries of the extra 1,000 officers. That is extra funding specifically to recruit those 1,000 extra officers and it should not be used for any other purpose. That has always been our position. It is the position that we have laid out in each budget that has been passed by this Parliament. It is the position that I have laid out in public, it is the position that I have laid out in private, and it is the position that I laid out when I met chief constables on 18 January. My message to them was simple: we have provided the funding that is needed to recruit 1,000 additional officers, so it should be used to recruit the 1,000 officers that we pledged to deliver. At that meeting, chief constables also shared their concerns about future budgets. They have heard the dire warnings coming from United Kingdom parties of cuts to come and, like me, they are worried. We have already had to live with cuts of more than £500 million. We will have the Chancellor of the Exchequer's £6 billion cuts programme, which will be announced on Monday; we will have the emergency budget on 22 June; and we will have the comprehensive spending review in the autumn. Decisions on the future size of the budget for the police in Scotland will be taken once we know the scale of the Westminster cuts and the effect that that will have on the overall size of the Scottish budget. I appreciate the efforts that have been made by police forces in meeting and exceeding efficient government targets in recent years. It is now more important than ever that all opportunities for efficiency are taken and that any waste or duplication is removed. That is why the Scottish policing board is working closely with ACPOS in developing the efficiency agenda. While we are planning budget stability in 2010-11 with no further cuts in this financial year, we do not yet know what will be delivered for future years by the Westminster Government. What we do know is that we have record numbers of police officers on our streets. We have provided funding for 1,000 additional police officers, and it should continue to be applied for that purpose this year. That is what communities across Scotland want and what they have a right to expect. Obviously, we await the impact of the Westminster cuts to come.  That is what I discussed with chief constables and I want to make it absolutely clear that that was also the message that was delivered by Scottish Government civil servants. The President of ACPOS, Chief Constable Pat Shearer, has made it clear that "Civil servants acting in their official capacity and in support of the Minister, advised that the funding had been made available specifically for the purpose of enhancing front line policing services. It was understood that it would be allocated to forces only for that intended purpose." I agree. That is and remains the position. I am proud of the achievements of the Scottish police service. I know from my regular meetings with chief constables that excellent work is being done across Scotland in bringing police officers closer to the communities that they serve. The benefits of that are already emerging, with reduced crime rates. With the serious and organised crime task force, we are seeing a renewed focus on the fight against serious and organised crime. Only this morning I was in Haddington to be briefed by and to congratulate Lothian and Borders Police on operation erase—a large-scale operation that has targeting drug dealers operating in the Musselburgh area and beyond. The dealers who were arrested in their homes this morning will be the first of many in East Lothian and further afield. I will continue to have constructive and straightforward dialogue with the police to ensure that Scottish policing is in good shape to face whatever challenges may lie ahead. This Government is committed to a well-resourced police service and to providing increased police visibility in our communities. We were elected on a pledge to provide 1,000 additional police officers: we have delivered on that pledge. Whatever cuts the UK parties inflict on Scotland, our commitment to our police officers and the safety of our communities will remain. We will continue to work with the police to make Scotland a safer and stronger place to live.

A variety of matters were included in that rather rambling question from Mr Baker. Let me do my best to address them. In referring to the statement that was issued on behalf of Pat Shearer, the ACPOS chair, a man to whom I spoke this morning, Mr Baker spoke of an "infamous meeting". In his statement, Mr Shearer did not speak of an "infamous meeting", but said: "The meeting referred to in the Herald article ... is one of many meetings involving Ministers, Officials of the Scottish Government and police officers at the highest level. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice hosted this meeting, initiating discussion and listening to Chief Officers' views on a wide range of issues affecting policing. Such frank and open dialogue with the Cabinet Secretary has been most welcome." Mr Baker's definition of full and frank discussion may be infamy, but that is certainly not the definition of the chief police officers in Scotland.  Mr Baker talked about the 1,000 officers. Let us be clear: you have stood in the chamber and have narrated elsewhere, Mr Baker, that we would never as a Government deliver 1,000 additional officers. We have delivered more than 1,000 officers, which is a target that you said we could not meet and to which you did not even aspire when you sought to be elected—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I turn to cuts. I refer you again to the statement that was issued on behalf of the chief officers in Scotland. Mr Shearer has described the meeting that has been mentioned not as an "infamous meeting" but as a dinner chaired by the cabinet secretary. He went on to say: "The situation is exacerbated by the uncertainty of the future budget allocation to Scotland and we have sought and received a firm commitment from the Scottish Government that it will keep the police service advised as to funding implications". Rather than attacking the Scottish Government, the member should be berating his colleagues south of the border, who got us into this mess and imposed £500 million-worth of cuts, and addressing his complaints to a Tory-Liberal coalition that seeks to impose more. I finish with the penultimate paragraph of Mr Shearer's statement, in which he says: "What is clear however is that all parties are working together and share a common interest in providing the best Policing service possible for the communities of Scotland. If only that applied to the major Opposition political party in Scotland.

Bill Aitken has raised a variety of issues. I refer again to the statement by the chair of ACPOS, who makes it clear that the meeting that has been mentioned was one of many meetings and dialogues that take place involving me and others. I know that Mr Aitken networks, but I should clarify the situation that I inherited. My predecessor, the then Minster for Justice, met chief officers initially, but thereafter regular meetings took place only annually. I meet chief officers twice per year, without officials. I have an open-door policy with them and meet them regularly, which is why the relationship between the Government and senior police officers is such that, on his retiral as senior assistant chief constable for Fife and the acting officer in charge of counter-terrorism, Allan Burnett chose to become a member of the party of Government. I welcome that move, which shows the deep trust in the Government that many officers have. We should be clear about the current situation. We have the lowest recorded crime in almost 30 years, the lowest murder rate in the city of Edinburgh, Lothian and the Borders for 20 years, and the lowest recorded homicide rate in Glasgow and Strathclyde for 10 years. The Scottish Government has delivered those achievements in a time of financial austerity, with £500 million of cuts from Westminster and £6 billion of cuts due to come online. Bill Aitken asked what the number of police officers will be next year. It will be 1,000 more than the number when we came into office.

What happens thereafter will be dependent on what Mr Rumbles's and Mr Aitken's parties do to preserve the people of Scotland from the deep cuts that were caused by Labour's recession and which will be implemented with some gusto by a Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition.

I will deal with the last question first. The Government has agreed to fund 1,000 additional officers. We consulted, we discussed, and we agreed with ACPOS that we would fully fund their recruitment, training and wages for the period. Eight hundred and one officers have come in, and the balance have to be funded. We expect that, if we provide the funding, that is what we will receive. That is perfectly legitimate and reasonable. Regarding the other points, I did indeed speak to Mr Shearer this morning. It was a deeply enjoyable and lengthy conversation, with a variety of matters to discuss—

Members should just wait, and they should note that the statement by ACPOS was issued not following our discussion, but last night. The conversation was subsequent to that. I do not know what Robert Brown is driving at. I agree that there should not be ministerial interference in operational police matters. I have frequently had to stand here in the chamber and make that clear—for example to Labour members on the subject of absconds. I also recall that I received a letter from Mr Brown, who wishes me to have operational involvement on the use of Taser guns.

How come I am criticised by Mr Brown, apparently for wishing—

How come I am criticised by Mr Brown for wishing to direct the police on finance, while at same time he is insisting that I should have operational involvement on firearms? He has no consistency there at all. Regarding what Mr McKerracher said, he did not make the quote. Mr McKerracher had other matters to say, not that. We are delivering matters. I am extremely proud of our police officers in Scotland, and I am extremely proud to be a member of a Government that has delivered a record number of police officers in our communities, making Scotland safer and more secure.

Absolutely. It is for that reason that I regularly meet the chief constables and other stakeholders. They are concerned about what is coming down the line, and they would be better served if Opposition members were to rally with the Government and, indeed, with our police family and with justice departments that face expenditure cuts. It would have been be helpful if they had helped us to oppose the £500 million of cuts, but it would be better if they came together now so that we do not get hammered with £6 billion-worth of cuts.

No. On Monday this week, in my ivory tower—actually in a committee room in St Andrew's house—I met the police board conveners. I had a pleasant and cordial meeting with Mr Stephen Curran, who has replaced the outgoing Paul Rooney as the Labour-nominated  convener of Strathclyde police authority. I have to say that Stephen Curran made no mention of an apocalypse coming, although we discussed the huge implications for Government and Scottish police boards of the cuts that we have faced from the Labour Government south of the border and the cuts that are coming.

That is certainly the case. As I said in my statement, there was a bulge in recruitment in the 1970s and we have had to ensure that we ramp up our approach. The lengths to which individual chief constables have gone are a great tribute to them. We have delivered 1,000 additional officers. Had we not done that and had we been left with the Labour manifesto commitment that was made during the 2007 election campaign, Scotland would be worse served and I fear that crime would be a greater problem in many of our communities.

Ms Craigie will be delighted to know that at least it is not outgoing Labour ministers in London, who appear to have been incurring the ire of senior civil servants down south by doing a variety of things that seemed to benefit their constituencies. We must ensure that we have a clear recollection of history. Labour fought an election with no commitment on additional police officers; we fought an election on delivery of 1,000 additional officers. Labour said that we could not deliver 1,000 additional officers, but we have delivered them. Police officers the length and breadth of Scotland and south of the border remember that,  notwithstanding the budget cuts that we have faced—

When a pay award was made, the Scottish Government implemented it in full and backdated it, whereas the Labour Government south of the border reneged on the contractual arrangements and the understanding that had been arrived at at the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service. Police officers north and south of the border will not forget that.

There is validity to what Margo MacDonald said. However, the driver for and precursor to the matter was the fact that communities welcome a visible police presence, not simply because the police detect and deal with criminals but because, as we know, in Scotland the problem is not just crime but fear of crime. A visible police presence not only deals with criminals who perpetrate crime but helps to reassure good citizens who are worried about crime. On the constitutional matter, let me explain the historical position on how the police service is dealt with, which the Government has not changed in any way. There is a tripartite agreement. Chief constables are appointed by and accountable to the local police board. As Ms MacDonald knows, the Lothian and Borders Police board is chaired by Iain Whyte, who is a member of Mr Aitken's party. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice might fund matters, but there is a tripartite agreement between the chief constables, who have operational independence, the police boards, to which chief constables are accountable and which therefore must keep a check on chief constables, and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in central Government, who is required to fund the service and to set broad outlines on policy and parameters.

The Scottish Prison Service is committed to reducing the harm that is caused by substance misuse. Security measures are in place to reduce the supply of illegal drugs into prisons. Treatment and care of and support for prisoners who are recovering from drug use is provided through services that are broadly equivalent to those that are available in the community.

Yes. We all accept that we have to try to do more, and do it better. Clearly, problems at Perth prison were flagged up, but we should remember that the report from HM chief inspector of prisons was, overall, quite supportive of the prison. I have spoken to him about it and visited the prison. We also have to remember the nature of the people whom the Prison Service deals with. According to recent drug testing statistics, 71 per cent of prisoners who were tested on reception had illegal drugs in their system. By way of comparison, on liberation, the figure was down to 29 per cent. Clearly, the figure is still far too high, but significant progress is being made. The Prison Service deals with very difficult and, at times, dangerous individuals.

Crime in Scotland is at its lowest level since 1980, with violent crime at its lowest level since 1986. Since 2007, we have seen offensive weapons crimes drop by 11 per cent and average sentences go up by 145 days. The average sentence for knife carrying is now more than eight and a half months. That means that Scotland is safer than it has been for a generation. However, we recognise that we cannot be complacent. That is why we are putting record numbers of police officers on the streets, providing record investment in the national violence reduction unit and supporting innovative initiatives such as no knives, better lives and the community initiative to reduce violence, which is a project for Glasgow gangs that tackles the causes and consequences of knife crime.

Absolutely. I am happy to record the thanks of the Government—and, I presume, the whole chamber—to the chief constable of Strathclyde Police, Stephen House, and every one of his officers for their actions. They have made tremendous progress. The Government is delighted to have ensured that there is a record number of police officers in Strathclyde, as elsewhere. It is important that we record and remember that homicide is at its lowest level in 10 years in the city of Glasgow and at its lowest level in 20 years in the city of Edinburgh. The Government intends to ensure that we have tough laws and that those are enforced. Equally, we intend to divert those who would otherwise fall into mischief and crime. That is why we must continue to tackle not just crime but the causes of crime.

The statistics are quite clear: fewer people are carrying, more police are out there, and those people who are carrying are facing severe consequences from our courts. That is down to the hard work and effort of individual officers, from the newest constable to the chief constable, and to the tough action that sheriffs and other members of the judiciary are taking, fully supported by the Government.

The Scottish Government is working with the police-led violence reduction unit to tackle violence throughout Scotland. Reducing violence is a force priority for Grampian Police, which undertakes a range of activities specifically to tackle knife crime. The work of Grampian Police, alongside that of local community safety partners, has contributed to a 9 per cent reduction in violent crime, a 2.5 per cent reduction in handling offensive weapons and a 21 per cent increase in convictions for possession of offensive weapons in the force area since 2006-07. Grampian Police is actively involved in the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland's continuing anti-violence campaign, which is organised by the violence reduction unit. The force has recently been deploying Scottish Government-funded Ferroguard metal detectors throughout the Grampian area, including as part of operation oak, which promotes safety in Aberdeen city centre. Grampian Police also works in partnership with schools to educate young people about the dangers and consequences of knife carrying.

I have regular dialogue with each and every chief constable—I met Chief Constable McKerracher not that long ago. It came as a surprise to me to find out that my predecessors had not done so. I am delighted to have that dialogue, as well as meeting representatives of ACPOS. I was also delighted to appear at a meeting in Glasgow last week at which I was joined on the platform by Allan Burnett, former assistant chief  constable with Fife Constabulary and head of counter-terrorism in Scotland. I was delighted that, the day after he resigned, following many successful and hard-working years' service as a police officer, he chose to join the Scottish National Party. That shows the commitment that many officers have, and the reciprocation of the support that we have given, with many senior officers now supporting the Government. I assure Mr Baker that Mr Burnett is not alone—there are more to come in support for the Government.

I met Chief Constable David Strang on 12 April at the latest meeting of the Scottish policing board, where a number of issues of importance to policing in Scotland were discussed. I will be meeting him for a private discussion, as I mentioned to Mr Baker, later this month.

There are no cuts to the police budget. Ms Brankin should know that. Equally, any operational decisions involving Bilston—I have visited the control centre there—are matters for the chief constable, for which he will be held to account by the police board convener. Indeed, I will meet the police board conveners shortly. I reiterate that Lothian and Borders Police does excellent work. That is why we have the lowest homicide rate in the city of Edinburgh—indeed, in the whole of Lothian and Borders—for 20 years. We also have the lowest recorded crime rate in Scotland for a generation.

Given the backdrop of the general election with its hustings and argy-bargy, it is probably good for the people of Scotland to realise that debates on subjects such as the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill see members of whatever political colour come together in the chamber . The tenor of the debate has been one of acceptance that there is a problem that we must address, whether for individuals on the campaign trail—we heard anecdotes about that from Christine Grahame—or, as in Patricia Ferguson's story, for the postman who was assaulted but unable to get any satisfaction or take any action. Patricia Ferguson and Michael McMahon made the appropriate point that this is a focused bill. It will not be a solution to all incidents out there; no Administration and no legislation could ensure that no child or adult will face being bitten by a dog. We must control loopholes in legislation that, through no one's fault, has been proven not to be fully fit for the purpose of dealing with changing circumstances, as Mr McLetchie mentioned in his speech. However, the bill will provide some salvation following incidents such as the nasty attack on the postman by Japanese dogs. Equally, the bill will help to drive home the message that there has been a specific change in powers and that dog owners have to act responsibly. Michael McMahon raised the question of cost. As I said in my opening remarks, COSLA seems divided on the matter. Some local authorities see the situation as one that can be dealt with by existing dog wardens. Our view is that the financial impact on local authorities of the new dog control notice regime will depend to a large extent on how they make use of it. We tend to think that those powers should be used sparingly and that the very existence of dog wardens' powers should act as a powerful deterrent. However, we recognise that these are tough financial times and that local authorities' ability to improve services or react to increasing needs is restricted. That said, there is the fallback position that if a clear problem is being faced by local authorities, this Administration has mechanisms by which we can discuss matters with COSLA. I give the chamber the guarantee that if there are problems, we will continue to discuss and debate with COSLA. As David McLetchie and Patricia Ferguson mentioned, we are moving towards emphasising deed not breed. We are happy to accept Patricia Ferguson's position—it is not a matter of semantics to say that we accept and welcome the  will of the Parliament. David McLetchie's point about dog walkers has come from left field and perhaps shows why the legislation might need to be amended in due course. We could argue that the dog walker situation might be better dealt with by the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, but that is not the case. It is clear that we live in a world where people walk other people's dogs and they have to accept responsibility for them. We must make sure that that situation is addressed in the guidance. The guidance is meant to deal with those in both rural and urban areas who have an interest because of their professional standing, whether they are gamekeepers or from the British Veterinary Association. I give an assurance to both Mr McLetchie and Patricia Ferguson that we will liaise with parliamentarians but, equally, that we will take on board the needs and wants of stakeholders. The kind of guidance that we want to issue is based not on the ideology of any Administration, whatever colour it might be, but on the specialised advice of those who are best placed to provide it. We also take on board the will of the Parliament. Jim Tolson raised the issue of a database. Obviously, we already have an enabling power and we are not persuaded that a database is either needed or wanted—nor is the committee. However, if the situation should change, the bill gives us the ability to act. We believe that the bill strikes the correct balance. Although I am not a dog owner, I recognise that owners are entitled to exercise their ability to deal with their dogs. We recognise the benefits that dogs bring to people, not just as a comfort or solace to the elderly or by what they provide to those who work with them, but as part of the fabric of our society. People must recognise, however, that as well as the right to own a dog and the right to roam with it, there is the responsibility to ensure that that dog is under control. We welcome the bill, which takes on board the need to address specific problems that we face. We have to recognise that if we are to minimise the dangers that dogs can pose to children, postmen, adults or whoever else, individual owners have to take responsibility. The bill is a welcome improvement on existing legislation and we are delighted to support it.

I thank Christine Grahame for the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill and join her in commending Alex Neil, who laid the foundations  for the bill while he was a back bencher. As she correctly pointed out, a member's bill does not reach this stage without significant commitment and a great deal of effort. I therefore join her in commending the non-Executive bills unit for all its work and effort in bringing the bill to this juncture. The Local Government and Communities Committee, which is chaired by Duncan McNeil, carried out detailed and thoughtful scrutiny of the bill throughout the parliamentary process, and the bill's general principles received unanimous support at stage 1. The bill was good to begin with, but it has become better through the small number of amendments that were made at stage 2. We welcome the policy objectives of the bill, which tries to make our communities safer through enabling effective preventive action to be taken against dogs that are out of control. The bill is designed to identify and tackle out-of-control dogs at an early juncture and provide measures to change their behaviour and, frequently, the behaviour of their owners before the dogs become dangerous. We believe that the creation of a dog control notice regime will encourage dog owners to take responsibility for the actions of their dogs. Under the bill, authorised officers will be able to issue a dog owner or the person with day-to-day charge of the dog with a dog control notice if their dog is found to be out of control. As the bill has progressed through Parliament, there has been some discussion of the costs of the new dog control notice regime. The main responsibilities under the proposed new regime will fall on local authorities. Members will recall that, during stage 1 evidence, some local authorities said that existing dog wardens would take on the role of authorised officer without any new costs being incurred. Others, to be fair, disagreed and suggested that higher costs would be incurred by their training and employing new staff. The Government's view is that the new dog control regime is designed to be preventive and we do not expect thousands of dog control notices to be issued every week. Under current law, when a dog is dangerously out of control in its own home, no criminal offence is committed by its owner under the terms of the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991. Section 10 of the bill will change that. The Government believes that the law should be extended to make it an offence to allow a dog to be dangerously out of control in any place, whether a public place or a private place, such as the dog's home. As Christine Grahame said, we all know of tragedies that have occurred not in a public place but in a private place, often the owner's home. This change will help to ensure that dog owners take responsibility  for the actions of their dogs in all places at all times. This good bill, which will assist in making our communities safer while respecting dog owners' rights, is an excellent example of the Parliament's system of members' bills. Alex Neil and then Christine Grahame drove forward the consultation process, which led to the bill's drafting and scrutiny by committee and, finally, to this momentous day on which we hope the bill will be passed. We welcome what seems to have been unanimous agreement at stage 1 and, as we expect, unanimity at decision time this afternoon that these changes need to be made. Although they are relatively minor, they might well have a significant effect in preventing some tragedies. The legislation will certainly help to drive home the message that although, as we all agree, dogs provide great comfort, friendship and solace for many, they have to be looked after and dog owners are required to be responsible. Once again, I pay tribute to Christine Grahame and everyone else who has been involved with the bill. The Government will support the motion and will be more than happy to work with Patricia Ferguson and others on ensuring that members see the guidance that will be provided to local authorities. As I have said, it will be up to those in local government who are involved in the enforcement procedure to take the appropriate action, but we are more than happy to undertake this work to maintain unity in the chamber.

Amendment 3 provides that the Scottish ministers must provide guidance to local authorities in relation to the exercise of their functions and the exercise of the functions of authorised officers under the bill, and that all local authorities and authorised officers must have regard to such guidance. Under the terms of the bill as it stands, there is no obligation on the Scottish ministers to produce guidance on the bill, but we plan to issue guidance and we believe that amendment 3 is helpful in putting a requirement to that effect on the face of the bill.

We would be happy to discuss that. The purpose is to keep the approach fairly light, and there are methods by which we can seek to do that. It is certainly not the desire of the Government to exclude anything from public scrutiny. Subject to the caveat that we must ensure that matters are dealt with as expeditiously and as simply as possible, we will be more than happy to ensure that members are kept abreast of matters. Amendment 3 provides that local authorities and authorised officers "must have regard to guidance". Local authorities and authorised officers will have to consider the guidance, but they will not necessarily be obliged to follow it as they carry out their functions under the bill. We consider that the issuing of guidance will help to enhance understanding of the bill's provisions and of  decisions by authorised officers on what is and what is not reasonable in the context of section 1. We are aware of the concerns that have been expressed that the legitimate and lawful activities of working dogs may be adversely affected by the bill. Although we do not think that that will be the case, we will engage with all those parties who have key interests in the bill, including local authorities and rural stakeholders, in drafting the guidance to ensure that it is fully understood how the dog control notice regime is to operate. We think that guidance will assist local authorities and authorised officers as they plan ahead for implementation of the bill. I move amendment 3.

Amendment 2 seeks to modify part of the two-part test for a dog being out of control, so that the wording of section 1(3)(c) changes from "the individual's alarm or apprehensiveness is not unreasonable." to "the individual's alarm or apprehensiveness is, in all the circumstances, reasonable." We consider that changing the wording of section 1 in that way, so that the obligation on the authorised officer is to decide whether the alarm or apprehensiveness of a person is reasonable rather than not unreasonable helps to emphasise that the authorised officer must be satisfied, in making the decision, as to what is reasonable. The change will also be helpful in ensuring that consideration of the two-part test by the authorised officer or a court will be more clearly focused and consistent with other references in legislation to a reasonableness test. We have sought to include the phrase "in all the circumstances" to ensure that the authorised officer is required to look more broadly at the context in which the alarm or apprehensiveness arose to determine whether it was reasonable. I move amendment 2.

We are aware that some who gave evidence at stage 1 expressed concerns about the inclusion of a dog's size and power as part of one element of the two-part test that must be met  before a dog can be deemed to be out of control. Some respondents felt that the inclusion of references to a dog's size and power were inconsistent with the bill's general thrust of moving away from basing dog control measures on a dog's breed and towards focusing the approach more on the deed of a dog and its owner. We accept that removing the words "size and power" might have little effect on the practical operation of the two-part test, but the inclusion of the reference to size and power serves a useful purpose. Those words add clarity, warning owners of large and powerful dogs of the need for greater control over those dogs. To draw a parallel, we would expect all drivers to drive responsibly and to take care when driving. However, we would expect the driver of a 10-tonne lorry to be aware of the likely extra danger of their large and powerful lorry getting out of control—as opposed to the driver of a small moped, say, losing control of their vehicle. Notwithstanding amendment 2, in my name, to section 1(3), which will be debated shortly in connection with the two-part test in its current form, we should remember that a further element of the second part of that test also requires to be met: authorised officers may consider issuing a dog control notice only when they are satisfied that the alarm or apprehensiveness that might be felt by the individual as a result of the size and power of the dog is not unreasonable. For clarity, we would prefer the two-part test to retain the reference to the size and power of a dog. We oppose amendment 1.

None.

If Lord Foulkes has questions about Mr al-Megrahi's lawyer, he would do better to put them to Labour's deputy justice spokesman, who is his brother, rather than to me, as I have had no correspondence with him. Lord Foulkes may be salivating about it but, in this country, medical reports are private and confidential. That applies equally to people who have committed serious offences and to those who have self-confessed addictions. Medical reports are not available to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, to members of the press or to members of political parties. Lord Foulkes may wish to change that, but that is how things currently are. I said at the time that Mr al-Megrahi may live for three months, for less or for longer. What is clear is that he faces terminal prostate cancer.

The Government is well aware that there are lingering questions that people feel need to be answered. We have always made it clear that we will fully support any inquiry that carries out an investigation, but it must have the appropriate powers. Those are not within the domain of the Scottish Government or the Scottish judicial system, but we have put on record what we are allowed. We will co-operate fully with any inquiry, whether it is constituted by the United Nations or by a UK Government of whatever political complexion. I give Ms Grahame the assurance that the Scottish Government will co-operate.

That comes back to the point that medical evidence is privileged and is regarded as private and confidential in this country. That applies to all individuals, irrespective of their status and whether or not they have been convicted. If Mr Aitken or Lord Foulkes wishes to change that, they can seek to do so; however, that would require legislative changes and medical reports are not within the Scottish Government's domain. Nor is it within our control to publish medical reports. If there are desires to change the legislation, members can seek to do so through members' bills or in other ways.

The Scottish Government has promoted the interests of victims and witnesses by providing record funding of more than £4 million a year to Victim Support Scotland, introducing victim  statements, extending the victim notification scheme and fully implementing the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004. The Scottish Government is working on proposals to further enhance the rights of victims and is about to undertake a comprehensive review of support for witnesses.

We accept that there is a journey to be travelled and recognise that, in Scotland, victims have been the forgotten people in the system. That issue was flagged up, quite correctly, by the current Lord Advocate when she served as Solicitor General for Scotland in the previous Administration. Significant progress has been made by my predecessor and by this Administration. We will consider and take a view on the victims commissioner proposal when Mr Stewart's bill is published. In a world of limited resources, we will have to decide whether to put significant funding into front-line services or into an edifice and a tsar.

The Highlands and Islands is covered by the Northern Constabulary police area. In March 2007, Northern Constabulary had 707 police officers, thanks in part to this Government's commitment to have 1,000 extra officers on the beat in our communities across Scotland. There are now 793 officers in Northern, which represents an increase of 86.

I note the member's concerns. His name was mentioned when I met the new chief executive of CrossReach, the Church of Scotland organisation that deals with alcohol. I can comment only from a police perspective, as such matters are decided on by the local alcohol and drugs partnership. Beechwood house offered a maximum of only four beds. Any additional numbers had to be accommodated at Burnett Road police station in Inverness. It is expected that there will be a small increase in the number of people who will have to be accommodated by the police, but their care will be the responsibility of dedicated custody staff, who will be supported by NHS Highland staff, where appropriate. It is not anticipated that the new arrangements, which are still under development, will result in any front-line officers being diverted from their operational duties. However, I understand the member's concerns, and I can confirm that they were shared by CrossReach when it met me.

The Scottish Government is working with the police-led violence reduction unit to tackle violence across Scotland. Lothian and Borders Police undertakes a variety of activities to reduce knife crime, which range from work in secondary schools to highlight the dangers of getting involved with knives to the deployment of Scottish Government-funded Ferroguard metal detectors to keep city and town centres safe. I am pleased to say that there has been an 11 per cent reduction in crimes involving offensive weapons in Lothian and Borders since 2006-07. That should come as no surprise, given the record numbers of police officers on the streets, the record investment in activities for young people through the cashback for communities initiative and the record investment in the violence reduction unit to address the causes of violent offending. I am sure that the member will join me in thanking the chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police and, indeed, every police officer in the force for their tireless work.

I am astounded at the concept that knife carriers are being let off scot free. Knife crime is down in Lothian and Borders, as it is elsewhere. Mr Whitton seems to be mixing that up with the fact that convictions are up, which is a good thing, because we wish those who are caught to be convicted and not to get off scot free. Mr Whitton should welcome the fact that more people who are caught with knives are being convicted, and are going to prison and going for longer but, overall, fewer people are being caught, because fewer people are carrying knives. That does not mean that we do not still have a significant way to travel. However, the homicide rate in Glasgow is the lowest recorded in 10 years; in Edinburgh it is the lowest recorded in 20 years; and overall recorded crime in the whole of Scotland is the lowest recorded in 30 years. Knife crime affects all of Scotland, but if Mr Whitton thinks that it is uniform throughout the country, he should get out more. There are significant problems in some areas of Edinburgh but, just as there is a greater problem in Craigmillar than there is in Duddingston, it is not rocket science to work out that the problem is worse in the west of Scotland than it is in Shetland or Orkney.

Yes, I recognise the debt of gratitude that we owe to Strathclyde Police, and to Lothian and Borders constabulary here in the east. Those who are a danger to our communities, who carry knives and who have a propensity to use them should be dealt with firmly and severely. As I said to David Whitton, I welcome the fact that more of those who are caught are being convicted, and that more of those who are convicted of a serious offence are going to prison, and going for longer. However, I ask Mr Aitken, as convener of the Justice Committee, to reflect on the written and oral evidence that he has received—for example, from the chief constable of Strathclyde, who is opposed to mandatory sentences, and from the chief superintendent who is head of the violence reduction unit, and who argues in his written evidence to the Justice  Committee that mandatory sentences not only are not a good thing, but would be counterproductive. I ask those who are currently engaged in a bidding war in relation to mandatory sentences—we have heard six months from the Labour Party, two years from the Tory party and four years from the Labour candidate in Glasgow North East—to reflect on the issue and to listen to the experts, such as the chief constables, the head of the violence reduction unit and the prison officers and governors, and to realise that such sentences are counterproductive.

The third round of the cashback for communities scheme, announced in December last year for the local authority areas of Edinburgh, East Lothian, Midlothian and West Lothian, resulted in grant funding by Youthlink Scotland of more than £148,000 to 33 projects, benefiting 5,980 children and youths. The schemes being funded are varied and across all four of the local authority areas. They range from providing respite for 30 young carers in Broomhouse to evening street hockey sessions in Loanhead. Those are just a few good examples of how we are turning the gains of criminals' illegal assets, their cash and possessions into meaningful, community-driven projects.

A total of more than half a million pounds in cashback for communities funding has been awarded to 64 youth organisations throughout the Lothians including in Craigmillar, Tranent, Gorebridge and Blackburn. Some of the areas are included because of their socieconomic nature and some because they tend to be in high-crime areas. The work ties in with that being done through the Scottish Football Association and the Scottish Rugby Union in partnership with others. There must be a requirement to ensure that those areas that are most blighted by criminality and where the kids have the fewest life chances are given additional  funding. Equally, we are certain that there should be no postcode lottery and that kids from other areas should also have the opportunity to be all that they can be.

I am aware that the Tory amendment has been withdrawn: I pay tribute to Bill Aitken—and to his colleague John Scott, who is not in the chamber—for their forbearance and for the support that they have shown. I think that we are all united in the attempt to resolve matters while retaining the fundamental ethos that has served Scots law well. I assure them that we wish to act as speedily as possible. Our desire has been simply to ensure that we do what we do correctly and appropriately. A rule against double jeopardy is an essential feature of a fair society: the state should never have unfettered freedom repeatedly to prosecute individuals for the same act. We should aspire to a system in which criminal proceedings are final and in which accused persons are spared the anxiety and humiliation of repeated trials. That does not, however, mean that we should leave the law on double jeopardy alone—times change and the society in which we live evolves. Although the ancient principle against repeated trials should remain, we must reflect on the fact that it is the product of a different time, in which the protections that were available for accused persons were rudimentary by today's standards. The rule against double jeopardy is a blunt weapon, which was devised to protect individuals against persecution by a medieval state. It is only prudent that a modern society take stock and consider areas where old laws need to be updated to reflect changes, whether in society or—as I will comment on in a moment—in science. My clear view is that the double jeopardy rule is in need of reform. It needs to take account of the checks and balances of a modern justice system and of advances in forensic science. An absolute bar against a second trial can bring the law into disrepute when an acquitted person makes a clear confession or compelling new evidence emerges. We have many important checks in our justice system, as is right and correct, and I am satisfied that there would be no unfairness in creating  exceptions to the rule for very serious cases in which particular and stringent tests were met. If the proposals are enacted, it will be for prosecutors and the police to examine the merits of cases and for the High Court of Justiciary to listen to the arguments and decide whether a retrial should be permitted. In individual cases, those are rightly decisions for the independent parts of our criminal justice system. We have debated the issue previously in the Parliament; I recall many compelling arguments in favour of change from members of all parties. I am pleased to be able to return to Parliament having published on Monday a consultation paper on the subject. The consultation, which will run until 14 June, seeks views on various aspects of reform of the rule on double jeopardy. I do not expect reform of the rule on double jeopardy to have an impact in many cases, which is as it should be. The reform is focused on the rarest but most serious cases—on some of the worst and most sickening injustices that are possible under the existing law. It is about pursuing the perpetrators of serious offences when there are compelling signs that they have gotten away with it. In such cases justice is, of course, of the greatest importance for victims and their families, but there is also a vital public interest in terms of ensuring that confidence is maintained in the criminal justice system. People simply do not understand why compelling new information or a post-trial confession cannot justify a new prosecution for a heinous crime. Our criminal justice system is not simply a contest between the Crown and the accused's agents, with the court as final arbiter—it is not a game between my learned friends. It is about delivering justice for victims, families and communities and it is about achieving fairness for victims and society, as well as for the accused. That is what we must seek to deliver and why we need to effect change. To do otherwise would invite manifest injustice. The consultation paper builds on the Scottish Law Commission's recent "Report on Double Jeopardy". I am grateful to the commission for its work on the issue and on the related issue of creating a Crown right of appeal against decisions, such as that there is no case to answer. That reform features in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which is currently before the Justice Committee. The commission's work stemmed from a reference that I made in 2007 and, as I am a long-standing advocate of reform, it is gratifying for me to see progress. I accept the Scottish Law Commission's proposals on restating in statute the rule on double jeopardy and on allowing a new trial when an  acquitted person subsequently confesses or when the original case was marred by corruption or intimidation. Those reforms are sensible and long overdue. No one should be able to mock our system by boasting with impunity about their guilt, and nor should those who corrupt a trial with threats or intimidation expect to be free from the prospect of retrial. The more difficult question is about situations in which compelling new evidence emerges after a trial. The most commonly cited example of that is to do with DNA material, but new evidence can come in other ways, such as through a previously untraced witness or a technological innovation such as improvements in photo imaging. The benefits of such material are clear: it can create a compelling case for a new trial. I understand the frustration that many people feel when new evidence emerges but cannot be used. On the other hand, there are reasonable arguments against a new-evidence exception. It is certainly true that the law should be clear and that acquittals should generally be certain and final, that there are limitations to technology, and that there might be a risk of prejudicial publicity at a second trial. Understandably, the Scottish Law Commission found the arguments difficult to reconcile. It did not recommend either way on whether to have an exception to double jeopardy when new evidence arises. Personally, I am strongly inclined to favour a new-evidence exception, and I also think that it should apply retrospectively. However, the issue is complex and important and it is one on which I would like the opinion of consultees. It is important to take time to listen to views and to get the reform right. However, there must be a clear direction of travel, which is what the Government is setting out. The consultation paper is focused on the arguments for, and the format of, any new-evidence exception. The principal issues on which views are sought include which offences should be covered by such an exception and whether it should be retrospective.

We will consult on the matter but we are aware that, south of the border, the rule applies to numerous offences apart from murder and rape. I am happy to listen to the views of consultees and, indeed, to Mr Brown on the issue, although it seems to me that if, for example,  manifest injustice were to come up in terms of a war crimes trial, it would be wrong not to pursue it. If a major paedophile trial, such as with operation algebra, were to gang agley, it would be wrong if we did not remedy that manifest injustice. I am not prejudging the consultation, but I must repeat that the possible offences that can be prosecuted in this way south of the border are serious and significant and go beyond the murder and rape offences to which the Scottish Law Commission has referred. I certainly think that many members of the public would be gobsmacked if justice could not be served with regard to terrorism, war crimes or paedophile offences.

Of course it does. As I said earlier, that is one of the arguments against the measure and one of the reasons why it is felt that it will be used very sparingly. Ultimately, the police and the prosecution service will have to decide whether there is any new evidence or a clear admission of manifest injustice. Equally, the High Court will have to decide whether a trial can proceed. Such a decision will not be at the whim of a procurator fiscal; the High Court's approval will have to be sought and granted. The court could well be persuaded that clear and compelling new evidence existed, but might equally decide that the publicity would be so prejudicial that it would be inappropriate to go ahead with the trial. What we as a Parliament are seeking—and what we as the Government are trying to drive forward—is the opportunity to consider ways of remedying such injustice. Ultimately, it will be for the Crown to consider whether the case should be brought and for the High Court to give its approval. I return to the consultation. We will also seek views on what test should be applied in assessing new evidence: whether evidence that was available but was not used should count as new; whether a disputed judicial ruling that stopped a case should be open to review; and whether to include evidence that was not admissible at the first trial, but which would be at a second. I look forward to consultees' views on those important points and I assure Bill Aitken again that I intend to follow the consultation with legislation at the earliest opportunity. I am pleased that there seems to be a great deal of cross-party support for reform of the law and I welcome the supportive comments that have been made recently by the Opposition spokesmen. I have discussed with Mr Aitken and Mr Brown their stage 2 amendments to the  Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill and understand what they are seeking to achieve. We are seeking to remedy an anachronism. It must be accepted that the measure should be used very sparingly, but we have to ensure that justice is served in the 21st century, in which our society, forensic science and a variety of other matters have changed. As Mr Brown and Margo MacDonald have suggested, the measure must be balanced with ensuring the rights of the accused. However, as I said earlier, the law is not a game and justice has to be served. This is not about arbitrating between my learned friends for the prosecution and my learned friends for the defence. Justice dictates that if a manifest injustice emerges, either through new evidence or a confession, a new trial should be possible, even though—as I made clear to Ms MacDonald—the ultimate decision is for the High Court. I move, That the Parliament agrees that, although double jeopardy must continue to provide an important safeguard, it needs to be reformed to fit with a fair and modern criminal justice system; agrees that persons who confess after an acquittal or who undermine trials by threats or corruption should be retried; supports reform to allow a second trial in very serious cases where important new evidence emerges and for this to apply retrospectively, and welcomes the Scottish Government's consultation on this issue.

Does the member accept that many of the issues that she raises relate to procurement, which is either EU driven or the responsibility of Lord Mandelson? Will she support me in the offer that I made to Councillor Stephen Curran in Glasgow, when I said that I would be more than happy to make a joint representation to Lord Mandelson, to call for action to tighten up on procurement, because it is wrong that gangsters benefit from public contracts?

I welcome that. HMRC sits on the serious organised crime task force. I look with interest at the Irish model, which is predicated in many ways on taxation. I have invited the Home Secretary to discuss that, but he is unable to make the next meeting. Many of these matters, including taxation, are reserved, so if the Conservatives become the next Administration south of the border, will they seek to work with us, so that we have the powers over taxation that would allow us to act? I can give this assurance: if we had control over taxation, not only would HMRC sit on the serious organised crime task force, but we would exercise that power.

Does the member accept that a serious organised criminal who carries out a shoplifting offence should get a sentence of significantly longer than six months?

Tackling serious organised crime is a priority for the Government, and I welcome this opportunity to update Parliament on the action that we are taking to tackle this blight on our communities. We have established the serious organised crime task force to provide a strategic focus for our work and to promote co-ordinated action. By working together, we have a better chance of putting the criminal networks out of business. Last June, the task force published its organised crime strategy, "Letting our Communities Flourish", which sets out how we plan to make our communities safer and reduce the impact of serious organised crime. The strategy focuses on four clear objectives. These are the four Ds: divert—how we are going to divert individuals from engaging in or using the products of serious organised crime; disrupt—how we will disrupt the activities of serious organised crime groups; deter—measures to protect communities, businesses and the public sector from serious organised crime; and detect—boosting capacity and improving co-ordination to give serious organised criminals no place to hide. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency has a major role to play in implementing the strategy, which is why we are providing it with an additional £4 million in funding over 2009-10 and 2010-11—an increase in funding of more than 27 per cent since April 2007. That additional £4 million is being used to establish a Scottish intelligence and co-ordination unit, which will enable us better to understand the intelligence picture, allow more focused tasking and co-ordination and boost specialist capacity at SCDEA. The Scottish crime campus at Gartcosh will provide a purpose-built national facility for SCDEA and its partners to facilitate joint tasking and co-ordination, and it will house a purpose-built forensic laboratory. We are making good progress—work is due to start on the first construction contract in the summer, and occupation is scheduled to begin in 2012.

Absolutely. As the member will be aware, the Scottish Police Services Authority is carrying out a review of those services, and we await its report with interest. The purpose of building Gartcosh is to create the crime campus that has been envisaged for years. A specialist facility will be set up there because the premises that are currently in use at Pitt Street are frankly not fit for purpose. Mike Rumbles will be aware of a recent incident in the city of Edinburgh that shows that it is necessary for us to ensure that specialist facilities are protected from serious organised crime. I see that Mike Pringle is nodding. Factors such as the security of such premises must be taken into account. We will receive the SPSA's report shortly.

Everybody knows that the only things that are guaranteed in this world are death and taxes. However, we are moving on apace, and we have got through the planning stage. Elaine Smith should realise that procedures must be followed, but we are committed to the project, and she can rest assured that it will be delivered. We are determined to improve effectiveness in seizing assets and confiscating profits. More than £27 million has already been recovered, but we can do more. To help to mainstream asset recovery, we have allocated £1.2 million to the Crown Office to allow the recruitment of specialist staff to help to boost recovery, and we have provided £500,000, which has been match-funded by the police service, to recruit 19 financial investigators in Strathclyde, Lothian and Borders and Tayside.

Hugh Henry is well aware that it would be inappropriate for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice—or for a minister for justice, as Mr Henry was—to comment on an individual case, as there may be live proceedings.  We have put resources into not only the police and the specialist investigators who are necessary to follow the paper trail, but the Crown Office, for the operation of the civil recovery unit. Rather than trying to denigrate matters by making cheap political points, we would do better to support the Crown Office and prosecution service in bringing these hoodlums and gangsters to justice. The majority of the money that has been secured from the proceeds of crime is being reinvested in the cashback for communities scheme, which provides positive opportunities for young people in Scotland's communities. Already, £13 million has been invested in the cashback scheme, from which more than 100,000 Scottish youngsters have benefited. We are creating four new offences in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. The package of offences targets the top of the criminal networks right down to the street drug dealer and the professionals who either facilitate such crime or turn a blind eye to it. Tackling serious organised crime should be a priority, as it is a blight on our communities. If anybody doubted that, our groundbreaking mapping project revealed the presence of more than 350 crime groups, including more than 4,000 individuals, that operate throughout Scotland, from six groups in Dumfries and Galloway to 152 groups in Strathclyde. The top 20 groups impact on all eight forces: more than 92 per cent of crime groups are involved in drug crimes, and more than 40 per cent are involved in serious violence or murder. They are diversifying and are now involved in counterfeiting, human trafficking, e-crime, fraud and money laundering—the list goes on. They will dabble in anything that gives them power and makes them money, and that is a problem for us all. It is not just a problem for Glasgow and Edinburgh, and it does not relate only to drugs. We should celebrate the many successes that the police and the Crown have had in disrupting supply, in seizing assets and confiscating profits from illicit activity, and in bringing serious criminals to justice. For example, George Buchanan was made bankrupt last year when he could not pay his court costs after a successful case was undertaken by the civil recovery unit, which recovered a number of assets including cash and cars. Operation lockdown targeted an organised crime group in Glasgow that was suspected of attempted murders and large-scale drug dealing. The operation, which ran for 17 months, resulted in the arrest of 146 individuals, including the four main targets. Drugs with a street value of £9 million, and 30 firearms and other weapons, were recovered. All four principal targets pled guilty to dealing cocaine and one pled guilty to money  laundering at the Glasgow High Court on 28 October 2009, and they were jailed for a total of 29 years. On Monday morning, I visited Glasgow and saw at first hand one of the flash vehicles that Strathclyde Police had taken from an organised crime group. I congratulate the police today, as I did on Monday, on their determination to get back at criminals who have laboured under the illusion that they control parts of Glasgow and that they are untouchable. The message is clear: "No, you don't. You are not untouchable. Your ill-gotten gains will be taken from you, and many of you will go to prison to face the penalties that you merit and deserve." Two good examples in which law enforcement agencies worked together with local authority and support agencies are operation Lochnagar in Grampian and operation focus in West Lothian, which targeted street-level drug dealers and related antisocial behaviour. That shows that the police are embracing the battle at all levels, including in our communities. Recently, the task force heard from a community police officer in Strathclyde who told us how his team is tackling serious organised crime on the ground. Its approach is starting to achieve positive outcomes and he and his officers feel that they are actually making a difference. That is not an isolated example. It is replicated in communities throughout Scotland. However, more needs to be done. The job is not one for the Government and law enforcement alone; it is for everybody.

Well, it is not a big bang. There is no millennium moment. The work is on-going at a serious organised crime task force level. Under the four Ds, we have various people in charge. Some matters are being driven and directed by the director general of the SCDEA and some by the Lord Advocate. It is a question of working together. I advise the Parliament that we have also invited the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers to come on board and be represented because we recognise the importance of tackling the matter in relation to public sector contracts. It is not a question of publishing one particular document; it is about ensuring that we are on the case and working together to deal with a situation that is ever evolving. Private businesses, too, need to ensure that they protect themselves against organised crime. Professionals need to ensure that they are not inadvertently facilitating organised crime. Local  authorities need to identify and disrupt serious organised criminals through their roles in licensing businesses, as employers, and as regulators. They must ensure that public money does not find its way into the pockets of serious organised criminals. Legitimate businesses, our downtrodden communities and the public expect us to tackle the disease of serious organised crime and, in doing so, to strip criminals of the assets that they gain from their illegal activities. I am confident that we are meeting the challenge. We will implement the strategy for tackling serious organised crime and encourage all law-abiding citizens to play a role. We will harass and disrupt the overlords of the crime groups and the lieutenants and foot soldiers who carry out despicable crimes that make misery. Organised criminals seek to profit from crime in our communities, to undermine legitimate businesses and to threaten the framework of our democracy. That cannot and will not be tolerated. We will be unceasing in our efforts to tackle serious organised crime and we will not rest until this blight has been removed. We will create a safer and stronger Scotland. I congratulate all those who have been involved at any level and look forward to hearing members' contributions to the debate. I believe that we have a unity of purpose in the Parliament in seeking to make our communities safer and stronger. I move, That the Parliament recognises that serious organised crime can have a devastating impact on communities and businesses in Scotland; further recognises that tackling this menace should be a key priority for a Safer and Stronger Scotland; supports the role of the Serious Organised Crime Taskforce in spearheading Scotland's commitment to address this type of crime; supports Scottish law enforcement in implementing the taskforce's serious organised crime strategy, Letting our Communities Flourish , and supports the view that serious organised crime cannot be seen to pay.

The guidance to local authorities that was published by the working group on marches and parades in December 2006 makes it clear that, if a local authority makes a case why a certain type of procession should be excluded from the notification process, the Scottish ministers will consider it and make an order if necessary. Only funeral processions are currently exempt from the notification requirements under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. I do not consider that it would be appropriate at this time to make an order exempting common ridings and other similar community events. There are important reasons why even non-contentious marches and parades need to be planned carefully.  In discussions with me, representatives from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities advised that they would not support the reinstatement of exemptions.

I fully recognise the contemporary and historical importance of those events and I am more than happy to meet the member. The meeting at which the issue was recently discussed was a result of similar issues being raised in Dumfries and Galloway. The Administration does not rule anything in or out, but the clear advice from representatives of local authorities and the police was that they did not wish to vary the rules or provide any exemptions. I am happy to meet the member, but perhaps he should also act by asking the local authority in his area to speak to COSLA, because the clear advice from police and local authorities at present is that they do not want changes.

I am always prepared to listen to advice from local authorities and the police. The clear advice from them is that, no matter how small an event may be, it impacts on traffic and there are dangers to others. I am more than happy to review the matter. Dumfries and Galloway Council raised the matter initially, but I spoke with COSLA and ACPOS. Perhaps Dumfries and Galloway Council should seek to lobby on the matter in COSLA. The chief constable of Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary, Pat Shearer, is the current president of ACPOS. Perhaps the member should seek to achieve a change in the views of the police locally, because their view was to keep the situation as it stands and not to vary it.

Firearms legislation is a reserved responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. The deployment and use of firearms is an operational matter for chief constables. Scottish police forces follow guidance contained in the  Association of Chief Police Officers "Manual of Guidance on Police Use of Firearms".

I assure Mr O'Donnell that firearms are reserved. If he can advise me how that is not so, I will act forthwith, because the Government is committed to taking action on the scourge of air weapons in our communities. If our doing so was simple, I have no doubt that he would have advised me about that by now. Firearms are reserved to Westminster, which is why the Scottish Parliament cannot legislate on the matter. Tasers are classified as firearms. As we debated this morning, it has never been, will not be under my watch and—I think—will not be for any justice secretary, whatever their political colour, to interfere with the operational matters of our police forces. To do so would undermine the democratic basis on which we operate, through political interference in policing that must be for our communities.

The Scottish Government carried out a major consultation exercise on juries, called "The Modern Scottish Jury in Criminal Trials" , in 2008. Following independent analysis of the responses, in December 2009 the Government published a statement of the steps that it intends to take.

As I understand it, such issues are not subject to statute but are matters of  procedure and guidance in the Scottish Court Service. I appreciate that being called for jury service is for many people inconvenient. We are grateful to the member's constituent and other people who give of their time to participate in the jury system. The reason why more than 15 people are called is to ensure that there is a sufficiently wide pool from which to select. There might among them be people who are inappropriate because, for example, they know the accused—especially in rural areas. There are good reasons to ensure that we have the maximum pool. I can only say that—as the clerk of the court and, doubtless, the presiding sheriff or judge would say—we are sorry for any inconvenience, but we are truly grateful to people who give of their time, whether or not they are called, to participate in a fundamental part of our judicial system.

The Scottish Prison Service will next week publish its strategy for the management of female offenders in custody, and an action plan responding to the HM inspectorate of prisons recommendations on HMP and YOI Cornton Vale. Those documents will be available on the SPS website and copies will be lodged with the Scottish Parliament information centre.

I am not aware of any ECHR challenges. I can inquire of the SPS and get back to Dr Simpson, but it might be easier to ask the deputy Labour justice spokesman, Mr James Kelly. After all, it is Kelly, and another whose name I have forgotten, who tend to bring most such challenges, so Mr Kelly may be able to advise whether any such challenges are on-going.  We are conscious of the challenges that are faced at Cornton Vale, and the Scottish Prison Service is dealing with those matters. I remind Dr Simpson of the response that was given by the governor, who said that the real solution was to deal with the constant churn. If the member wants to show some sympathy and take some action, he should support the Government in ending the regular use of short prison sentences for people who often require more to be treated than to be punished.

Those are operational matters for the Scottish Prison Service. As I said, I am aware of the challenges that have to be addressed, as are the prison service and the governor and staff of Cornton Vale. I have every confidence that they will rise to the challenge, but we equally have to accept that we live in a world of finite resources and that we have to prioritise matters. That should be considered by some people who would seek to increase the prison population. If we spend on prisoners, we cannot spend on pensioners. You pays your money and you takes your choice. The Government has to spend £120 million per annum to upgrade the prison estate that it inherited, but it would rather reward good citizens than continually pander to the bad ones.

It is clear that we have to take into account the rights of the child. I fully accept that in the spirit in which Malcolm Chisholm has raised the matter. There are security issues but, the point that has been made is clear. We must realise that the link with the child is fundamental to the best way of trying to ensure that the prisoner does not commit further offences and can be rehabilitated.  We also have to address another point that Malcolm Chisholm and others have raised: tragically, 50 per cent or more of the children whose mothers are in Cornton Vale end up in institutions themselves. If we are to break that cycle of offending, we must ensure that appropriate action is taken. I am more than happy to continue to discuss that matter with Malcolm Chisholm and to ensure that the SPS takes it on board.

We have set up the serious organised crime task force to tackle head-on serious organised criminals who operate throughout Scotland. In June 2009, the task force published its serious organised crime strategy in "Letting our Communities Flourish: A Strategy for Tackling Serious Organised Crime in Scotland". On 19 January this year, we joined Strathclyde Police for the launch of its implementation plan. The Scottish Government has also provided an additional £4 million of funding over two years to the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency to boost Scotland's efforts to tackle serious organised crime.

Absolutely. The basis of the launch of the implementation plan in Glasgow on 19 January was that such people are not untouchable. I recall that the billboard advertising showed people from such communities and elsewhere in Glasgow who had been brought to account and given considerable prison sentences for on-going actions. The director general of the  Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency is speaking to public and private sector agencies and is addressing procurement matters. It is clear that we are drawing to people's attention the fact that serious and organised crime is not simply a criminal justice responsibility; people who are in elected positions in health boards and local authorities also have responsibilities. Members of political parties, including mine, must take that into account when they are in a position to deal with such matters. Patricia Ferguson will be aware that I would happily legislate forthwith on procurement, consumer and other matters that are reserved to Westminster. Until the Scottish Parliament has the full powers of an independent Parliament, we will have restricted powers over some matters, and we will still require to go cap in hand south of the border.

Such matters are fundamentally operational matters for the police, and I would not wish to interfere in or engage with them. That would be entirely wrong. My answer relates to the earlier question about the use of Tasers. Various matters are being dealt with—witness protection, for example—to ensure that we maximise the ability to protect communities and good citizens who step forward. If Mr Kelly has particular suggestions to make, I assure him that I will happily table them at the next meeting of the serious organised crime task force to ensure that the best advice or suggestions from wherever are taken on board and acted on.

Firearms legislation is reserved. The training, deployment and use of firearms are operational matters for chief constables.

No—I do not feel comfortable with that and I cannot think of any member who would argue for a fully armed police force. I struggle to think of anybody in the main body politic in Scotland who would argue that or has ever done so. If the Parliament is to take action and if powers are to be given to any minister, the powers on firearms have to be devolved. Tasers are firearms—that is set in the legislation, because of the method of firing and other reasons. Thereafter, any decision would not be made on a whim or because of a fancy of mine. When the powers on firearms are devolved, it will be for each and every member in the Parliament to discuss and decide on the issue. Some people might argue that firearms should not be available to police officers, although I would argue against that and would ensure that that would not be the Government's position. If Patrick Harvie wished to introduce a bill or move amendments to a bill to specify that police officers could carry firearms only under set conditions, the Parliament could legislate on that. However, at present, we cannot legislate because we do not have the powers to do so. Once we have the powers, the issue will not be up to me or my successor—it will be for the Parliament to set the legislation and thereafter for the police and the Lord Advocate to act in conjunction with the laws that Parliament has set. Justice secretaries may bring proposed legislation to the Parliament, but it is the Parliament that enacts bills and gives authority to them.

I agree entirely that that law needs to be overhauled. We initiated the Scottish Law  Commission review of double jeopardy and we are delivering on it. However, with such a complex and important issue, we should take time to get it right. Rushing through an amendment to that bill risks producing a law that falls short of what is desired. Instead, we should introduce a stand-alone bill at the earliest opportunity, following a consultation, and ensure that the law is fit for purpose in a variety of aspects. I know that the Conservatives share my desire for reform and I would welcome their support for a stand-alone bill.

Absolutely. I am aware of the member's commitment on the issue and that, as he said, Bill Aitken has been pursuing the matter. I believe that there is unity in the Parliament that we have to address double jeopardy. The proposed amendment is well intentioned, but it does not go far enough, as it would restrict the crimes that would be covered to rape and murder. There might be instances in which all members would regret it if we did not have power to take action—for example, with a case such as operation algebra. We must ensure that we include the correct offences. The Government believes that there is good reason why any provision should be retrospective, although we will consult on that. If we proceeded with the proposed amendment, there would be no retrospectivity if new evidence arose in previously heard cases. I look forward to working with John Scott, Bill Aitken and other members to ensure that justice is served for all those who suffer a manifest injustice.

It is important that we consult on the issue and it would be wrong for me to  prejudge the outcome of the consultation. However, I have been pretty fulsome in saying that I see a direction of travel, as Mr Baker pointed out. I know that the view is shared by Bill Aitken and John Scott.

There are some matters on which the chamber is united, such as the requirement to protect our police officers. That is why, at the outset, we said that we are happy to accept the Conservative amendment in Bill  Aitken's name. There is also agreement that the use of Tasers is legitimate and proportionate, although there are disputes over the criteria regarding when they can be used. It has been useful to hear from Stewart Maxwell and Cathie Craigie about the nature and use of Tasers and how there are occasions on which their use is appropriate. Reference has correctly and understandably been made to the Amnesty International report; however, we should be clear that that report was on the use of Tasers in the United States. As members have said, just as there is a difference in police culture north and south of the border, there is a substantial difference between the police cultures in the United Kingdom and in the US, never mind the difference between the gun cultures. It is important that we keep things in proportion. I have the latest statistics from ACPOS on the deployment of Tasers in October to December 2009. The figures show that Tasers were deployed on six occasions, drawn on four occasions, red-dotted on two occasions and discharged on zero occasions. That indicates that our police are operating a balanced policy on the use of Tasers. Although the trial is taking place in Strathclyde, there were two deployments in central Scotland, one deployment in the Lothian and Borders region, one deployment in Strathclyde and two deployments in Tayside. Members have referred to the need for guidance and training. I make it clear that ACPOS has signed up to the Association of Chief Police Officers guidance. Officers who are taking part in the pilot in Strathclyde will, as Mr Brown said, have completed a three-day training course, the Taser element of which is delivered by authorised firearms officers. Whatever decision is ultimately made on the trial, appropriate training has been given. One of the fundamental issues under discussion is that of accountability. The Government's position remains that which I outlined when I intervened on Mr Brown's opening speech: the chief constable is responsible for police operations in his force. The Scottish ministers do not have, have not had and, under our Administration, will not have the power to direct chief constables. Mr Kelly seemed to imply that we could apply some form of direction through financing, but that would be seeking to interfere with the directional guidance of police officers by undermining their ability to finance. If Mr Kelly is suggesting any form of ring fencing or a reduction in their budgets if they do not do certain things, I think that that is unacceptable. The Government has regular meetings with the chief constables. Indeed, I can safely say that I have met officers individually more often than my predecessor met them  collectively. We seek to work with them, but we need the separation of powers.

I was about to address that point. As usual, Mr Rumbles made an intervention and then disappeared, meaning that he is unable to participate in the debate at a later stage. If we want to legislate to ensure that we do not have an armed police force—I do not support having a fully armed police force—that is not for the justice secretary of whatever political colour to direct; it is for Parliament to make a decision on the matter. Enshrining that will come not from a direction from St Andrew's house, from Mr Brown, from Mr Baker or from Mr Aitken, but from the Parliament making a decision. If we want to ensure that we do not have a fully armed police force and that we have specified matters regarding the use of Tasers, we must have firearms law devolved to the Scottish Parliament for us to make a decision. The Government's whole argument on firearms—not simply on the continuing problems that we face with air weapons—is that we need to decide what constitutes a gun, who may have it and in which circumstances it can be used. That would apply not simply to those in responsible, properly regulated firearms clubs, but to those in pest and vermin control; to officers of the law, whether they worked for the Ministry of Defence, the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority or the police; and to our constabularies. It is not for the justice secretary to give a policy direction; it is for Parliament to set out a legislative position that would then be enforced by the police and the law officers. The criteria for the deployment of Tasers in Strathclyde state that Tasers are to be deployed "Where the authorising officer has reason to suppose that they, in the course of their duty, may have to protect the public, themselves and/or the subject(s) at incidents of violence or threats of violence of such severity that they will need to use force." The Liberal Democrats may wish to get hung up on the argument that Tasers should be used only where a firearm—a rifle or whatever—would have been used, but that seems to be limiting their proportionate and legitimate use, which is backed up by the statistics that I have just cited.

If the Liberal Democrats want to legislate on firearms, they should support the devolution of powers—we must go beyond Calman to devo max, or independence. The body to which the chief constable is accountable is the Strathclyde police authority. I hope that Mr Kelly has spoken to the Strathclyde police authority, not simply to a beat officer in Strathclyde. I have the utmost regard for the outgoing convener of the Strathclyde police authority, Paul Rooney, and he has not raised the issue with me. I recognise that Mr Curran is only just in situ, given the difficulties and expenses that appear to have arisen in relation to a variety of other matters and the chair shuffling that has gone on in Strathclyde, but I have received no communication on the matter from Mr Curran either. I would have thought that, if the matter was of such concern to Labour members, the Labour convener—either outgoing or incoming—would have raised it with me. The on-going discussion between the convener of the Strathclyde police authority and the chief constable seems to leave Labour locally satisfied even if Labour in the Scottish Parliament remains dissatisfied. Some of the suggestions that Labour members have made seek to impinge on the separation of powers. We are all proud of our police in this country. They remain routinely unarmed, but there are circumstances in which we must activate the use of armed officers—that is proportionate and legitimate. That encompasses the use of Tasers as well as pepper and mace spray, which are necessary in dealing with some of the individuals that our police officers have to deal with. We must have greater trust and faith in our police. We must challenge the problem of firearms in our country, and the solution is to ensure that the Scottish Parliament has the powers to do that, not simply the opportunity to publish press releases.

I made it quite clear that the police authority is the first port of call, and I have not been approached by the police authority. Has the member approached the police authority to discuss the issue?

Is the member suggesting that I should direct which officers are included and be involved in their training?

The police in Scotland do an excellent job in often difficult and sometimes dangerous circumstances. I think that everyone in the chamber would agree with that. The safety of police officers is pivotal to making our communities safer and stronger. We will not endanger them or jeopardise their safety, or the safety of others. Tasers are an accepted and proportionate method of providing for the safety of officers and citizens. It is not acceptable that our officers should have to endure a high level of assault and it is understandable and acceptable that police forces would want to trial new approaches to address that issue. That is why I am happy to accept the amendment that was lodged by the Conservatives.

We have made our position quite clear: Tasers are a proportionate method of providing for the safety of officers and citizens; they are classified under firearms legislation; they are used to try to negate the requirement to use proper firearms; and decisions about their use are operational matters. Having listened to the member's speech, I think that he wants the Government to intervene in police matters in a way that would be entirely unacceptable and which would breach the tripartite arrangement in ways that I will explain later. Firearms are a reserved matter. I have made my position clear on that issue and have repeatedly pressed the United Kingdom Government for full devolution of those powers. At the firearms summit that we hosted in 2008, there was a consensus  that current firearms legislation is far too complex, difficult for the police to enforce and difficult for the public to understand. In order to be effective, the legislation needs to be completely overhauled and it is my view that that can be properly done and tailored to the needs of Scotland's communities only by this Parliament. The Liberal Democrats may make sedentary comments, but if they want this Parliament to have powers over Tasers, they must agree that this Parliament should have powers over firearms or, at least, air weapons.

No, and in that regard, this Government shares the view of ACPOS, the Scottish Police Federation and the Scottish police authorities conveners forum. I know of no one who argues for a fully armed police force. However, everyone accepts that firearms are necessary and that we need to have armed response units in Strathclyde and elsewhere. Such matters are operational decisions and are left to the chief constables. The Calman commission recommended that the powers over air-guns be devolved to Scotland, but that did not go far enough. The matter that we are debating today is another example of why we want all powers over firearms to be devolved. Since the matter is a reserved responsibility, this Parliament has no locus to intervene, and the decision about how best to apply the existing legislation is an operational matter for each police force. I understand that Strathclyde Police's decision to hold the pilot in two particular areas arose from the need to find a way of combating the high number of assaults on officers in those areas. The pilot involves only officers in Strathclyde Police, and is principally of concern to communities in the Strathclyde area. Of course, the primary responsibility for overseeing Strathclyde Police and holding the force to account lies with the Strathclyde police authority, which I have no doubt contains Liberal Democrat members. I am sure that the authority will consider carefully the results of the pilot, which I understand will be fully evaluated by Strathclyde Police. The deployment and use of Tasers is an operational matter for chief constables. That statement has been heard many times in this chamber, having been made by both the current Administration and the previous one, but there are good grounds for it being repeated. Under section 5(1)(b) of the Firearms Act 1968, Tasers are  defined as firearms. As we are all aware, firearms legislation is reserved.

I see no reason why we would seek to change the situation, but that matter would be debated in the Parliament. There is good reason why Tasers would remain firearms, given that, like air-guns, they are weapons. Mr Harvie fails to take into account the nature of the relationship between Government and the police in Scotland, which involves a tripartite arrangement between Scottish ministers, the chief constable, and the police authority. That structure has provided the bedrock of accountability for the police service for many years. The chief constable alone is responsible for police operations in his force, and he is accountable to his board. If people—including local members—have concerns, their first port of call should be Strathclyde police authority, which should seek to liaise on and deal with those matters. When I was in opposition, I would have opposed the suggestion that the Government should give directions to a police force, and I certainly would not seek to implement such a policy now that I am in government. I would have hoped that all those who seek to maintain democratic accountability for our police would accept that the Lord Advocate is the only person who has the powers to give direction to the police on criminal matters. The chief constable deploys his officers and other resources as he sees fit, using his discretion, but he must be responsible for and accountable to the police authority. I am happy to support the Conservative amendment to our amendment. I move amendment S3M-5808.2, to leave out from "is concerned" to end and insert: "recognises that firearms legislation is reserved and that Strathclyde Police is entitled to exercise operational discretion over the use of Tasers under this reserved legislation and notes the role of local police authorities and joint boards in scrutinising Scottish police forces".

I am happy to make our position clear. Mr Brown correctly pointed out that Tasers are classified as firearms. The Government supports the devolution of powers over all firearms, including air weapons. In those circumstances, the issue would become the responsibility of the Parliament but, until then, it remains the responsibility of Westminster.

The debate has been remarkably consensual, which is rather unusual for a debate on justice policy. The tone was set by the convener's speech and indeed by the nature of the report—that was mentioned by the likes of Christina McKelvie. I do not wish to detract from that, because it is important that we recognise that there are underlying social problems that we have to address. Bill Aitken was correct to say that, in many instances, the problems of female prisoners are a microcosm of the problems in the prison system. That said, they are usually worsened, heightened or accentuated by a variety of factors, in terms of number, of nature or of external circumstances, be they children or otherwise. I am grateful to Robert Brown for his comments about the performance of staff. Although Brigadier Monro made some challenging comments regarding Cornton Vale that will have to be addressed, there is uniform acceptance that the current staff work remarkably hard and do an excellent job with people who can be very demanding and difficult even if we have, in some circumstances, the utmost sympathy for them. It would be remiss of me not to make some comments on the basis that we recognise that the SPS and the Government need to do more. We certainly accept that. Equally, it would be remiss of me if I did not make the point that more in means more to be done, which exacerbates the challenges. More prisoners means more prisons, and the many things that require funding cannot be magicked out of fresh air. If we want to do some of those things, we have to recognise that alleviating the pressure is the right thing to do, that mandatory sentences might not be appropriate, and that we should consider those on short sentences, unless they need to be there. Johann Lamont will be glad to know that I am a great supporter of Sheriff Raeburn and her right to send  people to prison for periods of less than six months if she thinks that it is important to do that. That is why it remains. The committee report and many speakers in the debate mentioned the benefit of the system that operates in the prison in Belfast. We agree that it is good, but on Monday 8 February 2010, the female population at Hydebank Wood, Belfast, was 36—21 convicted, 13 on remand and two immigration detainees. Last night, the population at Cornton Vale was 373. We also have a wing at HMP Gateside in Greenock that houses women prisoners. It is clear that things have to be done and that we have challenges to rise to. There are facilities in Cornton Vale for access for children, even if they are not ideal, on which Brigadier Monro has commented. However, there is a significant difference in how one can deal with the wants of female prisoners, especially those with children, when the prisoner population is one tenth of the population that we have here. Not only is the population in Cornton Vale 10 times that of Hydebank Wood, but we have another prison that takes female prisoners. We recognise the challenges, but others should recognise that unless we make some underlying changes, we may strive to do more, but we will not be able to do more, except at great cost.

First, we must try to stop the numbers increasing. Many people, including Elaine Smith, acknowledge that the numbers keep rising. Dr Simpson may laugh, but the fact is that the numbers rose under his watch and they are rising under ours. Action has to be taken. The committee accepts that some change has to be made, because the system is not working. We recognise the great benefit of the 218 centres, which are appropriate for cities such as Glasgow. There are funding constraints and such centres could not necessarily be replicated elsewhere. As I said, we are taking steps to ensure that we have facilities at HMP Aberdeen and HMP Inverness. That will come at a cost. It will cost the Scottish Prison Service £300,000 to undertake improvements and provide staff for Inverness and Aberdeen. That is at a time when there are significant pressures on resources. I do not need to use the famous quote about how much we are being hammered by cuts from elsewhere. That is the money that we are putting in to try to deliver. If we want to make the changes, we have to provide the staff who are doing an excellent job with some room for manoeuvre.  It was recognised uniformly throughout the chamber that we have to rise to the significant challenge of mental health. Some people would be better treated elsewhere. That is why we recognise that we need to ensure that the prison health service is integrated with the national health service.

I regret that Dr Simpson, who was not present during the debate, came in simply to make excuses.

If Dr Simpson wants to tackle such matters, perhaps he should stick to his principles on alcohol, as opposed to going full circle on where he stands on minimum pricing. One of the major factors that is resulting in an increase in the number of women prisoners, and especially in remanded women prisoners, is alcohol abuse and the violence and disturbance that follow. There is such a thing as a ladette culture, as it is referred to on the television. One of the ways of tackling that is not to lock up these women for longer or to put them in for three weeks or less, but to tackle the availability of the cheap hooch that is fuelling so much disorder in our communities among the female population as well as among the male population. I am conscious of the time, Presiding Officer. We recognise the challenges that we have to rise to around mental health, and those around the particular needs and wants of women who are doing community payback. The problem is often lack of child care, rather than them not being capable of some of the work schemes. The point to end on is one that Margaret Mitchell raised. Something is fundamentally wrong when we are incarcerating more and more prisoners, and we know that those prisoners who have children have an increased chance of seeing their children, too, coming into the system, generation after generation, under Dr Simpson's watch or under ours. It is time to change, and that is why we welcome the committee's report.

Can the member tell us how many additional female prisoners he anticipates there will be if mandatory sentencing is brought in, or are they all to be viewed as exceptional cases?

I welcome the debate and the findings of the report by the Equal Opportunities Committee, "Female offenders in the criminal justice system". I also welcome the committee's convener's fair and balanced points. I thank the committee for its comprehensive and balanced report, which reflects many of the key issues that we have identified for improving management of women offenders both in prison and in the community. We must improve access to health services for those women in order that we meet their wide-ranging and—as Margaret Mitchell pointed out—complex needs. We can provide better learning opportunities to enable them to improve their literacy, numeracy and employability skills so that they can move on in their lives. We should also do more for women on short-term sentences and for those who are held on remand, so that they can be better engaged in productive activities, and we must provide better support for women who are leaving prison to help them to reintegrate into the community. The SPS and the governor of Cornton Vale have said that they recognise the challenges that have  been set for them by Her Majesty's inspectorate of prisons. It is appropriate that people also realise the challenges that they face and the comments that the governor made about the difficulties that they face because of the number of short-term prisoners. This issue is not about providing better treatment to women than we do to men; it is about delivering equality of outcomes for the women who for many reasons find themselves in the criminal justice system or participating in interventions that were historically designed around the needs of men—a point that was made by Margaret Mitchell. We need to work harder to deliver better services and equality of outcomes for women, even with the current pressures of the increased prison population. Her Majesty's Prison Cornton Vale was opened in the 1970s to provide a central belt prison for women. It has a design capacity for a population of 375. The number of women offenders in prison has risen sharply and disproportionately. Although still a very small proportion of the total prisoner population, the number of women prisoners has almost doubled over the past 10 years—even though—as some people will be sick of hearing me say—we have the lowest recorded crime in almost 25 years. The daily population now hovers around 400, and we also have women prisoners at Gateside in Greenock. Over that same period, the number of women who have been convicted of assault and drug offences has also risen. That is deeply concerning and I have consequently commissioned research to obtain comprehensive and current data on the factors that are driving that rise in the women prisoners population. It would be remiss of me not to point out that the historic view that the problem is all to do with drugs is now being balanced out by an understanding of the increasing problem that is caused by abuse of alcohol. Our understanding of the needs of women in the criminal justice system has improved in recent years. As the committee pointed out, women offenders are more likely to be parents of children in care, so the impact on the next generation is disproportionately high. Margaret Mitchell pointed out the shameful facts around the number of children of women offenders who go on to become prisoners themselves. We have to break that cycle of crime. The links between women's offending and experience of difficult relationships, violence and abuse are well established. Many women in prison are to be pitied, even though, in many instances, they must also be punished. The health problems of women offenders are recognised to be more complex and wide-ranging than those of men. I understand and share the concern of the Equal Opportunities Committee at  the prevalence of diagnosable mental health problems in prison. That is a matter that afflicts all the prison estate—it is gender neutral. However, there is a significantly higher proportion of people with diagnosable mental health problems in Cornton Vale than there is in many other prisons, and there are often clear links to abuse that those women have experienced in the past.

I am saying that there are many people in our prison system—male and female, young and old—who have mental health problems. I am also saying that there are greater numbers of those people in the women's prisons than in the men's prisons. However, all prisons have problems with mental health issues. I do not know whether that clarifies matters for the member.

I find it difficult to explain. In a nutshell, for the benefit of Mr O'Donnell and Ms Lamont, who clearly has problems herself with what I am saying, male prisoners and female prisoners suffer from mental health issues, but women suffer disproportionately more. I do not know whether that can be any clearer. Many of the health issues that are experienced by women offenders are linked to drug addiction and—as I and other members of the cabinet will never hesitate to point out—abuse of alcohol. We are tackling those issues across all portfolios, and seek the support of all parties in that regard.

I do not know whether Johann Lamont has yet managed to visit Cornton Vale—I know that she was a minister for a shorter time than I have been one. From my numerous visits there, I understand that the issue is not simply that many of the women have mental health problems. As Margaret Mitchell pointed out, such problems are compounded by the fact that many female offenders have addiction problems or have been the victims of domestic violence or of violence and abuse in their childhood. Some mental illnesses are more clearly diagnosable than others, and such problems often relate to other  matters. For example, alcohol or drug addiction fuels and causes mental health problems, but can also mask them. I am encouraged by the high uptake by women of the less intensive version of the drug treatment and testing order that is currently being piloted in Lothian and Borders. It is targeted at women and young offenders who tend to have less extensive criminal histories than their male counterparts. The programme to bring prisoner health care into the national health service is a major initiative that will allow prisoners to be treated in one system and will ensure continuity of care for males and females who are leaving prison. The committee expressed a desire for that to happen earlier, but it is a complex project that needs—as I am sure members agree—to be planned and executed well to ensure that when it kicks in, it works smoothly and appropriately. We are continuing to improve engagement between the justice and health sectors at national and local levels in order to provide offenders with equal access to mainstream services. The community justice authorities are working hard to encourage health and justice services to work together in the community to ensure that offenders' needs are addressed. Offender health issues will be included in the remit of the reconvened ministerial task force on health inequalities. Our objectives to reduce reoffending and improve public health are interwoven. My cabinet colleagues are committed to ensuring that health and other issues that affect women in the justice system are addressed, which will include taking joint action to follow up the recently published report of the independently chaired offender learning working groups. We will seek to ensure that learning, skills and employability opportunities can be maximised for women offenders. Improvement of literacy and numeracy skills will be a priority, and we are ensuring that the tools that are introduced to facilitate identification of needs are gender appropriate. Women offenders can be at their most vulnerable at points of transition, so agencies must get better at co-ordinating support for women who are leaving prison or completing community orders so that the good work to address needs and to motivate women to take charge of their lives is not lost. It is crucial that any interventions to address complex needs are tailored to the individual. Throughout the committee's inquiry there has been much debate about the pros and cons of community-facing prisons as opposed to a national establishment. Although a specialist women's prison such as Cornton Vale is essential for some women, being close to home and  maintaining links with family and with community-based services can offer benefits for women in terms of reintegrating them back into the community from which they came. I have therefore asked the Scottish Prison Service to work with the northern community justice authority and other partner agencies to enable a small number of prisoners who are serving short sentences, or long-term prisoners who are nearing the end of their sentences and who are willing and have been assessed as suitable, to move from Cornton Vale to Inverness and Aberdeen. That will locate them nearer to home and allow access to, and engagement with, services in the community. That work will inform delivery of our longer-term strategy for management of women offenders and their transition back into the community. It will also inform the piloting of the new community-facing prison regime that has been planned for HM Prison Grampian in Peterhead. I have announced additional funding of £100,000 for each community justice authority to provide additional capacity as further investment to support women offenders and reduce their risk of reoffending. Progress continues to be made in relation to the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill on the provisions for the new community payback order, which can and must be tailored to meet the specific needs of individual female offenders. I look forward to the debate and I welcome the Equal Opportunities Committee's contribution and the manner in which it was delivered by the committee's convener.

The reforms have made a significant contribution to the delivery of summary criminal justice. Nationally, good use is being made of direct measures for low-level offences, meaning that they are dealt with swiftly and without the need to take up valuable time in the courts. Cases that proceed to court are now being dealt with more quickly. We are also seeing more pleas of guilty at pleading diet, which means that victims and witnesses in those cases avoid the stress of a court case. However, although good progress is being made, there is still scope to improve efficiency and effectiveness in the summary courts and work is on-going at national and local level.

No, I do not agree. The summary justice reforms that Mr Kelly seems to be so staggered by and aghast at were first begun under the previous Labour-Liberal Administration. As with so many matters, Labour in government says one thing and does nothing, but in opposition takes the contrary position. I refer the member to the Solicitor General for Scotland's evidence at the meeting of the Justice Committee that Mr Kelly attended, which showed that a far higher percentage—60 per cent—of fiscal fines are being paid now compared with the 40 per cent that were paid before the summary justice reforms. We are implementing the reforms; progress is being made; and Labour remains with its soundbites, having done nothing while in  government and saying something completely different when in opposition.

Absolutely. In this matter, I must stand by the fine words of Hugh Henry. He is not here today to stand up for himself, but when he was the Deputy Minister for Justice he made it clear how ridiculous the proposal was. That said, I note that with regard to its own proposal, Labour is now talking about exceptional circumstances relating to both the offender and the offence. How is that any different from the current law? Hugh Henry ruled out the proposal when Labour was in government but, yet again, when in opposition Labour tries to score cheap political points and refuses to address the fundamental issue of the booze-and-blades culture that my predecessor highlighted. Labour talks tough about blades, but it did nothing about them when it was in power. As for booze, it is now doing nothing to tackle the real problem of the availability of cheap drink.

The Government is giving careful consideration to the recommendations that Lord Cullen made in his report "Review of Fatal Accident Inquiry Legislation". Many of his recommendations have practical implications for  the Scottish Court Service and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, and the Government will liaise closely with those bodies in identifying how the recommendations should be implemented.

Patricia Ferguson said that Lord Cullen recommended preliminary hearings. That would have implications for the operation of the Scottish Court Service and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. We instructed Lord Cullen to carry out the review because we are aware, as the Crown Office is aware, of the difficulties with FAIs, one of which is delays, and we are seeking to address those, but the courts have to rise to the occasion in the current situation and deal with cases quicker. We are discussing the proposals for preliminary hearings with those who are in charge of the Court Service, given the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008, and with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, which initiates fatal accident inquiries in the public interest.

Bob Doris raises two matters. We have had the opportunity to meet him and his constituent. The issues around the death of Scottish citizens abroad are extremely complex. Lord Cullen makes it clear that in normal jurisdictions, where there are procedures for such circumstances, matters would be dealt with there. Equally, there are countries in which circumstances are more difficult, and the Crown Office might have difficulty in gaining  access, therefore Lord Cullen has raised the point that we should be able to consider those cases. How the Foreign and Commonwealth Office deals with such cases is another issue. That matter is reserved to Westminster, but the local consulate or embassy has a significant role, especially in dealing with the clear and immediate needs of bereaved relatives. We are more than happy to liaise with the United Kingdom Government on that, because it is appropriate not only to find out the cause of death and the lessons that can be learned but to provide for those who are grieving at the time. The front-line officers abroad are not from the Crown Office in Scotland, they are embassy and consulate officials, so that matter rests with the UK Government.

We have seen the excellent work that people who are on community service have been doing clearing snow in the recent winter months. That type of work demonstrates clearly the potential for work by offenders in the community.  In doing so, they do something necessary, rather than getting free bed and board in prison and giving nothing back to the communities that they have harmed. However, flooding is a different situation from snow clearing. Although local authority community service teams assist with emergency situations, flooding management is highly skilled and potentially dangerous and is under the control and command of the police and fire and rescue services.

Absolutely. The Government is keen that, as I said, people should not be given free bed and board. They should be locked up when they are a danger to the community and have committed serious offences that merit that but, other than that, they should pay back the harm that they have done and make our communities safer and better.

Christine Grahame ably laid out the purposes of the bill, which has received uniform support across the chamber. As Michael  McMahon said, there are legitimate matters that will have to be teased out—that will be the committee's purpose—but I think that everybody supports the points that Christine Grahame made. Possessing a dog is not a right; it is a privilege. It is not a matter of being anti-dog. We have heard numerous jokes and anecdotes, but, sadly, tragedies occur. Related legislation has been passed as far back as the 19 th century. Even during my time as a practising agent, three related bills were introduced because the existing provisions were not fit for purpose. Those pieces of legislation have been referred to. It seems to me that Christine Grahame has managed to address a lacuna in the law. There are matters that must be addressed, but the bill strikes a balance. We should not interfere with people enjoying the company of a dog and the responsibility that goes with having a dog, never mind people's need for working dogs in rural and other areas. Equally, we must remember, as Christine Grahame pointed out, that there have been 800-odd reported attacks that have affected people at work and in their own homes. That is tragic and is why we must tackle the matter. The bill seems to us to be a proportionate response to deal with the issues that we face. As I have said, points have been made that will have to be teased out. Ms Grahame will doubtless mention those in summing up, and they will be considered further. Members, including Michael McMahon, have, correctly, mentioned costs. In my opening speech, I said that it appears that there is a dispute about costs between councils. Scottish Borders Council seems to think that significant costs will be incurred, but Dundee City Council seems to think that the bill will simply give it additional powers to take action, and that it will operate within the framework that it currently uses. If the bill is passed, we will be happy to discuss such matters with local authorities, but it seems to us that additional funding will not be required. There is certainly no available funding at present. Our view is that Dundee City Council's suggested approach is appropriate. David McLetchie rightly raised in committee the issue of corroboration, which Christine Grahame has addressed, and which can be further teased out. We are talking about a civil penalty that will have criminal consequences if it is breached. Corroboration will be required not at the instance of the imposition of the initial civil penalty, but with respect to whether the criminal penalty has been issued. Such matters arise in various other walks of life. It is clear that we must ensure that the legislation is appropriate so that those who breach it can be held to account and can face appropriate  punishment. We recognise that corroboration is required for the latter purpose. Mr McLetchie made the valid point that some people who have a propensity to be on the receiving end of notices might be people who cause alarm to others in the community. If the question is whether corroboration can be dealt with by wardens or officers, that seems to us an appropriate matter to consider. On the question of a database, we believe that the committee and others are correct to argue that a national database is not necessarily appropriate. We have to consider what such a database would be for, who would access it, why they would access it, and what they would do with the information. It is clear that appropriate information should be available. As far as I am aware, most police forces have a database, because, whether they meet the 17-stone Japanese dogs that Christopher Harvie mentioned or any other dogs, they require to know whether a household has a weapon, such as a shotgun, or a dangerous dog. Such information is already taken on board by the police and other authorities. However, who else would access the information on a national database, and why? If somebody who should not hold a dog was doing so, what would we do about it? We do not rule out using the benefits of modern technology, but we have to work out a system that is not unduly bureaucratic and does not simply result in increased costs, given that the question of costs appears to be significant to some councils. We also have to work out what we would do with the information. We are genuinely open-minded on the issue, and the details can be discussed and debated by the committee. It simply falls to me to say that we are grateful to Christine Grahame for bringing the bill to the Parliament and that it seems to us that it should be supported at stage 1. There are matters that have to be further teased out, but there is a gap in the law and the bill will improve the situation.

There are two issues. The first was raised by Mr McMahon, who asked what the costs of the bill will be. We stand behind Dundee City Council, which says that they can be  soaked up. Scottish Borders Council says that that is not the case, but our view is that some councils have expressed their ability to deal with the matter and so should others. The second issue is a matter of debate between Strathclyde Police and local authorities, and discussions on what should happen continue between COSLA and the police forces. As I said, there are two issues. The second is a matter of discussion and negotiation. The first issue requires further consideration and the committee will doubtless touch on it.

I thank Christine Grahame and the non-Executive bills unit for their work. Like other members, I commend Alex Neil on laying the foundations for the bill and thank the members and clerks who were involved in preparing the stage 1 report. The Scottish Government welcomes the policy objective of the bill, which is to make our communities safer by enabling effective preventive action to be taken against dogs that are out of control. The creation of a dog control notice regime will encourage dog owners to take responsibility for the actions of their dogs. Under the bill, authorised officers will be able to issue a dog owner with a dog control notice if their dog is found to be out of control. Such notices will be civil notices, but it will be possible to prosecute dog owners if they breach the terms of a notice. Before a dog control notice can be issued, the dog in question must be deemed to be out of control. We are aware that some concern has been expressed about the definition of "out of control" in section 1. The out of control test is a two-part test, both parts of which must be met. In  our view, the two-part test is satisfactory. However, we note that the stage 1 report suggests that the bill is "too imprecise" on exactly what constitutes "reasonable alarm or apprehensiveness" in the test. In their evidence, some people complained about the inclusion in the test of a reference to a dog's "size and power". It will be interesting to hear views on that during the debate. There has been some discussion regarding the costs of the new dog control notice regime. The main responsibilities under the proposed regime will fall on local authorities, as Duncan McNeil mentioned. In their stage 1 evidence, some local authorities indicated that existing dog wardens would take on the role of authorised officer without any new costs being incurred. Others disagreed, suggesting that higher costs would result from employing and training new staff. Our position is that the new dog control notice regime is designed to be a preventive regime. We do not expect thousands and thousands of dog control notices to be issued every week. We hope that local authorities will be able to act like Dundee City Council has done. In its evidence on the proposed new regime, it said: "the costs can be absorbed."—[ Official Report, Local Government and Communities Committee , 18 November 2009; c 2667.] Should the new responsibilities, once implemented, give rise to a request from local government for extra central Government resources, discussions would have to take place in accordance with the concordat with COSLA and local authorities.

You can have it as "historic" if you want. Anyway, those discussions would have to take place. I can tell Mr McLetchie—Mr McNeil referred to this—that we are conscious of the divergence of views on the matter. Dundee City Council might have problems in some areas, as is the case elsewhere, but that authority feels that the matter can be dealt with under the existing regime. It seems to the Government that if Dundee City Council can deal with such matters, other local authorities, too, should be capable of addressing them using current resources. The bill seeks to amend the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, as Christine Grahame said, so that it will be an offence for a person to allow a dog to be  dangerously out of control in "any place". We recognise that that gap in the law has to be addressed. Currently, as Christine Grahame emphasised, a dog owner is liable only if their dog is dangerously out of control "in a public place". It is right and appropriate that dog owners are held accountable for their dogs both in public and in private, and we welcome the change. For those reasons, we are happy to support the bill at stage 1.

The Scottish Police Services Authority is currently engaging with its customers and stakeholders on the future delivery of police forensic services. I expect the SPSA to present final recommendations for my consideration in the summer.

I am extremely surprised by Mr Macdonald's attitude. The previous criticism was that there had been a rush to make a judgment and that a decision had been taken without proper consultation. We are now in a position in which a process of full consultation and discussion—with Mr Macdonald or anyone else—is under way. The member is a victim of his own success. He wished there to be consultation; consultation is taking place and we will not rush to make a judgment. He should welcome that—after all, it is what he asked for.

Absolutely. Account must be taken of those factors. It is clear that financial matters must be considered—we must achieve best value—but the need to protect our communities by ensuring that we prosecute the people who perpetrate crime is at the root of the current process. In addition to Mr Macdonald and the people who work in the labs, another major stakeholder, as Mr Adam well knows, is the chief constable of Grampian Police, which is why we will take on board his views, which clearly have great significance.

We are intent on creating the Scottish crime campus. I am surprised by Mr Macintosh's view; his colleague Mr Baker seems to criticise us for not yet having it constructed. Planning permission has been granted, work is on-going and it is expected that the campus, which will obviously be the state of the art, will be opened in 2012. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, the chief constable of Strathclyde Police and others have welcomed it. We want to ensure that communities throughout Scotland—not only in Grampian—are safe, especially those in Strathclyde, where we have significant problems.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that children are protected from sexual abuse. We will continue to work with police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service to ensure that those who commit sexual offences against children are brought to justice.

I do not think that the priority should necessarily be further research. I would be happy to meet Robin Harper to explain the position and I explain to the chamber that we believe that it is not simply about the number of convictions—there is a variety of matters to consider. Operation algebra was remarkably successful and was testimony to the effectiveness of the prosecution service and the police, in particular. Through it, offenders were charged with serious sexual offences—and rightly so. The Crown Office made that judgment on the basis of the heinous nature of the offences. It is not necessarily the case that action is not being taken; it is simply that sometimes a more serious charge is recorded, which does not necessarily mean that the offenders are not also charged with the specific  statutory offences to which Robin Harper referred. Action is taken, but sometimes the more serious charge is what is recorded. We always monitor the situation to ensure that the legislation is being used as effectively as possible. However, if it would be of assistance, I would be happy to meet Robin Harper to explain the rationale behind the Crown Office's decisions and how they are recorded. Although the number of prosecutions under the 2005 act is not great, action is continuously being taken to protect our children. After all, that is one of the major raisons d'être of any government of any political colour.

Those matters are, fundamentally, for the Crown Office and the police. We are delighted that Mr Yates has been brought to justice. It will be for the court to decide what sentence is imposed. Orders for lifelong restriction now exist: we believe that they are an important tool. We do not comment on individual cases, but judges who impose orders for lifelong restriction because they feel that that is appropriate will have the full support of the Government. I understand that orders for lifelong restriction did not exist when Mr Yates's previous sentence was imposed. It is now for the judiciary to decide what to do in his case.

The Scottish Government consulted widely on its proposals for sentencing reform and a number of women's organisations participated in the consultation process. In preparation for the publication of the sentencing council consultation, my officials met representatives of Scottish Women's Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and Victim Support Scotland to discuss our plans for the council and the work that it might do. In implementing our proposals on the sentencing council, the community payback order and the presumption against sentences of six months or less in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, we will take account of all the evidence that was submitted at stage 1 as well as the Justice Committee's report.

All those organisations are key stakeholders. We speak to them on a variety of subjects and particularly on one that is so critical to them. I remind the member that the proposal is a presumption against sentences of six months or less. Why is it a presumption? Because we recognise that there are instances in which somebody should get a sentence of six months or less. Equally, there are some cases where people should get a significantly longer sentence. That will remain, correctly, a matter for the judiciary. I have had discussions with those who operate in the domestic abuse court in Glasgow, such as fiscals, representatives of victims and police officers. In particular, Sheriff Raeburn has persuaded me of the merit that she sees in being able, in some instances, not to give somebody probation but to give them a short, sharp shock, which might be a sentence of less than six months, albeit that in many instances those who perpetrate domestic violence should get considerably longer sentences. As I said, the reason why the proposal is a presumption is to give Sheriff Raeburn and her colleagues the flexibility to do what is right and take the appropriate action. That correctly remains the job of the judiciary.

It is clear from discussions that I have had with both the Crown and the police that individuals face a specific problem. Recent decisions in the High Court might well impact on the matter. The Government is looking favourably on the concept of lodging an amendment that contains some legislative provision on the matter. Clearly, we have to ensure that the small minority of people who carry out such acts, which are deeply frightening and concerning to the individuals concerned, can be brought to justice and dealt with appropriately.

The Scottish Government is clear that domestic abuse is never acceptable and we continue to work with our key partners to address its many forms. The police treat reports of domestic abuse as a matter of priority, and Strathclyde Police recently established a domestic abuse task force. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service provides specialist training for all legal staff, and it also has a dedicated specialist unit in Glasgow. Glasgow sheriff court has successfully piloted the concept of a domestic abuse court, the result of which has been the preparation of a domestic abuse toolkit, which has been shared with courts throughout Scotland.

We are happy to look at those matters. Equally, we have to recognise that all public funding faces challenges, particularly the legal aid fund. Priorities clearly have to be dealt with, and victims of domestic abuse must be protected. However, we live in a world where those who are substantially well endowed might have to meet some costs themselves. We are more than happy to consider those challenges, but we must ensure that we take action to tackle the perpetrators and protect the victims. That is why I paid tribute to the police force in Strathclyde, where particular action was taken on the day of the old firm game, because we all know that when strong drink is taken when an old firm game or any other fixture is on, some people think that it is fair to go home and batter their wife or partner. That is entirely unacceptable, and we have to take steps to ensure that we nip it in the bud. In the world in which we live, we have to prioritise the protection  of the weakest and most vulnerable, and certainly those who do not have access to funds.

The number of individuals given a custodial sentence of six months or less for a main offence with a domestic aggravator are as follows: 442 in 2005-06, 472 in 2006-07 and 540 in 2007-08.

No. Such matters are best left in the hands of the judiciary. One reason why the Government is persuaded that there should be such a presumption is the representations that have been received from the likes of Sheriff Raeburn, who does an excellent job in the domestic abuse court in Glasgow. She is quite clear that there are cases in which a sentence should be well in excess of six months, cases in which a custodial sentence is not applicable, and cases in which she wishes to give the perpetrator a short, sharp shock. I pay great tribute to the domestic abuse court in Glasgow. It is doing a remarkably good job, which is why we are seeking to roll out its benefits elsewhere. I pay particular tribute to Sheriff Raeburn and her colleagues. We should give our full support to the shrieval bench in Scotland, whose members do a good job. We should trust their judgment as they continue to take steps to protect our communities, especially the victims of domestic abuse.

The contract between the Scottish ministers and Reliance Secure Task Management Ltd for the provision of prisoner escort and court custody services in Scotland went fully live in February 2005 and expires in January 2012.

We are where we are. In opposition, we made it clear that we opposed the situation; however, Reliance is now in charge of the contract. The contract will be retendered later this year and a new contract will be awarded in 2011. As Mr Kerr might expect, it would be entirely inappropriate for me to comment on specific commercial matters. Those will be dealt with by the Scottish Prison Service, which does an excellent job in difficult circumstances. If that is Mr Kerr's view on privatisation, I wish that he would join my colleagues in thanking the Administration for taking steps to ensure that HMP Low Moss remains a public, not private, prison.

The number of recorded crimes for handling offensive weapons has dropped by 11 per cent since April 2007. Violent crime is also down 11 per cent since April 2007 and is now at its lowest level since 1986. That should come as no surprise, with a record number of police officers on the streets, record investment in activities for young people through cashback for communities and record investment in projects such as the community initiative to reduce violence, which is working with gangs in Glasgow to address the causes of violent offending.

Absolutely. I also pay tribute to my predecessor, Cathy Jamieson, who, as the Minister for Justice, coined the phrase "booze and blade culture" to describe what we have in Scotland. It is well known that, as night follows day, strong drink is taken and violence follows, whether that involves someone battering their wife or partner or stabbing and indiscriminate violence. That is entirely unacceptable. There is a clear correlation in many instances between such violence and cheap strong drink. That is why, as well as ensuring that we have a visible police presence and tough laws, those who want to talk tough in the chamber should join the Administration in being tough on the causes of crime, which include the availability and pricing of strong drink. They should support the Government's proposal for minimum pricing of alcohol to tackle the scourge of alcohol abuse and the violence that follows.

As I said earlier in the week, we have a vat of shame in Scotland that includes many strong drinks. Buckfast is up there, but a variety of cheap ciders, strong lagers and cheap vodkas all play their part in fuelling the violence. As I said in response to the earlier question, that cocktail is responsible for what my predecessor called our "booze and blade culture". We must take action to stop the abuse of alcohol and to promote responsible drinking. We must also ensure that we have responsible promotion of alcohol and responsible pricing. It is about time that we had fewer words of sympathy from Labour and more action to tackle cheap drink in our communities.

No, there are currently no plans for any change to the capacity of HM Prison Dumfries, which remains an integral part of the Scottish Prison Service estate.

Absolutely. It was a great privilege to attend once again the Prison Officers Association Scotland's annual conference in Pitlochry. I will be more than happy to meet individual officers in Dumfries. We are committed to a public sector prison service, and I hope that Dr Elaine Murray will welcome the Government's position in ensuring that HM Prison Low Moss will remain a public sector prison and will not be put into the private sector. That has been uniformly supported by the Prison Officers Association Scotland—by members based in Dumfries and in other parts of the estate.

As I said on 10 December, I have received a variety of representations over recent months regarding the release of Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi. I have received very few since that date. The First Minister and I have given evidence to the Scottish Affairs Committee about the flawed process that led to the United Kingdom Government entering into a prisoner transfer agreement with Libya.

Full reports on the medical reports that were provided by the Libyan Government appeared in many daily newspapers. It is in no doubt that this is a dying man. I have to say to Lord Foulkes that it ill befits us, in the name of humanity, to circle like vultures. Mr al-Megrahi is going to die. That is why he was released.

No. I made it quite clear when I released Mr al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds that he might die sooner or later. The evidence that the director of health and care at the Scottish Prison Service provided was that if Mr al-Megrahi remained in a Scottish prison it was likely that he would die within three months. It is a self-evident fact that he has lived beyond that. It is clear from the medical information that has been provided—and paraded across papers the length and breadth of Scotland and elsewhere—that he has been receiving chemotherapy. That was not recommended by Scottish doctors, on the  basis that it would not tackle the underlying problem. Mr al-Megrahi is doubtless receiving an increase in life expectancy at the cost of his quality of life during his last, few days.

The Scottish Prison Service works closely with partners in the criminal justice system to prevent prisoners from benefiting financially from their period in prison, through illegal activity. That close working includes the location of police liaison officers in a number of prisons and SPS headquarters, to allow a rapid and effective exchange of information between agencies. The Government has closed the legal loophole that was identified by the judgment in Somerville, to ensure that a one-year time bar exists for prisoners' compensation claims. However, we continue to face a number of historical and new human rights claims in respect of prisoners.

I am more than happy to ascertain whether SPS investigations can elucidate the situation. We have been doing cross-border work on the issue because, given the nature of the media, much requires to be dealt with on a cross-border basis. The Coroners and Justice Act 2009, which received royal assent on 12 November, will permit the recovery of profits obtained by criminals who seek to exploit their crimes, for example by publishing a memoir. The scheme is restricted to serious indictable offences and will be operated by the civil recovery unit on behalf of the Scottish ministers. That shows that the Government, in collaboration with colleagues south of the border, is anxious to ensure that people who seek to build on crimes that they perpetrated can be dealt with. I was happy to work with colleagues south of the border and I am delighted that that legislation is in place.

Two clear themes have run through the debate: community prisons and the cash to pay for them. The chamber is united in seeing community prisons as a good thing. I welcome the comments of both Nanette Milne and John Lamont on how such prisons can work towards reintegrating people—that is their whole ethos. However, there has been a great deal of cant and hypocrisy from those members whose parties were in the Executive for eight years. When they were in charge, they had an opportunity to deliver community-facing prisons. If we tally up the number of such prisons that were delivered by the Liberal-Labour Scottish Executive between 1999 and 2007—if Mr Stephen wants to interject to tell me the number, I will happily give way—we see that the number was zero.

Dr Simpson, not one community-facing prison was delivered by the Labour-Liberal Executive.

Not at the moment. The first community-facing prison will be HMP Grampian. That is the direction of travel that has been set out by the Government—

Not at the moment. HMP Grampian will be followed by HMP Highland, which will replace HMP Inverness, and HMP Inverclyde, which will replace HMP Greenock. We will deliver community-facing prisons; in eight years, the previous Executive delivered none. I give way to the member.

I give way to Nicol Stephen.

Those were the eight years in which the previous Executive failed to deliver one community-facing prison. The member cannot have it both ways.

Sorry, but Mr Simpson did not speak in the debate. The charge is that HMP Grampian is not a community-facing prison, but we have just heard criticism from the Labour benches that the prison will no longer house a specialist unit for sex offenders. What then is that prison? HMP Grampian is a community-facing prison that provides us with the opportunity to stop young men being required to go down to Polmont and to stop women offenders being required routinely to go to Cornton Vale. HMP Grampian is a community-facing prison that has been delivered by this Administration, as will be the subsequent prisons that we will deliver. The previous Executive had eight years and failed to deliver any. That takes us to the question of cash. We welcome and support the fact that we had a great deal of honesty about that from the Conservatives. I would be the first to concede that prisons could be built wherever we wanted if we were prepared to spend the money. However, Labour and Liberal Democrat members did not say where the cost of such prisons would come from. Mr Stephen thinks that we could trim the cost at the edges. Should we cut back on security? Should we perhaps make the prison a bit less secure? Is that really what he wants to suggest for Peterhead? The fact of the matter is that prisons need to be paid for, but neither Labour nor the Liberal Democrats has made any proposals on how they would fund an additional prison in addition to what the Government is spending.

No. I do not have enough time. We are investing £120 million on prison capacity each year. That is an increase of £20 million per year. We are delivering because the previous Executive failed to deliver. We are ensuring that we have a prison estate that is fit for purpose. As I said, two themes have run through today's debate: community-facing prisons and cost—

No; I am in my final minute. We all accept the need for community-facing prisons. I am glad that those who failed to deliver when they had the opportunity now recognise that. They should be a bit less churlish and more  supportive of what the Government is doing in HMP Grampian. People must realise that you pays your money and you takes your choice. As a Government, our priority is to ensure that we have a prison estate that is fit for purpose so that those who need to be in prison are detained there. It would be useful if the Opposition—in particular, the Labour Party—would support us on tackling the alcohol abuse that fills up our prisons and on dealing with the issue of short-term offenders, who get free bed and board when they should be out there clearing the snow for our old folk. You pays your money and you takes your choice. The priority of this Government, having delivered a prison estate that is fit for purpose, is to invest in new homes, new houses, new schools and new hospitals. The priority for Mr Macdonald, apparently, is to have a new prison. He can have what he wants if he does not want the Aberdeen western peripheral route, new homes and new hospitals. That might be the direction of Labour, but it is not the direction of this Government. That is why we are committed to community prisons. We will fund the prison estate that we can manage, but we are putting in millions.

Will the member explain why, when he was Deputy First Minister, the last prison to be signed off was Low Moss, which was not to be community facing but privately owned? Does he now accept that the change of position by the Government such that the prison should be publicly owned is, in fact, beneficial?

Will Richard Baker give way?

I am pleased to have this opportunity to respond to the petition about the development of HM Prison Grampian. We will be more than happy to communicate with the Public Petitions Committee and indeed with its deputy convener on the specific questions that he has asked. Community-facing prisons, which give the Scottish Prison Service the chance to work closely with local partners to deliver a joined-up sentence management regime, form a key element of our policy. That is the direction of travel that is being initiated by this Government. We are committed to public prisons, not to those that are run and operated for private profit. We are committed to moving towards community-facing prisons, and that is what we are now embarking on with HMP Grampian. I hope that the whole Parliament will unite in supporting that desire to have public community-facing prisons. We must accept that the Government is currently investing significant amounts of money to deal with the inadequate prison estate that we inherited.

We could have a prison in every community of a certain size, but we could do so only at the expense of other things. We have been debating and discussing the Aberdeen western peripheral bypass—you pays your money and you makes your choice. Mr Macdonald could tell John Swinney that he wants not a western peripheral route but a prison, but he would then have to explain that to the people. The same argument applies to every community the length and breadth of Scotland: do people want new prisons or do they want houses, homes and hospitals? Having inherited a prison estate that was unfit for purpose, we are doing what is necessary and appropriate to rebuild it. We made a commitment to keep a prison in the north-east of Scotland and we are delivering that. We said that the new prison would provide around 500 prisoner places and would be an innovative model—a community-facing prison that meets the entire prison needs for the north-east. Managing offenders who are sentenced to prison is a challenging undertaking, but our Scottish Prison Service does that with professionalism and dedication. Working with  prisoners to help them to address their risks and needs and to stop them re-offending can mean, at times, having to locate them for at least part of their sentence some distance from home. That may be because of a need for security or to give the prisoner access to services and programmes that will reduce their risk and/or the prospect of re-offending. That is effective offender management practice: we have dangerous people and not all of them can be housed in community-facing prisons. A modern prison service must always be able to manage prisoners flexibly so that it can deal swiftly and appropriately with changes in prisoner numbers; provide the most effective means of maintaining security and good order; and, most importantly, offer the right supports and interventions to protect the public and reduce re-offending. Creating community-facing prisons enables prisoners from the local area to serve their sentences, if at all possible, near the communities from which they come. At the moment, about 400 male prisoners from the Grampian area are in our prisons across Scotland with only about 130 of them in HMP Aberdeen—a prison that is years beyond its sell-by date, which makes it unfit for purpose and with no space for redevelopment. Also, around 50 women prisoners from the Grampian area are serving their sentences in the central belt. The proposed new HMP Grampian will allow prisoners from the Grampian area to serve their sentences closer to their families, the communities from which they come and the services that they need to access for their return into the community. I am delighted that our proposals enjoy considerable support from Aberdeenshire Council and others in the community. The Scottish Prison Service will work closely with the northern community justice authority to build community links and maximise the benefits that proximity to family can offer in rehabilitating offenders. I accept that some prisoners who serve sentences in HMP Aberdeen will be slightly further from home. However, in future, many more prisoners will be much closer to their communities and families than is the case at the moment. It is also definitely the case that they will be held in far more acceptable conditions. At the moment, only about one third of prisoners who come from the Grampian area serve their sentences in HMP Aberdeen. HMP Grampian will maximise the opportunity for partnership working between the Scottish Prison Service, community justice authority and partner agencies in local authorities. We all should welcome that. I believe that the new prison will give a better service than is the case at the moment and, perhaps most importantly, maximise efforts to  ensure the successful reintegration of offenders into the communities from which they come and help to break the cycle of crime and re-offending that blights many communities, whether in the city of Aberdeen and small communities in the north-east or anywhere else in Scotland.

That is an operational decision for the Scottish Prison Service, which advises me that the decision has been taken to consolidate the management of all prisoners who remain in open conditions over the festive season on one site in order to provide efficient and effective service delivery. Parts of the open estate have been closed before at this time of year, most recently Noranside in 2004. Giving prisoners home leave at Christmas has been the custom and practice of the Scottish Prison Service since the 1950s.

I have no idea how much money will be saved, but I am more than happy to pass that request to the acting chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service. James Kelly is clearly perturbed by the issue, so he will be delighted to know that home leave has been the custom and practice since the 1950s. I have the statistics for the situation since 2004. In 2005, under the Liberal-Labour Administration, 321 prisoners were given Christmas leave; in 2006, the figure was 252; in 2007, it was 318; last year, it was 211; and this year, under a Scottish National Party Administration, it will be an estimated 190. I can appreciate the great concern, but perhaps Mr Kelly can appreciate that significant progress has been made to allay his fears.

I last met Chief Constable Norma Graham of Fife Constabulary on Monday 14 December 2009. We discussed issues relevant to policing in Fife. I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate the chief constable on her success in reducing recorded crime in Fife, which in 2008-09 was down by 5 per cent, on top of a 16 per cent decrease the year before.

The matter has been the subject of inquiries by the police in Fife, and we are not aware of the matters to which the member refers. The increase in the number of offensive weapons charges last year in Fife was down to proactive policing, on which I once again congratulate the chief constable. As a result of Fife Constabulary's concerted efforts, there has already been a 40 per cent reduction this year,  which shows that the Government's action to tackle knife culture in Scotland is working. I also saw that yesterday when I visited a scheme in Barrowfield in Glasgow, where there has been a 50 per cent reduction.

Absolutely. I have seen some of those results myself in Levenmouth and elsewhere. It is quite clear that schemes such as the one in Barrowfield that I mentioned in my reply to Claire Baker are working. We need to make the big stick available to make it clear that those who persist in offending will face the full consequences and weight of the law. Equally, those youngsters who are given the opportunity to be all that they can be, to get back into education, to obtain employment and to keep themselves off the streets and out of trouble should be applauded. I congratulate the chief constable. We will roll out matters. However, members in other political parties should remember that if we are to tackle youth disturbance, we also have to address the problem of pocket money prices for alcohol, because we know that much youth offending is alcohol fuelled.

The Scottish Police Services Authority has been appointed as an agent, acting on behalf of the eight Scottish police authorities and joint police boards, for the provision of police information and communication technology services. The agency agreement will save the SPSA £3.8 million a year that would otherwise have been paid in VAT.

That would be a matter for the SPSA board. Clearly, it is doing remarkably good work in dealing with issues that require to be addressed. I will leave it to the board, Vic Emery and the interim chief executive to progress matters. I have no doubt that there are suggestions to be made, some of which could come from the Justice Committee and its convener. I also have no doubt that Vic Emery would be happy to meet briefly to discuss the variety of issues on which the SPSA board is working. Indeed, we all have a joint interest in making Scotland safer and stronger with regard to such matters.

It will add to the cost pressures on the justice budget on top of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's cuts to the Scottish Government budget, which were initially £500 million but are now apparently £800 million or more. The VAT position will be decidedly unhelpful. That said, our police and police boards are doing their best to mitigate the pressures that they, like the Government, face because of London cuts.

Matters are under way. It might be useful if the Labour Party decided on its position on many SPSA matters, given that it established the SPSA but now seems to have some doubts about its structures. I have met Vic Emery, the SPSA convener, to discuss on-going issues. I have no doubt that Mr Emery would be perfectly happy to meet Mr Baker, if he wishes to be enlightened further. The SPSA continues to do good work. Having been established under the previous Administration, it has the full support of this Government.

The previous Liberal Democrat-Labour Administration set up the task group on civic government licensing. The group included representatives from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the police and business interests. It consulted voluntary organisations and other interested parties before making the recommendation on the licensing of market operators that the bill would implement. [ Interruption. ]

However, we have received many representations and fully understand the concerns that the bill will impact on fundraising events in general. In light of those concerns, the Government will lodge amendments to the bill to retain the current exemptions for charitable and other groups.

We will lodge Government amendments to change the policy of the former Liberal-Labour Administration.

I have received a variety of representations over recent months regarding the release of Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi. I was particularly delighted to hear of the support from Nelson Mandela and I personally met Arun Gandhi, the grandson of Mahatma Gandhi, who expressed his agreement with my decision.

No, I am not able to do that, because those reports remain with the council that is charged with dealing with his release. They will be forwarded in due course and, as before, we will make them available. Lord Foulkes will know that, if we have been given the opportunity to do so, we have made everything available on the internet. The latest report has not been received, but, as previously, we will make matters fully available.

I made it clear when I made the statements to the Parliament and at St Andrew's house that the criteria for compassionate release had been met in respect of the prognosis of a life expectancy of three months in the information provided by the director of health and social care at the Scottish Prison Service. I indicated that, although that was his prognosis, these matters are not an exact science and that Mr al-Megrahi might live longer or die sooner. The position remains that the timing of someone's death is a matter of when their body fails, an accident befalls them or their maker calls them. That is, correctly, not within the domain of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. Mr al-Megrahi will die when one of those criteria is met.

The Scottish Government recognises that alcohol does not cause domestic abuse. However, we acknowledge that it is a contributing factor to the frequency and severity of abuse a victim will experience. In the 2007 evaluation of the pilot domestic abuse court in Glasgow, police identified that in 43 per cent of cases "the alleged offender had consumed enough alcohol to merit mention." The findings from the partner abuse section of the Scottish crime and justice survey 2006 also highlight the link between domestic abuse and alcohol misuse. More than 63 per cent of men and women who had experienced force said that the  perpetrator had been drinking alcohol on at least one occasion. We are clear that tough action on Scotland's drink culture will not in itself end domestic abuse, but it will greatly contribute to decreasing the risk of harm to many thousands of victims and children affected by the issue.

Absolutely. As I indicated in my answer to Ms McKelvie's first question, there is a clear correlation. As night follows day we have a culture in Scotland that my predecessor, Cathy Jamieson, referred to as a cocktail of bevvy and acts of violence. That has to be tackled. The Scottish Government has made it clear that there is a clear link between alcohol abuse and offending. That offending clearly penetrates into the home, damaging women in particular but also scarring children for years to come. It is for others in the chamber, given the opportunity to take tough action on the root accelerant that fuels so much domestic violence, to support this Government in taking action to change Scotland's unacceptable relationship with alcohol and to support minimum pricing.

These matters are work in progress. It has been a pleasure and a privilege to see the court in operation, to meet Sheriff Raeburn and those involved in the care of women victims and to meet the police officers. As Ms Craigie will be aware, the court does not cover every police  division in Glasgow, because of its size and the volume of cases, and clearly the matter is dealt with in different ways. In the recent debate in the Parliament, we fully accepted the convener of the Justice Committee's logic, albeit that he was wearing his political hat. We have to progress the matter. There is no one-size-fits-all solution. I was a practitioner for 20 years in the courts of Scotland and I have been in courts in places such as Lochmaddy, Stonehaven and Dingwall, which clearly cannot deal with a specialist domestic abuse court—that is not to say that there is no domestic abuse in the Western Isles, the north of Scotland and elsewhere. We must adopt the approach that fits and works. The action that has been taken in Glasgow has been remarkably successful. I give the commitment that I have given to Mr Aitken: we will do what is appropriate for each jurisdiction in Scotland.

Minimum pricing is one of the most effective ways of reducing alcohol misuse and harm and a broad consensus of support for the approach is building, particularly among people who see the effects of alcohol misuse every day. The University of Sheffield alcohol policy model showed clearly that the policy would bring substantial benefits in the context of health, crime and employment harms. The estimated reduction in crime includes violent crime, criminal damage and acquisitive crime. For illustrative purposes, I point out that it is estimated that a 40p minimum price, combined with a discount ban, would result in 3,200 fewer criminal offences each year, including 850 fewer violent crimes. The associated total financial value of harm reduction is estimated to be £4.7 million. I hope that all members will carefully consider the evidence and research during the passage of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.

I absolutely agree. As I said in response to Christina McKelvie, it is unfortunate that, for a far-too-significant section of Scottish society, when alcohol abuse takes place, violence follows. We must break the culture of bevvy and blade or bevy and batter the wife, which means that we must tackle alcohol abuse. A fundamental aspect of that is consideration of how alcohol can be not just promoted and consumed responsibly but priced responsibly. Instead of giving us vacuous words about talking tough on crime, some members should think about taking action on the root cause of much crime, which is that far too much alcohol is available at pocket-money prices to fuel youth disorder, whether in the Borders or elsewhere.

I heard similar arguments from the voice of WalMart when I was visiting Asda at the Jewel. People have always travelled to buy alcohol—whether to Calais or elsewhere. If minimum pricing were to be introduced in Scotland, some people might seek to do that—albeit at great cost, given the huge cost of fuel in this country as a consequence of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's levy. Let us be clear. South of the border, the chief medical officer supports minimum pricing. The solution in Scotland is not simply to repeat the vacuous and mealy-mouthed words of the supermarket industry but to take action to protect our communities from low-level antisocial behaviour and to stop the serious violent incidents that are occurring in people's homes and on the streets because of the availability of cheap drink. We have to tackle the root cause, and that means bringing in minimum pricing.

Since its introduction in April 2004, the Scottish crime recording standard has helped to provide a more uniform and victim-orientated approach to crime recording standards across Scotland. Ultimate responsibility for ensuring compliance with the SCRS lies with chief constables and is discharged by crime registrars in Scottish police forces. The development of the SCRS was reviewed by Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland in February 2008 and the recommendations from that report are being taken forward by the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, in liaison with the Scottish Government.

There is greater recording, which is to be welcomed. That is why Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary seeks to ensure that the good practice that operates in some jurisdictions is rolled out. It is clear and is accepted that domestic violence is perpetrated against males, but we must always take cognisance of the fact that it is clear that domestic violence and violence against partners is almost invariably—90 per cent and more—perpetrated by men against women. That is not to downplay the incidence of domestic violence against men or the undoubted trauma for the individuals, but we would do well to remember that it is primarily perpetrated by men against women.

No. That is primarily a matter of contractual law between those who own and those who use such private car parks. However, we are aware that the High Court concluded in 1992 that wheel clamping on private land amounted to theft and that the demand for payment of a release fee amounted to extortion. Therefore, wheel clamping is not an option available to private car park owners to enforce fines.

I share Irene Oldfather's concerns. If there is any harassment or abuse, that is a matter for the police. The Government would give full support to the police in dealing quite severely with anybody who sought to intimidate people, whether low-income families or the elderly. I am bemused by the terms of the contract that Irene Oldfather described and fines that increase in such a way. It is a matter of getting legal advice, because it seems to me that, in many instances, such contracts are not enforceable and cannot be successfully pursued.

Is James Kelly saying that there would be no exception to Labour's mandatory sentence for knife crime? If not, will he please define what the exceptions would be?

Will the member give way?

I begin by thanking members of the Justice Committee and their clerking team for their work in preparing the stage 1 report, which was published a couple of weeks ago, on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. The bill includes provisions on more than 80 topics. In the time available this morning, I can cover only some of the key parts of the bill, although I am sure that many parts will get a mention during the debate. Tackling the scourge of serious organised crime in our communities has been one of the Government's top priorities. That is why the serious organised crime task force was established. We are determined to tackle those who take part in serious organised crime at all levels, from the generals at the top, to their lieutenants, down to the foot soldiers and the fixers who turn a blind eye to the illegal dealings of their clients. We welcome the committee's strong support for the intentions underlying the serious organised crime provisions in sections 25 to 28. Equally, we recognise the concerns expressed by the committee and others about the definitions contained in some of those sections. Although some consider that the definitions are too wide, by its very nature, serious organised crime is wide ranging and evolving. From trafficking and peddling drugs that bring misery to our communities, to lower-level but high-volume crime, serious organised crime comes in many forms. That is why the definitions may have to be wide ranging. In his stage 1 evidence, Chief Constable Stephen House of Strathclyde Police said: "If we tighten ... too much we will miss issues and new crimes. Criminals might even exploit the definition to ensure that activity does not fall within the definition of 'serious organised crime'".—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 26 May 2009; c 1906.] We need to keep one step ahead and be able to anticipate the next form of criminality. However, the definitions need to be appropriate, and we are continuing to consider them with a view to lodging amendments at stage 2.  The scope of the "failure to report" offence in section 28 has caused some concern. Let me be clear: we are not trying to criminalise people who inadvertently discover during the course of their employment that another person may be involved in serious organised crime. Equally, however, we are clear that the offence must capture those people in professional occupations who knowingly contribute to and profit from the ends of serious organised criminals or who are used as fixers. The law should come down hard on them, and that is why section 28 is in the bill. Following the work of Lord Coulsfield's independent review, the bill includes provisions that will establish a statutory regime for disclosure of evidence in criminal trials. That statutory regime is crucial, as it will provide certainty for all those involved in the court process about which arrangements should be followed in that important area and will help to uphold justice for all. We are pleased that the Justice Committee is generally content with the shape and content of the disclosure provisions. However, concerns have been expressed that some provisions are too complex and that others are too detailed. Although we want provisions that provide certainty and clarity for practitioners and accused persons, it is not our intention to impose an unnecessary burden on the police and prosecutors or to create an inflexible system. Disclosure is a simple duty to understand but a complex subject for which to legislate. Attempts to set out the duty in a simple form often miss critical elements. That said, we accept the concerns that the provisions are too complex, and that is why we will seek to amend the bill at stage 2 to simplify the provisions and to ensure that they are both comprehensive and well understood. The bill takes forward our manifesto commitment to establish a Scottish sentencing council, which will have the power to develop sentencing guidelines to help to improve consistency, transparency and public confidence in sentencing. We are pleased that the committee expressed support for our aim to improve consistency in sentencing and recognised the need to tackle the poor public perception of sentencing. People have the right to understand why a particular sentence has been given in a specific case. We believe that the sentencing guidelines that the sentencing council produces will help to improve public understanding of, and therefore public confidence in, our justice system. In the evidence that was taken at stage 1, there was much support for the creation of a sentencing council from a number of important criminal justice organisations. We believe that it is important that representatives of broader society sit on the sentencing council and that the council takes into  account the views of others who have a role in the administration of criminal justice. The stage 1 report sets out the concerns from some quarters about the impact of the sentencing council on judicial discretion. We regard the council and its guidelines as a resource for the courts, but we are giving further consideration to the committee's thoughts on how best to achieve our aims while maintaining the independence of the judiciary. The bill provides a tough new community payback order sentence as a replacement for a number of existing community penalties. The community payback order will require offenders to repay communities for the damage that is done by offending and will help to tackle reoffending rates with quick justice. The stage 1 report supports the creation of the payback order. We welcome that conclusion, which acknowledges the facts about the effectiveness of community sentences versus short prison terms. It also reflects the public view, given that 84 per cent of people in Scotland think that community sentences are a good idea for minor crimes. However, the committee expressed some concerns on the matter in its stage 1 report. It asked us to consider whether we have the terminology of "payback" right. The Scottish Prisons Commission was clear—as we are, and as we think the committee is—that payback to communities should be the focus of our community justice system.

For the first time, we will be able to provide for that in up to 20 per cent of an order. That is a significant indicator that we recognise that, although one aspect of an order has to be for the person to pay back for the harm done, we must also tackle the root problem of their offending, be that literacy problems, drug or alcohol addiction, or any other matter that the sheriff regards as relevant. We believe that we have struck the right balance in ensuring that people atone and are punished for the crimes that they commit; equally, as a society, we seek to assist offenders to tackle their underlying problems. We see the importance of ensuring that the terms that we use accurately reflect the activity that the new community sentence will involve and that they do not create confusion. We will consider that further before stage 2. The committee's report highlights the need for additional resources to make the community payback order work. We recognise that, and we  have provided significant extra funding for community service both this year and next year, to make the system tougher and tighter. The new funding will also help to provide for the transition to the new regime. As for the calls for the new sentence, when it is in place, to receive more additional funding, we have set out our budget for the next financial year and we have already provided extra resources. We absolutely share the Justice Committee's conclusion that the new sentence must be adequately resourced; that will be our priority.

We are not creating the problems of cutting budgets. That comes from Westminster, and we have to address the consequences. As Mr Kelly knows, we are sitting down with the Association of Directors of Social Work and the community justice authorities, which are involved in front-line services. They are saying that it will be difficult but that they are satisfied that they will manage. Perhaps he should have more faith in the staff who work in community services and local government, rather than continually disparaging them.

Not at the moment. Alongside the community payback order, the bill proposes the introduction of a statutory presumption against the imposition by the courts of prison sentences of six months or less. We read the stage 1 evidence and the committee's conclusions on that proposal with great care, and we found nothing that explains why some members of the committee oppose it. Many witnesses presented the committee with evidence that demonstrated the limitations of short custodial sentences. All members of the committee accept the evidence, as articulated in the stage 1 report, that "short prison sentences do not normally achieve much by way of rehabilitation", that they have "limited effect as a deterrent", and that any respite that they provide for victims and communities "is only for a limited period". We agree with all that. The Sheriffs Association gave evidence that short prison sentences are the only appropriate  option in some circumstances, and that, in particular, custody must be an option for breach of a community sentence. We agree, and the bill acknowledges that point and contains safeguards that address it. Let me be clear that courts will still be able to impose sentences of less than six months. There will be no statutory bar to that. However, the committee's report gives several reasons to support the presumption against short prison sentences. David McKenna, the chief executive of Victim Support Scotland, which speaks up for those who suffer from crime and whose lives are blighted by it, said just last week: "as an organisation we supported the introduction of robust and timeous community penalties for offenders in non-violent, non-serious cases, so we're a bit disappointed that the committee has taken the decision not to support this proposal within the bill ... Certainly we hope that they can be assured that this will work for Scotland, because I think this is a golden opportunity really to take a radical and new view of how we deal with crime in our communities, making it better for communities but more importantly making it better for victims."

There are two points there. First, Richard Baker criticises the time lag. That is the current system, which we inherited from him and his predecessors. That is why we are bringing in measures to improve the system and to address questions of timing. If he is critical of the system, that criticism should lie at my predecessor's door. Secondly, I remind Richard Baker that we are talking about a presumption. In cases in which a sheriff believes that it is appropriate for respite care to be given, that a breach has occurred, or that no other sanction can be applied, we will fully support that sheriff in their decision. Richard Baker should perhaps think about supporting those who speak for and represent victims, who have been speaking out about what will really change things. Members should remember that the status quo is not working. We inherited the revolving door, and communities are blighted as a result. For that reason we have established a broad coalition, from the former First Minister Henry McLeish, to the Scottish Prisons Commission and people such as David Strang, down to David McKenna. Yet some members of the Justice Committee have been unable to follow where the evidence led.  Members agreed that the priority for prison should be dealing with offenders who commit such serious acts that no other form of punishment will do. Committee members acknowledged that short prison sentences are of limited usefulness, but that specific instances may arise in which a short prison sentence may, nonetheless, be the only option. Committee members followed exactly the same path of reasoning as the Prisons Commission did, and as we have done in making the proposals that are set out in the bill. Therefore, why do some members of the committee and of the Parliament not support the presumption against short prison sentences?

I am sorry; I must make some progress. No good reason was found to stand against the presumption, and we call on the members concerned to support that important provision. Sections 58 to 60 make changes to the operation of the system that allows the retention of forensic data in the justice system. The forensic data working group has made good progress with developing a list of relevant sexual and violent offences committed by children that will trigger retention of forensic data under section 59. It is important that we get those provisions right, so careful consideration must be given to them. As requested by the Justice Committee, we aim to provide a draft list of the relevant offences before stage 2. GeneWatch UK submitted stage 1 evidence to the effect that DNA samples should be destroyed once DNA profiles have been obtained. The forensic data working group is considering the issue. In considering the retention and use of forensic samples, we are determined always to strike the correct balance between the rights of individual citizens and the need to keep communities safe. This is a licensing as well as a criminal justice bill. In it, we are implementing the recommendations of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 task group and are modifying a number of provisions in the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 to reduce costs, shorten process times, remove unintended barriers and close loopholes. A number of provisions in the bill give rise to a need alter reserved legislation, and we are working with United Kingdom Government departments so that a section 104 order, under the Scotland Act 1998, can be made at the appropriate time. The Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill is a comprehensive bill that shows this Government's ambition to help make Scotland a  safer and stronger land, and to change the status quo, which is clearly not working. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.

We are in close contact with Fife Constabulary, which is currently collating information about the final costs of the event. We have asked HM Treasury to confirm that the United Kingdom Government will meet the costs associated with the event, in line with the statement of funding policy that was agreed between the Treasury and the devolved Administrations. A response is awaited.

That is certainly our position, which is why the protocol and arrangements were entered into. The G20 meeting was substantially smaller in scale than the G8 summit. It was remarkably well policed by Fife Constabulary and we are extremely grateful to the police that the event was trouble free and had only a limited impact on the community. Arrangements are in place and we are in regular communication with HM Treasury. We do not want to anticipate a problem and we hope that there will be no problem, but we will seek to defend the interests of the people who pay their taxes and fund the police, whether through the Government or through their council tax. Let us see what the discussions bring.

Every elected representative in Fife, whichever party they represent, is aware of the excellence of Fife Constabulary. Indeed, every member of the Scottish Parliament is aware that we have an excellent police force. Whether a member signs a motion is a matter for them, but I think that all members heartily pay tribute to Fife Constabulary. The event passed safely, with no disruption to the surrounding community, and there were only five arrests, after a small group of protesters chained themselves together. That is testimony to the excellent policing that was provided by the police in Fife.

The reality in Scotland is that overall recorded crime is at its lowest level for nearly 30 years. However, there are areas that continue to give concern, hence the Government drive to tackle both knife crime and alcohol abuse. The Scottish Government is working with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, local community safety partnerships and others to tackle crime in Scotland. We are investing £13 million through our cashback for communities projects, £1.6 million to support the community initiative to reduce violence in Glasgow and £400,000 in the safer streets programme to deliver crime reduction measures through community safety partnerships.

: I have sympathy, as does the Government, with anyone who is the victim of crime, especially when a life is lost. On the case to which the member referred, our sympathies go out. A trial is outstanding and it would be wrong of me to comment further. I stand with the chief constable of Strathclyde Police in considering that the best way of tackling knife crime is by having the severe punishments that we have, by supporting our judiciary, by tackling education to ensure that we deal with matters, by bringing in Ferroguards so that we apprehend people who carry knives, and, ultimately, by leaving the matter to the discretion of the judiciary. Anyone who uses a knife is almost certainly going to go to jail. People who carry knives know that there are severe consequences,  including jail. However, as I said, I prefer the advice and evidence of Detective Chief Superintendent John Carnochan and of Steve House. I stand with the people who make operational decisions on the front line.

Yet again we hear the old Tory line about early release. We can only point out that early release was instigated by the Conservatives many, many years ago. It was not Mr Aitken's responsibility, and he was certainly not convener of the Justice Committee at the time, but it was the Tories who brought in early release and it is this Government that is taking action to deal with the situation. We stand four-square not just behind the people who are in the front line of policing, such as Chief Constable Steve House, but behind the wise decisions that have been made by the judiciary, whether at senator or sheriff level. That is why we allow the judiciary to make the decisions. Although we believe that short sentences do not work, in that they do not tackle the problem of reoffending—we are supported in that direction of travel by a variety of organisations, such as Victim Support Scotland—we have made it clear that if a sheriff thinks that a short sentence is appropriate, they have my full support. I have given that undertaking to Sheriff Raeburn, who argued that some people should get a short, sharp shock, especially in domestic violence cases, when someone needs to be taken out of the household for others' protection. Members on the Government benches were persuaded by that point. We trust our judiciary as we support our police.

Through the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill we will tighten sexual offences prevention orders to impose new, positive obligations on high-risk sex offenders, strengthen the requirements for homeless sex offenders, and ensure that anyone who is subject  to a foreign travel order will have to surrender their passport to the police. We are also monitoring the community disclosure pilot in Tayside. If it is successful, it will be rolled out nationally.

As I said to Mr Aitken last week, on new technology, whether we are talking about satellite tracking or polygraph tests, which Mr Aitken also mentioned, we do not rule anything in or out. We consider what is operating and we learn from other jurisdictions. Polygraph tests are being trialled south of the border. It is not a matter of agreeing to "look again"; I can assure Mr Lamont that we continually consider such matters. If an approach is shown to be appropriate and cost effective, we will be happy to adopt it. However, as I said, currently the police appear to take the view that the approach that Mr Lamont described would not add to what we have. Should that change, we will be more than happy to act, as we are doing with the Tayside community pilot.

Because we use a variety of methods to monitor sex offenders and do not just do so through the criminal justice directorate. Mr Kelly might not know about how we make up multi-agency public protection arrangements. We have to involve local authorities because of their responsibilities in housing and social work. The Scottish Prison Service is also involved. Other agencies, such as health and voluntary sector agencies, come on board when it is appropriate. The resources for MAPPAs to monitor sex offenders in the community come not just from the justice directorate's budget but from others who contribute in a variety of ways. If Mr Kelly is so mindful of budget cuts, I ask him to support this Government in seeking to oppose  the £500 million of cuts that Westminster is imposing on it—£21,000 is but petty change in comparison with the £500 million of cuts that we face from Westminster, never mind its further expenditure on weapons of mass destruction.

The serious organised crime task force will discuss what action to take on the report at its next meeting on 8 December 2009. The Scottish Government has allocated an extra £1.2 million to the Crown Office and arranged a funding package of £1 million for the police to recruit specialist staff to boost our capacity to recover assets from criminals. We will continue to do everything that we can to maximise the effectiveness of asset recovery, as we committed to do in the serious organised crime task force strategy that we published on 2 June 2009.

The member misunderstands the current legal position. The balance of proof switches in such matters and it is for the individual to show that an asset was from a legitimate source. We constantly review matters, which is why we will review the joint thematic report. Bill Skelly and others will be involved. Although the presumption switches and the onus is on the individual, that is not to say that there are no difficulties. I recently met the civil recovery unit and officers who deal with specialist and serious organised crime. We know that we have to take further action, and we will examine all the relevant areas. Some of the legislation is devolved and some of it is reserved to Westminster. Where it is appropriate we will take action, and where the legislation is reserved we will encourage the Home Secretary to take action. The law is as I have described it, but we seek to learn lessons, whether from Ireland or elsewhere.

We discussed those matters at the outset of the serious organised crime task force and the cashback for communities scheme. It seems perfectly sensible that some element of providing more money to be able to bring in more money is a good thing, which is why money was allocated to the police in discussions with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. Indeed, other funds have been provided to ensure that we can process matters. The principal aim of cashback for communities will always be to allow our children from disadvantaged or, indeed, not-so-disadvantaged areas to be all that they can be. To ensure that we do that as best we can, we must maximise the resources that are available to strip criminals of their assets and put them back to use for the good of our community.

I make this statement with both pride and sorrow: sorrow for the pain inflicted on the victims and their families by the perpetrators of these vile and sickening crimes—I hope that the successful prosecution brings some closure for them—and pride in the dedicated and professional police investigations by the officers from both Lothian and Borders Police and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency who were responsible for the success of operation algebra. These truly appalling crimes were uncovered and the perpetrators successfully brought to justice thanks to the outstanding work of the police officers and prosecutors involved. As a society, we are deeply grateful for the work that they do day in, day out. It was a case of global dimensions, and it shows that we have a world-class police service. Operation algebra resulted in an historic case that is a landmark for our criminal justice system, as it involved the first ever convictions in Scotland for conspiracy to commit abuse against children. When I met members of the algebra investigative team in Craigmillar in my constituency in May and visited the agency's e-crime unit in September, I was given some clear messages: that the viewing of child abuse material on the internet is not a victimless crime, because the demand for such images creates the abuse of children worldwide; that offenders and potential offenders must be told, "The law enforcement agencies are after you and they will get you"; and that anyone in Scotland who views such material on the internet faces the real prospect of being caught, prosecuted and punished severely. Six members of the ring were jailed for a total of 43 years. Strachan was jailed for 24 years. Rennie was jailed for 21 years. They were both placed under orders for lifelong restriction. Those sentences show how the police and prosecutors can intervene to stop those who are intent on committing child abuse. Although the case was successful, a heinous offence took place, and it is always important that we look to learn lessons from such cases so as continually to improve operation and public protection. Lothian and Borders Police, the City of  Edinburgh Council and NHS Lothian undertook a significant case review of their handling of Neil Strachan, who was a registered sex offender. I received a copy of the review this week. Its findings are confidential and are for local agencies to consider. There are no recommendations for the Scottish Government regarding legislation or guidance, but we will work with the responsible authorities to help to disseminate any operational lessons that need to be addressed. In handling people such as Rennie and Strachan, we need to remember that we are dealing with deeply devious and highly manipulative individuals who will go out of their way to get round the checks that are placed upon them, however stringent the restrictions and monitoring to which they might be made subject. Law enforcement agencies continue their work to bring perpetrators to justice. Operation alba is one such case, in which the police are currently utilising intelligence and a range of investigative and technological techniques to detect those who are involved in abuse. I wrote to Paul Martin and Bill Aitken, the convener of the Justice Committee, on 17 June to update them on the significant progress in implementing the 33 recommendations of the Justice 2 Committee's report on child sex offenders from the previous parliamentary session. Our assessment is that 29 have been delivered, and of the remaining recommendations we will deliver those that fall within our legal powers. We are determined to ensure that a robust legislative framework is in place so that those who manage sex offenders can do so as effectively as possible. For example, through the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill we intend to tighten further the sexual offences prevention order regime to impose new positive obligations, as well as negative ones, on high-risk sex offenders. That could require offenders to provide more household and social data, including e-mail addresses, and to state whether they are living in the same household as a child. We will further strengthen the requirements for homeless sex offenders and ensure that anyone who is subject to a foreign travel order will have to surrender their passport to the police. We have taken forward the committee's recommendations on a public information strategy. We have produced online and print materials to inform and advise families about child sexual abuse and the measures that are in place to try to keep our communities safe. We all understand the desire of parents, carers and guardians to better protect their children from harm. Nothing matters more to a parent.  The Tayside community disclosure pilot that I launched in September and which has the support of all parties in Parliament is a positive development. I welcome and am grateful for that all-party support. The chamber is united in the need to do everything possible to protect our children from harm. The pilot links well with the strengthened multi-agency public protection arrangements that were introduced under the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Act 2005. MAPPA have led to better information sharing among relevant authorities. We are very aware that any disclosure of information about sex offenders living in the community is a hugely sensitive and complicated process and that we require to weigh up conflicting rights. We take the consideration of disclosure very seriously indeed, so we will not rush the process and we are making sure that every issue is well thought through. The Scottish Government is funding a full evaluation of the pilot to determine how successful it is. I assure the chamber that assuming that the pilot is a success, our aim is to roll it out across Scotland in every jurisdiction for every community. Our priority is to ensure that police and local agencies are equipped to protect our communities. We have achieved a great deal in tackling the menace of sex offenders, and we will build on that good work, much of which I inherited from my predecessor. As I have said today, and as colleagues have said on the radio, this is not a party-political issue. We have introduced more robust arrangements for managing sex offenders in the community. We are working with the police and their criminal justice partners to ensure that the online protection of children from sex offenders is as robust as possible. We will continue to implement the recommendations of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee, we will consider the comments of the Justice Committee if and when it makes them, and we will evaluate the Tayside community disclosure pilot. I hope that all of that reassures members that the Scottish Government remains committed to protecting our children from sex offenders. I want to continue to work closely with Parliament, stakeholders and communities to ensure that the public receive the best possible protection from these terrible crimes. I thank members for their support and co-operation to date, and look forward to working with them, as we do with all agencies, to better protect our children.

The member has raised a variety of issues. I will try to cover all of them. First, the report in question is not my report. Perhaps it would be helpful if Mr Baker understood its background. Lothian and Borders Police, the City of Edinburgh Council and NHS Lothian carried out a significant case review as a consequence of Neil Strachan's offending and his being a registered sex offender. We did not instruct them to do that; they did it as good practice. The report of the review is not mine; it is theirs. I have a lot of sympathy with the idea that many of the issues should be made available in the public domain, but that is a matter for those who  produced the report. After all, it contains personal circumstances and details of victims. Some of the issues are highly confidential. The Administration is more than happy for those who produced the report to act as they see fit; it is for them to decide whether to publish it. However, given the personal data involved, they face considerable difficulties. Publication could be difficult for the victims of the heinous offences in question. I can say that four recommendations were made—that is no state secret. They relate to police procedures in the investigation of domestic violence between lesbian or gay partners; consistency in the use of risk assessment tools by the police and other agencies; operational improvements around sexual offences prevention order applications; and the identification of increased risk when an offender admits to fantasising about children. There are no recommendations for the Scottish Government regarding legislation or guidance, although we will be happy to work with the police, social work and health services through the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to help disseminate any operational lessons. I stress that this has been an historic case, and each of the recommendations has been actioned locally by Lothian and Borders Police, the City of Edinburgh Council and the national health service. Those organisations should be congratulated on instigating the review, but it remains theirs. The report is confidential, because of the personal data on the individuals involved. The organisations may choose to publicise some information, redacted or otherwise, and I will support their judgment whatever they choose to do—but it will be their decision. The Scottish Prison Service has a great deal of expertise in dealing with sexual offences, and a great deal of pride is taken over the work that is done at Peterhead prison. The Administration is therefore delighted to ensure that a prison remains in Peterhead, so that the valuable staff there can continue to serve locally. There are consequences as a result of the European convention on human rights, in that we must ensure that we also provide assistance elsewhere. We are seeking to do that, and we are dealing with that as best we can. Mr Baker should realise that MAPPA are relatively new. It became clear from the Strachan review that, sadly, MAPPA were only kicking into gear when he was perpetrating his offences. I hope that we have closed some gaps as a result of MAPPA—I congratulate my predecessor on introducing them. MAPPA were not available for the Strachan case, but lessons have since been learned and continue to be learned.

Absolutely. I thank Bill Aitken for his questions and for his tenor. I can give an assurance that this Administration, like previous Administrations, is ever vigilant. We recognise that this is a moving feast—that developments come upon us. For example, there have been substantial changes in relation to the internet since much of the sexual offender legislation first came into force. We must be ever vigilant and watchful, and we must change, which is why some matters are now being addressed under the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. Polygraph tests are being trialled south of the border, and we are monitoring that with interest. I assure the member that, if it is shown that they work, we will be more than happy to learn from any jurisdiction. The Tayside pilot was predicated on methods that were being trialled in, I think, Warwickshire. We are happy to learn. Polygraph testing is one thing; satellite tracking is another. The difficulty with satellite tracking is that, although it can show where an individual is, it does not necessarily reveal what that individual is doing. The system can show where they are, but further information, for instance on whether they are walking a child or walking their dog, is not available. Technology has to be considered, and where appropriate we will introduce it, but it has limitations. Bill Aitken is correct to say that we must ensure that the legislation is robust and fit for purpose. I give an assurance that we are happy to review it. I have heard that the member is anxious for the Justice Committee to address the matter. We will fully support any recommendations that the committee makes. Indeed, I would be happy to contribute.  If issues arise from the Strachan case review that require legislation, we will address them. The review indicates that the steps that are being introduced under MAPPA will add to the measures that are available—albeit those arrangements were not in place in time to address the offences that Mr Strachan carried out. We recognise that we are dealing with highly devious and manipulative people. We have to be able to change to track the new tricks that they get up to. Equally, we have to recognise that we might not be able to prevent every evil deed and that, therefore, in some instances, the only person to blame is the person who rightly has been convicted. That is why I am grateful for the member's comments about the police and the other agencies that have been involved in dealing with this matter.

I am happy to provide further information in due course on the evaluation; I am not able to provide it immediately. I welcome Mr Brown's comments regarding the importance of seeking to treat these people. At an event last night, I spoke to Dr Mairead Tagg about these matters. A lot of the information is being developed and evaluated, and academics and others are discussing it. We seek to build on what we already have. Mr Baker acknowledged that we have an excellent service at Peterhead. We seek to provide such a service elsewhere. It is a matter of regret if those who are seeking treatment are not able to access it. The SPS seeks to address that, and this Administration supports its attempts in that regard. There is a good reason why, sometimes, those who refuse to admit their guilt are not placed on the programme. We are talking about highly manipulative and devious people. Sadly, some people go on the programme to try to delude those who are charged with looking after them and monitoring them in the interests of public safety that they have learned the errors of their ways. Without going into detail, I can say that Mr Strachan said a variety of things to the authorities, some of which are now being reviewed. We have to recognise that there is a judgment call on the part of those who are in a position to make decisions and have been trained accordingly. This Administration is supporting that area of expertise, which is developing under the guidance of academics in Scotland and elsewhere. We will try to ensure that those who want sex offenders treatment are provided with it. Whether it is worth giving that treatment to someone who refuses to admit their guilt is a matter of judgment for the appropriately qualified people. The old adage that one can take a horse to water but one cannot make it drink still holds true. If someone denies that they have got a problem, there is a danger that they will undermine group therapy work. Further, we have to be ever vigilant and remember that some of these people are deeply manipulative and are downright liars. They make certain statements and say that they have learned and have changed but they have not. We have to recognise that we are dealing with a changing situation and that we must give full support in that regard. Mr Brown has an assurance that the Administration will welcome suggestions, wherever they come from. I know that Mr Brown is a member of the Justice Committee, which might decide to examine the issues that he raises.  The area is evolving. Medical science has not yet managed to develop the area fully. However, as and when developments are made, we will seek to implement them. Finally, I remind the member that, in many ways, the Scottish Prison Service is ahead of the game internationally as well as nationally, in terms of its expertise.

MAPPA place duties on the police, local authorities and the Scottish Prison Service, as the acting responsible authorities. As and when necessary, other agencies can become involved, such as health boards; the principal reporter to the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration, if we are dealing with a youngster; housing providers that accommodate MAPPA offenders; and electronic monitoring providers, which I should mention in light of the points that Mr Aitken raised. The arrangement is a multi-agency one, but the basic triumvirate is made up of the police, local authorities and the Scottish Prison Service.

The Government has made a record investment in the Scottish Prison Service—a public prison service, as opposed to the privatised system with which Mr Kelly wishes to proceed. I regret the tenor of Mr Kelly's question, given the manner in which other members have asked questions and commented on the issues. The safety of our children is the responsibility of us all, and to turn that issue into narrow partisan politics simply demeans it. We challenge the claim of a £21,000 cut, given our record investment in the SPS. If Mr Kelly wishes to query why our Administration—and the whole country—faces financial problems, he should consider the role of a Westminster Administration that is imposing £500 million of cuts and that presided over a lack  of regulation of our banks, the results of which are hitting each and every one of us in our pockets.

The great difficulty is that although I can present statistics that show that sex offenders reoffend less than most other offenders, when they do reoffend it can be catastrophic for individuals, their families and entire communities. The 2007-08 MAPPA report showed that of the 3,765 registered sex offenders, only 44 reoffended, or slightly more than 1 per cent. It is clear that that is 44 more than any of us would wish, but we can compare it with the 45 per cent two-year reconviction rate among all other offenders. We recognise the difficulties and dangers, and the devious nature of the people with whom we are dealing. We can, thankfully, rest assured that they are few in number, but we acknowledge that when they reoffend, the consequences are severe.

I have tried to make clear to members the action that we are taking and have taken. I have given credit to Margaret Curran's colleague, who was my predecessor as justice secretary. I do not wish to be flippant on the issue of funding, but if Labour wishes to impose the Glasgow airport rail link on us, the cutbacks to which Mr Kelly refers—which I deny—may in fact be substantially greater, because the money that is spent on GARL must be deducted from somewhere else. Every pound that Labour members want to spend on something has to come out of some other budget. Perhaps they can tell us which budget they want to cut.  I have been advised of yesterday's conviction, and I have no doubt that there will be a review by the agencies that were involved, just as there was a review of the Strachan case. If lessons can be learned, and if matters should be passed to other jurisdictions, we will seek to do so. On the point that Mr Randall had come off the sex offenders register, I know that Margaret Curran was not the previous Minister for Justice—that was her colleague Cathy Jamieson, to whom I pay tribute—but perhaps she could have taken cognisance of the legislation that she was passing when she was in the Cabinet. Under the legislation, if the court imposes an order for, say, five years, the person comes off the sex offenders register after that time, although an offender can be put on the register for life automatically for a variety of offences, which are set out in statute. In the case that we are discussing, the individual fell off the register because the period that was imposed—five years—expired. Clearly, lessons will be learned. If we have to change the legislation that was brought in during the member's time in office, we will seek to do so. Actually, I think that we will seek to learn lessons in other ways, because in the main, as I said, MAPPA kick in. The sex offenders register is simply a record of data at the time. The fact that somebody comes off it does not mean that they cannot be put back on it through SOPOs or applications to the court.

Scots law and the Scottish courts have served us well in civil matters for many years but, last Wednesday, the Lord Justice Clerk, Lord Gill, presented me with the "Report of the Scottish Civil Courts Review", which is a hard-hitting report and the first system-wide review in modern times. I begin by thanking Lord Gill, his colleagues and his staff team for all their work. I also thank Cathy Jamieson for her foresight in commissioning the review during her tenure as a minister. In his opening paragraphs Lord Gill pulls no punches. He says: "The basic structure of civil jurisdictions in the Scottish courts remains much as it was in the late nineteenth century". He continues: "changes in the social and economic life of Scotland ... have left us with a structure of civil justice that is seriously failing the nation. Reform is long overdue." Those conclusions are unavoidable. Our civil courts now operate in a rights-based, property-owning, consumer-oriented, insurance-reliant society of a sort that would have been unrecognisable a century ago. A reliance on ad hoc reforms has delivered a system of civil justice that is unfit for today's purposes. Lord Gill states: "The practitioners of 100 years ago would have little difficulty in picking up the threads" of today's courts. The severe summary is that the structure is "seriously failing the nation." Lord Gill has diagnosed failures in efficiency, economy and expedition; his is a diagnosis of notorious and sometimes scandalous delays that ill-serve our people. His proposals for change include that there should be stricter management of cases, with sanctions for breach of the rules; that there should be a major transfer of jurisdiction to the sheriff courts, with cases that are worth less than £150,000 taken out of the Court of Session; that most appeals should be handled in the sheriff courts from where they sprung, with a requirement for inner house permissions; and that the simplest cases should be dealt with under a new procedure before a district judge. There is also a host of proposed technical improvements. The report has been broadly welcomed by all those who believe that the people of Scotland deserve an accessible  system of civil justice that delivers fairly, economically and promptly. I cannot address all Lord Gill's recommendations today. His report extends to 700 pages, with evidence presented in 11 informative annexes, which detail the disproportionate cost of litigation, excessive delays and volumes of business, as well as lessons that are to be learned from other jurisdictions. I broadly welcome the recommendations and accept the twin thrusts of jurisdictional adjustment and procedural change. Cases must be dealt with at the level that is appropriate for their importance and complexity, and the courts should ensure that cases are properly managed, with an end to drift and repeated procedural hearings. Reforms in the commercial court and summary criminal cases have shown that that can be done and it must now be done throughout the system. It is absurd that more than half the cases that come before the Court of Session cost more to sue than the sum being sued for: an average of 222 per cent more in the lowest-value cases. It is increasingly odd that the average time for a case to reach its conclusion continues to grow. Without access to today's technology, the Roe v Wade decision was issued in three months, including holidays, and the Nuremberg trials were concluded in 10 months. Our delays are not justified. They delay justice and they contribute to Scottish businesses choosing other jurisdictions for their litigation. So we should all agree on the needs driving reform: modernisation, a change of culture and a whole-system approach. We will carefully examine the detail of the specific proposals. Some could be implemented soon, others will require careful costing and a different public finance climate. Some solutions are at the disposal of the court, others are for the Government and others still are shared, but that does not diminish the urgency of our moving forward in this general direction. I therefore invite the Opposition spokespeople to reach early agreement with me on which recommended changes can be rapidly progressed.

I accept both Lord Gill's direction and Robert Brown's comment. Obviously, certain matters will require primary legislation, but others can be dealt with more expeditiously. I do not want us to go all round the houses and wait until every matter has been fully canvassed, and experience procedural delays. I make this offer: if  each and every one of us can agree on action that will advance civil justice, let us do so. If we cannot agree, we will not seek to proceed but, as I said, where we can make progress for goodness' sake let us make progress. Where we require to deliberate, we are happy to do so.

Some areas will not be within the Government's jurisdiction; they will not require primary legislation but will be within, for example, the domain of the Court of Session Rules Council and a variety of other bodies. If we can agree politically, and if we accept that we might have to wait some time for primary legislation, we should try to make progress where we can. If the matter is one on which the Government or our legislature has an input, we should press on. If it is a case of encouraging others, either within the rules council or elsewhere, let us do so. Margo MacDonald is correct to ask her question and I agree with Mr Brown. The package needs to be viewed in its totality. Equally, we do not have to wait until every t has been crossed and i dotted before we deliver change. If we can, let us resolve issues while we work towards the general thrust of the recommendations.

I am more than happy to consider it. Lord Gill commented on that process, as did those involved in providing support through citizens advice bureaux and others. I am more than happy to meet Mr Whitton or his front-bench colleagues to discuss it because we are genuinely open to ideas. We do not insist on any formula. As I said, if we can agree on changes that are within our control, we will seek to do so. If changes are within the domain of others we will encourage them to act, if that is Parliament's view. Other matters will require to await the outcome of an election and, presumably, the availability of legislative time. The shape of reform will require endorsement and, in some cases, enactment by this Parliament. There will be those in the chamber and beyond with particular interests in the course of reform, whether that involves McKenzie friends or other ideas. They will want to ensure that their interests are protected, be they of the cause or constituency type. That is to be expected and welcomed. The ethos of Scots law needs to be upheld; the special requirements of island communities and sparsely populated rural areas need to be taken fully into account and to be fully protected.  The chamber should not lose sight of the original diagnosis that the current system is "seriously failing the nation". That is why, when we have an opportunity to advance matters, even in a minor way, we should take it. Neither vested nor narrow interests should have a part in our debates. There is no place for protectionism or parochialism. We will all have our work cut out: the Government, the Parliament and the soon-to-be-reformed Scottish Court Service. However, these recommendations can help us to meet the challenge. We await with interest the report of Professor Neil Walker, who is considering the issue of the final appellate jurisdiction in the Scottish legal system, the new Supreme Court. As Lord Gill says, we need a proper hierarchy of appeal courts, and the whole system must be considered, as Robert Brown mentioned. Lord Philip recently reported on the future of tribunals in Scotland. Those have proven to be an effective way of delivering civil justice in areas of public law, but the system in Scotland is fragmented and, similarly, outdated. We need to determine whether an integrated tribunal service for Scotland can improve the operation of existing tribunals; it may perhaps develop the capacity and expertise to handle cases that are currently before the courts. We will take that work forward in parallel with the consideration of Lord Gill's and his team's review. Lord Gill also acknowledged the value that can be added by alternative mechanisms for resolving disputes and by mediation services in particular. We have already introduced the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill and strengthened protections for home owners, and we will be implementing the European Union directive on mediation. We will also consider further recommendations for public legal education and advice services. Parliament will be presented with our detailed proposals after public consultation. We have a generational opportunity to seize and we must all meet the challenge. I anticipate the debate and I look forward to changes. We are happy to accept the amendments. As I said earlier, we are more than happy to speak to individual members and front-bench spokesmen. It is correct to say that we must deliver the whole package of measures. Equally, we must all agree that there are aspects that can be dealt with and we should not wait until the final chapter has been concluded before we make progress. If we wait, we will simply replicate the delays that are causing significant problems now. Sadly, some Scottish businesses and other interests are choosing to litigate in London—despite the fact that it costs  significantly more and is less expedient—because we cannot provide the service. That is simply not satisfactory. We have to get the balance right between the points made by Robert Brown—

We must address the matter urgently. The Government is already on the case, because the matter was flagged up to me by Stephen Pearson, the head of legal services at the Royal Bank of Scotland, which, after all, is our single largest institution here in Scotland. We are doing what we can. To the credit of the Scottish Court Service, rules for commercial actions in the Court of Session have been brought in under Lord Reed, but significant progress has still to be made. Further changes are necessary, some of which might require primary legislation, as Lord Gill says. There is an obligation on each and every one of us to do what we can to improve the system and to end the absurdity of Scottish clients choosing to litigate elsewhere. That is why we have been seeking to interact with financial services and with companies that are choosing to litigate elsewhere, to work out what we can do to change that. We are proceeding in a variety of ways, such as through the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill. There is not one simple solution. This is a package of measures. As Mr Brown and Ms MacDonald have said, the ultimate framework must be taken in its totality. Equally, it is incumbent on each and every one of us to make what progress we can to improve the system, which, as Lord Gill said, is not serving us well. I am proud to have served in the Scottish legal profession. It is an institution that has, in the main, served us well, but, because of the changes in the social and economic life of Scotland that Lord Gill correctly mentioned, it is not doing so now. We must change in a thought-through manner, which is why I pay tribute to Lord Gill, but we must do what we can, even if not everything can be done immediately. We are having this debate because a great deal must be thought out, discussed and consulted on. Equally, there are matters that are a no-brainer to deal with and it is incumbent on us to do so. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Report of the Scottish Civil Courts Review conducted under the chairmanship of the Lord Justice Clerk and the reports of the Administrative Justice Steering Group conducted under the chairmanship of Lord Philip; looks forward to the report of final appellate jurisdiction in preparation by Professor Neil Walker, and believes that the people of Scotland deserve a reformed  and modernised civil justice system that is fit for purpose in the 21st century.

There is no delay. After consulting the Crown Office, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and others on the work that they need to undertake ahead of implementing the 2009 act, we intend to commence its provisions in autumn 2010. Implementation is not straightforward, as the act replaces a large area of common law with statutory provision. Putting the necessary arrangements in place takes time. It is important that the Crown Office, the police, the Scottish Court Service and others involved in the criminal justice system are fully trained, and that their systems are updated to take account of the new act.

No, I do not accept that. First and foremost, the Crown Office and the police could not make any arrangements to change their procedures until such time as the bill, with its various amendments, had been passed. They have clearly sought to ensure that they can make the relevant changes to implement the new legislation. Those changes are substantial. We are moving from common law to statutory provisions. The Parliament came together as one to pass the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill in order to address the problems that exist and the fact that far too many victims have been failed. It is important to get any legislative change right, especially with such substantial change in such an important area, with such significance for so many individuals. On that basis, the Court Service, the police and the Crown Office requested that we move as speedily as we could, while ensuring that when the provisions were commenced, they worked appropriately to protect victims.

Absolutely. That is why the Government has been working with Rape Crisis Scotland and other organisations to develop a package that includes an advertising campaign, in addition to the legislation. As with other aspects of Scottish society, it is important to have appropriate laws that are up to date for the 21 st century and that protect victims; and to enforce those laws through our police and prosecution system. As regards sexual offences, and rape in particular, we need to challenge attitudes in Scotland. A substantial section of Scottish male society still apparently think that a girl who is dressed attractively and is under the influence of alcohol is fair game. That is unacceptable and, sadly, we have to challenge it. I absolutely accept what the member has said. It is a matter of progressing on an array of fronts, with tough laws, proper enforcement and changing cultural attitudes on the part of some people in Scotland who have to be brought into the 21 st century.

Whether anyone is prosecuted and the crime for which they are prosecuted are matters for the Lord Advocate, acting independently and in the public interest. Each case is considered on its own unique facts and circumstances. It is not appropriate to provide a definitive answer to a theoretical question.

The member is alluding to various developments south of the border. I can state what the current Lord Advocate has already stated, both publicly and in a letter to the member: there exists in Scotland a very different legal landscape to that in England and Wales. The  offence of assisted suicide in England and Wales does not exist in Scotland. The Lord Advocate has already published the prosecution code, which provides information on the general considerations that will be taken into account by prosecutors when they decide what action to take in any case. It is important to bear in mind what the Lord Advocate has made clear. She provides guidance, as her predecessors have done in the past, and that is fair and appropriate, but fundamentally laws are made not by the Lord Advocate but by those who are elected to this Parliament.

Extradition arrangements are reserved in terms of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. However, as the Scottish ministers bear responsibility for the implementation of extradition obligations in Scotland, the impacts of all extradition agreements that are entered into by the UK Government—including the treaty with the United States—require to be carefully considered by Scottish authorities.

The member makes the point that such matters must be kept under constant review, as times change. As a Government, we can say that extradition is a valuable tool. As well as extraditing people from this country, we occasionally seek to have people extradited from other jurisdictions. It is important for all jurisdictions to have a tool that enables them to work together to ensure that people who flee do not avoid being held to account and brought to justice. However, such matters obviously require to be kept under constant review.

Statistics on the number of convictions in Scottish courts covering July 2009 will not be available until spring 2011, but on the basis of statistics that were published this week, I can confirm that the number of offensive weapons offences in Glasgow fell last year by 6.3 per cent. That happened against the backdrop of violent crime in Scotland being at its lowest level since  1986 and crime overall being at its lowest level since 1980. However, there is always more to be done on issues such as knife crime. That is why we are working with the national violence reduction unit, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and other partners, including Glasgow City Council, to tackle knife crime. The collective effort is considerable, and the Government will play its part.

That is just not true. We are putting record amounts into ensuring that we deliver on community sentencing and community payback. The Government is delivering on that. As far as the city of Glasgow is concerned, a record number of police officers have been provided by this Government, in conjunction with others, whose contribution I am happy to acknowledge and give credit for.

It is true that Glasgow City Council contributes. Great credit must also go to Chief Constable Steve House, who has radically transformed policing by ensuring that officers are used constructively and that we not only provide officers but get them out on the streets by lessening the requirement for them to stay behind desks. Glasgow is where the violence reduction unit, which I mentioned in my original answer, is based, and it leads not only in Scotland but, in many respects, in the world. Indeed, it was praised by Cherie Blair, the wife of the former Prime Minister. Significant resources are being provided. The member will be aware that in the east end of Glasgow, which she represents, work is being done that shows that we recognise the significant problems that exist there and in other parts of Glasgow. That is why we are putting resources into policing, violence reduction and working constructively with partners.

I acknowledge the huge amount of work that has gone into the transition to the new licensing act that was put in place by the previous Administration in 2005. As expected, the changeover has been a massive task and has not been without its difficulties in some parts of the country. The amount of hard work and effort that have been put in by all involved to get to the end of the transition period has been impressive. The overwhelming majority of premises have continued to trade since 1 September, but there is still residual work to be completed for some boards. The Government welcomes and has encouraged the pragmatic and commonsense approach that the police and licensing standards officers are taking as the new regime beds in. However, the Government has made clear its wish that the act be used to its full effect. Where boards and the police wish to take tough action against problem premises, they will have the Government's full support.

The member raises various issues. I do not know about the Braco case, but I would be more than happy to discuss it with him. As I said, we acknowledged that there would be difficulties in implementing the legislation, which was introduced by the previous Administration, in which Dr Simpson served as a minister, but significant progress has been made. Many people predicted that we would see the end of the earth in a sort of millennium meltdown on 1 September, but that did not happen. That does not mean that  we are without difficulties in some areas, but the principle behind the act, especially with regard to licensing fees, is that there is something fundamentally wrong with council tax payers having to subsidise licensing boards and applications for licences from those who seek to make a profit out of selling alcohol. That relates to the point about funding. That is why we fully supported the changes that were introduced by the previous Administration, in which the member served. Obtaining the right to sell alcohol should be fully funded by those who are given that right, not subsidised by the council tax payer.

I am in regular contact with Lothian and Borders Police to discuss matters relating to effective policing across the force. In July, I was pleased to visit Melrose, where I met the chief constable and local officers in the police station.

Absolutely. We recognise that the needs and wants of rural communities are distinct and have to be dealt with. It is not simply a matter of ensuring that the police take on board their responsibilities. I met not only Chief Constable Strang but Sheriff Kevin Drummond, who made it clear to me that he acts appropriately, because it is clear that some matters in rural areas are of greater concern than they are in urban areas, and that some problems are significantly greater in rural areas than they are in urban areas. The Government must ensure that the needs and wants of every part of Scotland are catered for, whether in the fields of justice, health or education. We must especially recognise that there are sometimes difficulties in rural areas in Scotland. That must be taken on board in the justice and other aspects of government.

Various civil and criminal legal powers are available to the police and local authorities to manage unauthorised encampments. Those include the powers under sections 61 and 62 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 and the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984. A summary of the legislative framework is provided in the Scottish Government's "Guidelines for Managing Unauthorised Camping By Gypsies/Travellers in Scotland". No further action is planned at this stage.

I fully appreciate the distress and damage that is caused locally. Guidelines on the management of unauthorised encampments were published in 2004, and we will ensure that we keep them up to date. The issue of enforcement may be better discussed with the local police or the local procurators fiscal. If there are problems, action must be taken. Legislation is in force and guidelines have been provided. The Government believes that we must ensure that local areas can act accordingly, as urban areas sometimes face different problems from those that are faced by rural areas, as I said in response to an earlier question. The enforcement powers exist, and the member has our full support in seeking to discuss matters with both the local police and the local procurators fiscal.

The Scottish Court Service has recommended to me that Annan, Cumnock, East Kilbride and Girvan courts should close. I am currently considering that recommendation.

As I said, I am considering the recommendation from the Scottish Court Service and discussing matters with members of the committee and others. If Elaine Murray wishes to discuss the matter with me, I am happy to do so. I have not made a final decision. I will consider the recommendation, but I will also have to take other factors into account. As Elaine Murray correctly said, I will have to weigh up the views that were expressed by the Justice Committee on the last occasion that the matter was addressed in parliament.

Although I meet regularly with Strathclyde police authority, I have no plans to meet with it or with Glasgow City Council to discuss marches and parades. I would be happy to discuss the matter with Strathclyde police authority at a future meeting if it wishes to do so.

The member mixes up two distinct matters: events of a cultural nature that occur in Edinburgh and some events that occur in the west of Scotland that are euphemistically described as cultural. I do not view Orange marches as falling into that category. I acknowledge the extreme pressures on the police as a result of marches and that is why, in opposition, we supported Bill Butler's party when it was in government in giving local authorities powers to exercise greater control. We support the exercise of those powers by local authorities where they see that that is appropriate, and the work that local authorities do with the police to achieve the correct balance in protecting our communities' rights while ensuring that people have the right to march and protest.

Such events are, as I said in response to Bill Butler, a matter for the local authority, but our Administration has always said that it will support local authorities when they act in defence of their communities. The defence of the community includes not only the wider community, but specific minority communities that must be protected from those who seek to spread poison and bile. Strathclyde Police will, as always, have our support in taking whatever steps it feels are necessary to protect every citizen and every community in Scotland from those who seek to do them harm.

We support the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 that Mr McConnell and his Government introduced, which gives local authorities powers over such matters. We believe that local authorities are best placed to protect their communities. That may not have been Mr McConnell's view, or he may have forgotten it, but the purpose of the 2006 act was to allow local authorities—which are best placed to do so—to provide a balance in deciding which marches are appropriate and beneficial for a community, and which are inappropriate and unacceptable. We fully support the right of local authorities to make those decisions and to take the advice of our police and work in conjunction with them. It is not a matter for micromanagement—we should support the legislation that Mr McConnell introduced and of which he should be proud.

The provisions introduced by the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Act 2005 have enabled certain offenders to be assessed as suitable to be released under the home detention curfew scheme. Those offenders are released on licence and are under curfew, supported by electronic monitoring, to assist them to reintegrate into their communities. Between 2006, when the scheme was introduced, and 4 September 2009, 6,248 offenders sentenced to less than four years were granted home detention curfew. Eight hundred and forty-one of them—13 per cent—moved to home detention curfew after serving a quarter of their sentence in custody.

The statistics show clearly that over 75 per cent of prisoners successfully completed home detention curfew. Between July 2006 and 30 August 2009, 5,993 low-risk offenders were released on licence under HDC, of whom 23 per cent—1,386—have been returned to custody, with fewer than 1 per cent being reconvicted of a further offence.

The Home Office continues to reject our calls to devolve responsibility for firearms legislation to the Scottish Parliament. The Calman commission recommended that legislation for air weapons be devolved, and we acted quickly to lay orders in Parliament before the summer recess—but there is still no sign of progress from the Home Office. Indeed, I invited the Home Secretary to visit Edinburgh this summer to discuss this and other issues, but the offer was not taken up.

I have made it quite clear that we are ready to act immediately. There is something quite bizarre in the fact that, although I can make a decision regarding the release of Mr al-Megrahi, this Parliament cannot make a decision to tackle the safety of our communities by tackling the air weapons that are in them.

In the sheriffdom of south Strathclyde, Dumfries and Galloway, the Scottish Court Service has consulted further with the sheriff principal and local authorities as prescribed by the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007.

I am not making the same proposal again, because I have not received further submissions or recommendations from the Scottish Court Service. When I do, what Cathy Jamieson suggests might be the case, but I cannot confirm whether it will be, because I have received no submissions. I am surprised by the criticism of the procedures, because, after all, the procedures that I follow are those that are laid down in the 2007 act, which was introduced not by me as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice or by my Government, but by yourself, Ms Jamieson, when you were the Minister for Justice. If you do not like the legislation, you should have thought about that before you implemented it.

It has not done so. No recommendations have reached me and until such time as they do, no decision can be taken. I cannot comment on whether the SCS is being arrogant, but I can give you the factual position that no further decision has been made, because no recommendations have reached me.

The council tax freeze and the commitment to 1,000 additional police officers are both priorities for the Scottish Government and have been agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities as part of the concordat. Accordingly, they are both fully funded by the Scottish Government. That is why earlier this week I was able to announce that in June 2009, there were 17,278 police officers employed by Scottish forces—the highest number ever recorded. For the first time, we have passed the milestone of 1,000 additional police officers, well ahead of our pledge to do so by the end of this parliamentary session, with an increase of 1,044 since March 2007. Strathclyde police authority has considered the potential impact of spending decisions that have not yet been made. The Scottish Government will publish the draft 2010-11 budget later this month, which will be subject to parliamentary scrutiny and debate in the usual way. We await the next spending review, which we expect to be delayed until after the next general election.

It would have been possible; the deputy chief constable said that his force would have risen to any challenge. However, it was made clear that there would have been significant operational difficulties—48 officers would have been required simply to monitor him in the house. To move him to hospital or elsewhere would have required additional policing above and beyond that. As I have said before, I find it ludicrous and grotesque that we should have imposed—I heard  the word "impose" used by some speakers in the chamber—Mr al-Megrahi on a Scottish hospice. People go to a hospice to die with dignity, surrounded by friends and family in their dying moments, not to have Mr al-Megrahi, an international press corps and, indeed, a police camp there. I say to Mr Foulkes that that would have been unacceptable and I stand by my decision.

Absolutely. I pay great tribute to the chief constable of Strathclyde. It is to his enormous credit that he is not only delivering the Government's commitment to provide additional officers to Strathclyde but is, through his own actions, and supported by every officer of whatever rank in his force, ensuring that additional recruits are taken on, that officers are retained and that officers who are behind desks are redeployed. When the convener of the SPA referred to the potential problems and the difficulty that it may face in terms of recruitment, he did not point out that, for the first time, the SPA has recruited a press officer.

I accept that in the spirit in which it was given. The Scottish Government is delighted to deliver the additional 1,000 officers. We are happy that the Scottish Conservatives have supported us on the matter. I will seek to work with Mr Aitken where I can on other financial matters, albeit that—in many instances—that work will be done by our colleagues who cover the finance portfolio.

We are currently considering whether any changes to the eligibility rules for civil legal aid are desirable.

I am aware of Dr Murray's concerns on the issue—concerns that she has raised on previous occasions. Many in the chamber will share those concerns. Indeed, I discussed the matter with the chief executive of the Scottish Legal Aid Board. It is important to bear in mind two points. First, there are the legal aid regulations, which we seek to monitor—indeed, we are happy to review them and change them if and when it is necessary to do so. In many instances, primary legislation may be required to do that. I assure Dr Murray that I hope that frivolous and vexatious appeals will be precluded by the Legal Aid Board. The legislation that is in place is subject to interpretation by the board. Secondly, and without reference to any specific case, it is important to bear in mind the fact that we require to have cognisance of the European convention on human rights. Simply because someone may have done something reprehensible should not necessarily mean that, in other matters, they should not be eligible for legal aid. That is part of our strength as a democracy. It is also part of an obligation that is contained in the legal aid rules and regulations that were brought in on an all-party and non-party basis. Dr Murray is correct to raise the issue, which is a matter of concern. As I said, the Legal Aid Board is aware of her constituents' concerns—concerns that I am sure are felt by others elsewhere. The matter is under constant review.

Ministerial decision making in cases involving offenders was examined by the late Sheriff Principal Gordon Nicholson QC, to whom the First Minister gave testament at First Minister's question time. Sheriff Principal Nicholson  undertook that examination at the request of the previous Administration. His report was published last year, and made no recommendations for change in relation to the process for compassionate release.

I made it clear previously in Parliament and I make it clear again that it was my decision and my decision alone, and I stand by it. It might have been more appropriate if those who are throwing brickbats around had taken a view before the decision was taken, but there we go. We do not rule anything in or out. The late Sheriff Principal Nicholson—who did the Parliament and the country a great service with the licensing reforms, and with his service as a sheriff principal, and a sheriff before that—carried out a review. That review was instructed not by my Administration but by the previous Administration. He reviewed compassionate release and felt that it was appropriate that it should remain a ministerial matter. If members want to have an inquiry, the Government is prepared to consider one. If they want to press the issue further, we have nothing to hide, although perhaps others must answer for their bit.

The legislation that we operate under dates from 1993. It provides that it is for ministers to take the decision. Parliament looked again at the arrangements for  compassionate release in section 27 of the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007, which was introduced by the previous Liberal Democrat-Labour Administration. It replicated the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, leaving the decision in the hands of ministers. Sheriff Principal Nicholson was asked to consider the issue. He did so, and that is the current position. If members wish to make other suggestions, we would be more than happy to consider them. On the issue relating to Mr al-Megrahi, we have nothing to hide and we stand by our decisions.

On Tuesday, official statistics revealed that there are 17,278 police officers in Scotland, the highest number ever on record. That means that the Scottish Government has reached its target of having 1,000 more police officers in Scotland—compared with the 16,234 officers when we came to power—well ahead of our pledge to do so by the end of this session. For the fifth quarter in a row, the number of police officers serving Scotland's communities has increased. There are now 1,044 more officers than there were in March 2007.

Absolutely. I pay tribute to Chief Constable Stephen House, who has done an excellent job. We are delighted to fund the 1,000 additional officers, ensuring that Strathclyde gets its share. It is our largest force, and it faces many of the greatest difficulties with regard to recorded crime. It is clear that the chief constable is doing a fantastic job, as is each and every officer, whichever force in Scotland they serve in. It is  appropriate to ensure that we have adequate numbers of police officers. We must also ensure that they are appropriately and properly used, and are not stuck in court twiddling their thumbs, having been cited to give evidence in cases that are never called. The progress that is being made on summary justice reform is a great credit to the Solicitor General, the Lord Advocate and the Crown Office. It is a credit to chief constables throughout Scotland that they are getting officers out from behind desks to do work elsewhere. A visible police presence reassures good citizens and deters those of evil intent.

We are committed to funding the 1,000 additional officers. Two years ago—and even more recently—the member did not think that it could be done, but it has now been delivered. The Government obviously has to prepare a budget, and we have to do so in the knowledge that we face £500 million-worth of cuts from the UK—they are coming down the line, and those are London-enforced cuts. That will impact on Scotland.

I hear a sedentary input from Mr Foulkes. As well as that £500 million, the Government is also paying—as am I, as a constituent and a representative of the city of Edinburgh—for the folly of a tram scheme that has cost a further £500 million.

That is an operational matter for Strathclyde Police.

As I said to Bob Doris, I have great faith in our police and I have no doubt that whatever challenge is presented to Strathclyde Police, whether it is guarding an individual or reacting to a serious terrorist incident such as we had at Glasgow airport, the force rises to the challenge and shows that it is capable of dealing with it. I repeat that I find grotesque the suggestion that we should have sought to impose on a hospice the situation that the member proposes. I have yet to hear from the Conservative party which hospice was to have taken Mr al-Megrahi. I am not aware that any hospices were queuing up to accept him. In my experience, people are queuing up to get into hospices because of the difficulties that we face in palliative care. We made the decision; and it was my decision. It was quite clearly made on the basis that I believe that people who go into a hospice to die should be able to do so with dignity and be treated with compassion, without having armed police in every nook and cranny and without the presence of an international media circus. The member might want to have imposed such a situation on a hospice in Scotland; I never will.

I remind Mr Brown that the application was made by the Libyan Government, not through Mr Megrahi's team, which was involved in the High Court appeal. Mr Megrahi was accompanied by his solicitor. However, as I have said, that related to the PTA and was a request from Mr Megrahi. Those matters are entirely separate from concurrent events in the court of appeal.

Is Richard Baker suggesting that I should not have considered the prisoner transfer application at all, despite representations from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office that it was appropriate that it proceed?

On 20 August, I announced the decisions that I had taken in relation to Mr Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi. On 24 August, I repeated the substance of that announcement for the benefit of Parliament and took questions. I will now offer further detail to the Parliament. At the time of my statement, given the public interest, I took the unprecedented step of publishing the medical advice on which my decision was based. Yesterday, I published a substantial package of information relating to the lead-up to the ratification of the prisoner transfer agreement, the representations and other material that I took into account in reaching my decisions and the advice that was given to me. It has always been my position to offer as much information as we can. I have also published details of the contact between the Scottish Government and the Libyan Government. I am grateful to those who have given their approval for material to be released. When third parties have requested that material be redacted, we have complied with that request. This is a sensitive matter, particularly where the families of victims are concerned, so we want to ensure that we do nothing that causes them any further pain. I will publish further material as we secure agreement to do so. Let me first deal with the issue of prisoner transfer. On 29 May 2007, Tony Blair signed a memorandum of understanding with the Libyan Government. The Scottish Government consistently opposed the PTA, and on 7 June the First Minister made a statement to the Parliament. He expressed his concern that the memorandum of understanding could be interpreted as having implications for the due process of law, and he emphasised that the Scottish Government was determined that decisions on any individual case would continue to be made following the due process of Scots law. The PTA was finalised and signed in November 2008, and it was ratified in April this year. The Libyan Government applied for the transfer of Mr al-Megrahi on 5 May 2009. Despite our previous opposition, I was duty bound  to consider the application, and I did so according to due process.

No, it was not the case that it was automatically ruled out. It was possible for it to be homologated and for the appeal to be dropped. As Mr Baker is now aware, a note was lodged by the Libyan Government that indicated that it would be prepared to drop matters. Indeed, I received representations from Mr al-Megrahi's lawyers that their interpretation of how the situation could be dealt with was different. However, our view was that the application was properly submitted. The criteria would have to be met, but I was duty bound to consider the application. I received numerous letters and representations, and I recognised that a decision on transfer would be of personal significance to those whose lives had been affected. On 27 May, I received advice from my officials that proposed a process that would allow representations to be taken into consideration in a fair and appropriate fashion. Accordingly, I met groups and individuals with a relevant interest. I spoke to the United States Attorney General, Eric Holder, on 26 June. On 1 July, I met the families of victims from the United Kingdom; on 6 July, I met a lady from Spain whose sister was a member of the cabin crew; and on 9 July, I held a videoconference with families from the United States. In addition, on 23 July, I spoke with a family whose relatives died in Lockerbie. With the agreement of the families, I have published the notes of those meetings. I met Minister Alobidi and the delegation from the Libyan Government on 6 July and again on 10 August.

There were a considerable number of meetings with Libyan officials to discuss all relevant factors. The notes of those meetings have been published. I cannot give the member a  precise number off the top of my head, but if he cannot tally it from the information that is available on the internet I will be more than happy to provide it to him. We have provided full details of the relevant information. As I explained on 20 August, I faced conflicting advice on the extent of any pre-trial agreements about where any sentence should be served. In an effort to establish the true position, my officials wrote to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on 22 June, and the FCO replied on 3 July. I wrote to the Foreign Secretary on 16 July to seek further clarification. Ivan Lewis, Minister of State at the FCO, replied on 3 August. He indicated that the assurances that had been given to the Libyans were political, not legal. We did our very best to get to the bottom of the issue, but I still do not know the exact nature of the pre-trial discussions, nor what may have been agreed between the UK and Libyan Governments, or any other Government. However, I am certain of the clear understanding of the American families and the American Government. As I explained, that understanding was a critical factor in my consideration of the application for Mr al-Megrahi to be transferred, and it was on that basis that I rejected it. Prior to ratification, the prisoner transfer agreement was scrutinised by the Westminster Joint Committee on Human Rights. It was the first PTA that did not require the consent of the prisoner. As a result, Jack Straw gave a commitment that, in cases in which applications are not submitted by the prisoner, the prisoner must be given the opportunity to make representations.

No. The representations that I made to Mr al-Megrahi are the same as those that I made to every party—I said that, for a prisoner transfer application to be considered, criteria had to be met. That is what I stated to Mr al-Megrahi in the presence of his solicitor, Mr Tony Kelly. I think that Mr Kelly was quoted as saying on television that it was a factual discussion that some would interpret in the manner that Mr Rumbles has but that most others would see it as reasonable to point out that the criteria of the PTA required there to be no outstanding appeal. Under  the PTA, it was my obligation to make that clear to the party.

I cannot remember the precise details, but I have published the note of the meeting. I went to see Mr al-Megrahi about the prisoner transfer application. On compassionate release, as with other matters, I indicated that I would consider matters together because I did not see the point in going round all the parties again. As is recorded in the notes taken by civil servants, I stated to Mr al-Megrahi the criteria that had to be met—in particular, article 3(b) of the prisoner transfer agreement. Beyond that, I listened to his submissions and received a written note of them, which I have published. No further matters beyond that were discussed. He had the benefit of having his solicitor present. The discussions were on the PTA.

I must make some progress. During the process, all parties were given the opportunity to make representations directly to me. Mr al-Megrahi chose to make representations in person, just as other parties did. The families of victims and the US, UK and Libyan Governments all made their representations directly to me. When Mr al-Megrahi chose to make representations in person, clear advice was given to me that that request could hardly be denied. The application for prisoner transfer had been submitted by his national Government, not through his legal defence team in the High Court. As I have said, it would have been outwith the tenets of natural justice to refuse his request, and I met Mr al-Megrahi at Greenock prison on 6 August. The note of that meeting, together with the text that he read out to me, has been published. I now turn to compassionate release. Section 3 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 gives the Scottish ministers the power to release prisoners on licence on compassionate grounds. The act requires ministers to be satisfied that there are compassionate grounds that justify the release of a person who is serving a sentence of imprisonment. Although it does not specify the grounds for compassionate release, the principles are set out in guidance from the Scottish Prison Service, which suggests that compassionate release may be considered when a prisoner is suffering from a terminal illness and death is likely to occur soon. There are no fixed time limits, but a  life expectancy of less than three months may be considered an appropriate period. The guidance makes it clear that all prisoners, irrespective of sentence length, are eligible to be considered for compassionate release. That guidance has also now been published. I received an application for compassionate release from Mr al-Megrahi on 24 July 2009. In accordance with the procedure that is laid down in the 1993 act and the SPS guidance, the application was sent first to the SPS so that I could be provided with reports and recommendations by the governor of Greenock prison, the doctors and prison social work staff. The medical advice before me consisted of a report from the SPS director of health and social care, Dr Andrew Fraser, who is a former deputy chief medical officer for Scotland and one of the country's most eminent doctors. Let me be clear: national health service consultants, including experts in palliative care, were consulted as part of Mr al-Megrahi's care. Dr Fraser had access to all Mr al-Megrahi's medical records and conferred with NHS consultants as part of the process of drafting his advice on compassionate release. The people with whom he conferred included the NHS cancer consultant who acted as an external reviewer—the suggestion that the SPS director of health and social care did not consult relevant specialists is totally inaccurate. Dr Fraser's report took all the expert views into account and is clear. It states: "the clinical assessment is that a three month prognosis is now a reasonable estimate for this patient". The governor's report forms a further part of the procedure. It is equally clear and it, too, recommended compassionate release. As part of the established procedure in assessing an application for compassionate release, the case was referred to the Parole Board for Scotland on 10 August. It was considered by the board on 11 August, and the board's recommendations were included in the advice that I received on 14 August. The board was also clear on the question of Mr al-Megrahi's prognosis. Its report states that "there can be very little doubt as to the short life expectancy" of Mr al-Megrahi, and it made a unanimous recommendation, stating he was "suitable for compassionate release". Since 2000, the Scottish ministers have considered 31 applications put forward by the Scottish Prison Service for compassionate release on medical grounds. Seven have been refused and 24 granted. The seven applications were refused because they did not at the time meet the criteria for compassionate release. There has been no case in which the recommendations from  the Scottish Prison Service and the Parole Board were all positive but ministers refused the application. It has been suggested that Mr al-Megrahi could have been released from prison to reside elsewhere in Scotland. Clear advice from the deputy chief constable of Strathclyde Police on 14 August was that the security implications of such a move would be severe.

I say to Mr Purvis that I do not in this instance or in any instance breach the constitutional rules that we have in this Parliament and in this country that state that I do not interfere in operational matters for the police. I follow the advice that is given. I was advised that a minimum of 48 officers would be required simply to allow Mr al-Megrahi to live in Scotland. The option of having such a large police presence in a residential area and the need for additional resources to manage hospital visits rendered it utterly inappropriate, and I ruled it out on that basis.

I am in my final minute.

It was not a question of cost or capability—I know that Strathclyde Police would have risen to the challenge—but I found grotesque the idea of an armed camp or international media circus in a residential area, or even worse, in a hospice for the dying. Accordingly, as Mr al-Megrahi met the criteria, it was my responsibility to decide whether to release him. Based on the values, beliefs and common humanity that define us as Scots, I allowed him to return home to die. I move, That the Parliament notes the decisions by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to reject the application by the Libyan Government to transfer Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi under the prisoner transfer agreement between the United Kingdom and Libya and to release Mr Al Megrahi on  compassionate grounds; notes that the decision on compassionate release is in accordance with the recommendations from the Scottish Prison Service and the Parole Board for Scotland, and endorses the decision as being consistent with the principles of Scottish justice.

On 20 August, I announced the decisions that I had taken in relation to two applications in respect of Mr Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi. I am absolutely committed to the integrity of this institution, so I believe that it is appropriate that I lay out the basis and reasoning of my decision. Accordingly, I will now repeat the substance of that announcement, for the benefit of Parliament, and then answer any and all questions that members may have. On the evening of 21 December 1988, a heinous crime was perpetrated. It claimed the lives of 270 innocent civilians. Four days before Christmas, men, women and children who were going about their daily lives were cruelly murdered. They included 11 from one small Scottish town. That town was Lockerbie—a name that will forever be associated with the worst terrorist atrocity ever committed on United Kingdom soil. A prisoner transfer application was submitted by the Government of Libya seeking the transfer of Mr al-Megrahi, the man who was convicted in the Scottish courts of those offences. He also sought to be released on compassionate grounds. The crime preceded both the election of our Government and even the restoration of a Parliament to Scotland. The decisions were a consequence of the post of justice secretary that I  am proud and privileged to hold. The applications had been lawfully made, and I was obliged to address them. Final advice from my officials was given late on Friday 14 August 2009. I reflected on that advice before making and announcing my decisions. It was my responsibility to decide on the two applications. They were my decisions, and my decisions alone. In considering the applications, I strictly followed due process, including the procedures laid down in the prisoner transfer agreement and in the Scottish Prison Service guidance on compassionate release. I listened to many representations and received substantial submissions. I have already published key material on both the applications for prisoner transfer and for compassionate release. I will now look to publish other relevant material. Some of it can be published only with the permission of others, which we are now seeking. The Scottish police and the prosecution service undertook a detailed and comprehensive investigation, with the assistance of the United States and other authorities. I pay tribute to them for the exceptional manner in which they operated in dealing with both the aftermath of the atrocity and the complexity of a worldwide investigation. When Mr al-Megrahi was brought to justice, it was before a Scottish court sitting in the Netherlands. I pay tribute to our judges, who presided and acted justly. Mr al-Megrahi was sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of 270 people. When such an appalling crime is perpetrated, it is appropriate that a severe sentence be imposed. Mr al-Megrahi has since withdrawn his appeal against both conviction and sentence. As I have said consistently throughout, that is a matter for him and the courts. That was his decision. My decisions were predicated on the facts that he was properly investigated, a lawful conviction passed and a life sentence imposed. There remain concerns to some about the wider issues of the Lockerbie atrocity. This is a global issue, and international in its nature. The questions to be asked and answered are beyond the jurisdiction of Scots law and the restricted remit of the Scottish Government. If a further inquiry were felt to be appropriate, it should be initiated by those who have the required power and authority. The Scottish Government would be happy to co-operate fully in such an inquiry. On 5 May 2009, the Libyan Government applied for the transfer of Mr al-Megrahi. Prisoner transfer agreements are negotiated by the United Kingdom Government. Throughout the negotiations, and at the time of the signing of the PTA with Libya, the Scottish Government's opposition was made clear. It was pointed out that the Scottish Prison Service  had only one Libyan prisoner in custody. Notwithstanding that, the UK Government failed to secure, as was requested by the Scottish Government, an exclusion from the PTA for anyone who had been involved in the Lockerbie air disaster. As a consequence, Mr al-Megrahi was eligible for consideration for transfer in terms of the agreement that was entered into by the Governments of the United Kingdom and Libya. I received numerous letters and representations, and recognised that a decision on transfer would be of personal significance to those whose lives have been affected. Accordingly, I decided to meet groups and individuals with relevant interests. I met the families of victims: those from the United Kingdom who had relatives on board the flight, and those whose kinfolk were murdered in their homes in Lockerbie. I met a lady from Spain whose sister had been a member of the cabin crew, and I held a video conference with families from the United States. As I said earlier, I am grateful to each and every one of them for their fortitude on a matter that I know is still a source of great pain. I also spoke to the United States Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, and to the United States Attorney General, Eric Holder. I met Minister Alobidi and his delegation from the Libyan Government. I noted and considered all the points that were presented, and the relevant written representations that I received. Prior to being ratified, the prisoner transfer agreement was scrutinised by the Westminster Joint Committee on Human Rights. It was the first PTA that did not require the consent of the prisoner. As a result, Jack Straw, the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Justice, gave a commitment that in cases in which applications were not submitted personally by the prisoner, the prisoner must be given the opportunity to make representations. Mr al-Megrahi had the opportunity to make representations and he chose to do so in person. That was his decision. It would have been outwith the tenets of natural justice to refuse that request; therefore, I was duty bound to meet him. It was clear that the United States Government and the American families objected to a prisoner transfer. They did so on the basis of agreements that they said had been made, prior to trial, regarding the place of imprisonment of anyone who was convicted. The United States Attorney General, Eric Holder, was Deputy Attorney General at the time of the pre-trial negotiations. He was adamant that assurances had been given to the United States Government that any person convicted would serve his sentence in Scotland. Many of the American families spoke of the comfort that they had placed on those assurances during the past 10 years. That clear understanding  was reiterated to me by the US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. I sought the views of the United Kingdom Government, and I offered it the right to make representations or to provide information. It declined to do so. It simply informed me that it saw no legal barrier to transfer, and that it had given no assurances to the US Government at the time. It declined to offer a full explanation. As I said last Thursday, I found that highly regrettable. I therefore do not know what the exact nature of those discussions was, nor what may have been agreed between the Governments. However, I am certain of the clear understanding of the American families and the American Government: it appeared to me that the American families and Government either had an expectation, or were led to believe, that there would be no prisoner transfer and that the sentence would be served in Scotland. It was for that reason that I rejected the Libyan Government's application for prisoner transfer for Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi. I turn now, as I did then, to compassionate release. Section 3 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 gives the Scottish ministers the power to release prisoners on licence on compassionate grounds. The act requires that ministers be satisfied that there are compassionate grounds to justify the release of a person who is serving a sentence of imprisonment. Although the act does not specify what the grounds for compassionate release are, guidance from the Scottish Prison Service, which assesses applications, suggests that it may be considered when a prisoner is suffering from a terminal illness and death is likely to occur soon. There are no fixed time limits for life expectancy, but less than three months may be considered an appropriate period. The guidance makes it clear that all prisoners, irrespective of sentence length, are eligible to be considered for compassionate release. That guidance dates from 2005. On 24 July 2009, I received an application for compassionate release from Mr al-Megrahi. He was diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer in September 2008, and I have been regularly updated on the progress of his illness. I have received numerous comprehensive medical reports, which include the opinions of consultants who have been treating him. It is quite clear to the medical experts that he has a terminal illness—and, indeed, that there has recently been a significant deterioration in his health. I was provided with reports and recommendations by the governor of Greenock prison, the doctors and prison social work staff, and—as is laid out in statute—I consulted the Parole Board for Scotland. They all recommended compassionate release.  The opinion of Mr al-Megrahi's Scottish Prison Service doctors, who have dealt with him prior to, during and following the diagnosis of prostate cancer, and who have seen him during each of those stages, is that his clinical condition has declined significantly. Assessment by a range of specialists reached the firm consensus that his disease was, after several different trials of treatment, hormone resistant—that is, resistant to any treatment options of known effectiveness. Mr al-Megrahi was examined by Scottish Prison Service doctors on 3 August 2009. A report dated 10 August from the director of health and care for the Scottish Prison Service indicates that a three-month prognosis is now a reasonable estimate. The advice that the doctors provided is based not only on their own physical examination, but draws on the opinion of other specialists and consultants who have been involved in his care and treatment. He may die sooner or he may live longer. I could base my decision only on the medical evidence that I had before me. It had been suggested that Mr al-Megrahi could be released from prison to reside elsewhere in Scotland. The clear advice of the deputy chief constable of Strathclyde Police was that the security implications of such a move would have been severe—a minimum of 48 officers would have been required simply to allow Mr al-Megrahi to live in Scotland. I therefore ruled that out as an option. As the criteria had been met, it fell to me to decide whether Mr al-Megrahi should be released on compassionate grounds. I was conscious that there are deeply held feelings and that many people would disagree whatever my decision, but a decision had to be made. The decision that I took was based on the law of Scotland and on the values that I believe we seek to uphold. It was not based on political, diplomatic or economic considerations. It is a matter of great regret that Mr al-Megrahi was received in such an inappropriate manner, which showed no compassion or sensitivity to the families of the 270 victims of Lockerbie. Assurances had been given by the Libyan Government that any return would be dealt with in a low-key and sensitive fashion. Advance notice of my decisions was given to the UK and US Governments so that they could seek similar assurances. However, my decision was made following due process and according to the law of Scotland. I stand by the values and laws of Scotland. Scotland will forever remember the crime that was perpetrated against our people and those from many other lands. As I said, the pain and suffering will remain forever—some hurt can never heal and some scars can never fade. Those who  have been bereaved cannot be expected to forget, let alone forgive, but, as I said, Mr al-Megrahi now faces a sentence that has been imposed by a higher power. It is one that no court in any jurisdiction, in any land, could revoke or overrule. It is terminal, final and irrevocable. He is going to die. In Scotland, we are a people who pride ourselves on our humanity. It is viewed as a defining characteristic of Scotland and the Scottish people. The perpetration of an atrocity and outrage cannot and should not be a basis for losing sight of who we are, the values that we seek to uphold, and the faith and beliefs by which we seek to live. As I said, Mr al-Megrahi did not show his victims any comfort or compassion. They were not allowed to return to the bosom of their families to see out their lives, let alone their dying days. No compassion was shown by him to them, but that alone is not a reason for us to deny compassion to him and his family in his final days. Our justice system demands that judgment be imposed, but that compassion be available. Our beliefs dictate that justice be served, but that mercy be shown. Compassion and mercy are about upholding the beliefs that we seek to live by, and about remaining true to our values as a people, no matter the severity of the provocation or the atrocity perpetrated. For those reasons, and those reasons alone, it was my decision that Mr Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, who was convicted in 2001 for the Lockerbie bombing, and who is now terminally ill with prostate cancer, be released on compassionate grounds and allowed to return to Libya to die. That was my decision. I will now answer questions.

I will only reiterate what I said in my statement—that this was my decision and mine alone. That is what I have said throughout. I fully accept that Mr al-Megrahi showed neither compassion at the perpetration of the atrocity nor, indeed, sensitivity when he was shown compassion by us, but I reiterate that I stand by the values that we have. On the decision, I did, as I said, meet Mr al-Megrahi. I did not put any pressure on him to drop his appeal. It was his decision and his alone. That  was made clear to him, it was made clear to his agents, and it has been made clear throughout. The basis on which my decision was made was that I had to consider two matters—first of all, the prisoner transfer application. Iain Gray is wrong to say that it would have automatically been ruled out on the basis of the outstanding appeals. It is quite clear, and it was submitted by his agents, that those could have, as I say, been matters that were purified. Accordingly, I was required to go through matters and to consider the advice. Indeed, that was also made clear by the UK Government. On compassionate release, as I said, I followed two leads. I followed the due process that has been laid down by the law of Scotland—law that we inherited as a Government and that I inherited in my post of cabinet secretary. I followed the guidance and the submissions that I am required to—not simply the law, but what is laid down to ensure that justice is done. That included taking account of the views of the prison governor, the social work staff, the medical experts and the Parole Board for Scotland. As I said in my statement, each and every one of them recommended compassionate release. It is correct that there was still a further judgment for me to make, but I believe that due process was followed according to the law of Scotland and that—as is written on the mace—we are required to show compassion even when compassion and sensitivity are not shown to us. It is our position as the people of Scotland that we wish to treat people as we would have them treat us. Mr al-Megrahi's failure to show us compassion does not mean that we should ignore our position. I believe that I followed due process and upheld those values, and I stand by my decision.

The suggestion that Mr al-Megrahi could have gone to a hospice is ludicrous. As I have, Miss Goldie and many other members will have visited hospices, where people go to have dignity in their last few moments. It is denigrating to suggest that we could have sent Mr al-Megrahi to any hospice in Scotland, where others would have, frankly, seen a travelling circus. There was a suggestion that he could have gone to the house in Newton Mearns. As I said, we took clear advice from the Deputy Chief Constable of Strathclyde Police, our largest police authority, that 48 officers would have been required simply to cope with his being in the house, let alone the other problems relating to that. In a hospice, that would have been a problem for those who are entitled to dignity in their last moments. I took that view and followed the security advice of our officers. On compassion, I quote Archbishop Mario Conti, who has said that "compassion ... is, after all, one of the principles inscribed on the mace of the Scottish Parliament by which Scotland's Government should operate. The showing of mercy in any situation is not a sign of weakness. Indeed in this situation, with the pressures and circumstances of the case, it seemed to me a sign of manifest strength. Despite contrary voices, I believe it is a decision which will be a source of satisfaction for many Scots and one which will be respected in the international community." I accept that there are many in America who disagree with my decision. I have said that I understand that. Nothing can assuage the grief and pain that they have felt since 21 December 1988. They can be assured, though, that we followed due process according to the laws and values of the Government and people of Scotland. Equally, I am aware that there is some support in  the international community for what we have done as a Government.

Decisions on timetabling business for the Parliament are a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau and, ultimately, the Presiding Officer. I say to Mr Scott, as I said last  Thursday, that the decision was mine and mine alone—I stand by it and I live with the consequences. I turn to the other matters that Mr Scott raises. I did not speak to the Crown Office, as that would have been entirely inappropriate. As Mr Scott should be aware, we have separation of powers and it would have been contrary to that and wrong for me to have approached the Crown Office. Therefore, I did not do so. On the papers and process, we are looking to release as much of the information as we can, but we must ensure that those who have written, co-operated and given evidence—perhaps not on the basis that the information would be released—are at least given the courtesy of being asked whether they wish their names and the testimony and information that they provided to be released. Mr Scott has an absolute assurance from me, as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, that we will seek to provide the papers. I turn to two final matters. I appreciate that Mr Scott has spoken as the leader of the Liberal Democrats. He asked about the situation for people in future. When I looked back to find out about people who had previously been given compassionate release, I found that, on the watch of Jim Wallace—a former leader of the Liberal Democrats—a child killer who had been given a life sentence was released. Clearly, that man took but one life, not 270, but Jim Wallace was prepared to follow due process and to adhere to the values of the people of Scotland. Finally, I will simply quote from another former leader of the Liberal Democrats, Lord Steel, who said on the radio this morning that my decision was "clearly made on compassionate grounds. It wasn't made as part of a prisoner deal. It wasn't made as part of a trade agreement. People should focus on that. Most opinion in Scotland therefore is in favour of a decision to release him on compassionate grounds." Mr Scott might take a different view from Jim Wallace and David Steel, but I repeat what I said earlier—it was my decision. I stand by it and I will live with the consequences.

I can confirm that, leaving aside applications from those who failed to meet the criteria and were taken out at sift, no cabinet secretary has refused any application for compassionate release since 2000. That is the position in the guidance on the laws of Scotland that I followed and my predecessors followed before me.

Mr Baker is quite right to say that I did not meet the American families personally. That was not possible. However, we had a simultaneous videoconference link with families in New York and Washington. We had an exchange, and I listened for over an hour to matters that they raised. In respect of information and papers, we are seeking to make as much of that available as possible. We have to ensure that those who made contributions and provided us with information are able to give their consent to those papers being made available. If they do not give their consent, it would be inappropriate and wrong of us to publish those papers. However, as I said, we will deal with that issue. On a leak inquiry, there has been a huge amount of speculation about the issue that we are discussing. I did not read yesterday's Sunday Post , but I am told that it said that the decision had been made—and that it knew of it—four weeks ago. The Times of England—that great organ of the British establishment—said that I had made a decision to refuse Mr al-Megrahi's request. There was a wide range of speculation. However, as I said, I made my decision on Wednesday 19 August 2009 and I made it public on 20 August  2009. I stand before the chamber of the Scottish Parliament today to account for my actions, and I stand by them.

The guidance that underpins my position is laid down in the Scottish Prison Service rules that have been followed by my predecessors and by me. However, it was not only the law and guidance in Scotland that were important but the values of Scotland. Tricia Marwick referred quite appropriately to Archbishop Conti, and I am glad that there is an ecumenical position on this matter in Scotland. The Rev Ian Galloway, the convener of the church and society council of the Church of Scotland said: "This decision has sent a message to the world about what it is to be Scottish." We are defined as a nation by how we treat those who have chosen to hurt us. Do we choose mercy even when they did not choose mercy? I understand the deep anger and grief that still grips the souls of the victims' families, and I respect their views, but to them I would say that justice is not lost by acting in mercy; rather, our deepest humanity is expressed for the better. To choose mercy is the tough choice, and our nation met that challenge. I made that choice. It was a tough decision, but I believe that I followed due process and I believe that I stood up for the humanity that we pride ourselves on as a people.

I say to Dr Murray what I said to Annabel Goldie: the suggestion that we could have sent Mr al-Megrahi to a hospice in Scotland is ludicrous. People in a hospice are dying: they are terminally ill and they go there to spend their last moments with some tenderness and to be in the bosom of their family. That should not be turned into a media circus, which is what would have happened. We discussed matters with the Deputy Chief Constable of Strathclyde. As I have said in debates in the chamber on a variety of issues, I do not direct the police on operational matters. Their clear advice was that the consequences, if Mr al-Megrahi remained in Newton Mearns, would be severe. A minimum of 48 officers would be required just to have him located there, without any other considerations being addressed. I decided, on the basis of that advice, that that course of action would be inappropriate. I had a videoconference with those members of the American victims' families who wished to participate. They were contacted and we offered them every courtesy, as I have done since, and I am conscious of the hurt that remains. What I can say, Dr Murray, is that their hurt and pain started on 21 December 1988—it was caused by the action perpetrated by Mr al-Megrahi. I am aware, from having listened to them talk about their heartfelt pain and suffering, that I can do nothing to take away or assuage that pain, which will remain with them until the day that they die. I had to make a decision based not only on the ability to impose a judgment, which we had done, but to stand up for the values and law of Scotland, which is to be able to show mercy, which I did.

I made it clear that I thought that it was highly regrettable that the Government of the United Kingdom failed to exercise the opportunity to make representations, which was available to it, or to provide any information that would have counteracted information that I received from the families of the American victims and the Government of the United States. I believe that that was highly regrettable. I cannot comment on or state what did or did not take place, whether it involved Lord Mandelson, Gordon Brown or Tony Blair. As I said, I acted without consideration of political, economic or diplomatic considerations; I acted on the basis of the law and values of Scotland. It will be for others to decide whether my judgment was right or wrong; equally, it will be for others to decide whether the actions of others were appropriate.

It is for each and every one of us to decide what our definition of compassion is. When members take the oath and when the mace is brought in, they might give some consideration to what is inscribed upon it. Those words reflect the tenets to which I subscribe, and which I believe are also supported by the Church of Scotland and the Catholic church in Scotland. The member may disagree—that is his right and entitlement—but I stand by my definition of compassion, which I believe is supported by many. I have been extremely grateful for the support that the First Minister has shown to me on this  matter but, as I said, this has been my decision and my decision alone. I repeat: I made the decision, I stand by it and I face the consequences.

As I said, this was the first ever prisoner transfer application that could be made by a national Government without the consent of the prisoner involved. The application that came before me was made by the Government of Libya. Accordingly, I required to hear representations from the prisoner involved. Mr al-Megrahi chose to make those representations himself. I practised in the courts of Scotland over a period of 20 years and—except in an instance in which someone was seeking to harass a witness in a sensitive sexual offence case—I have never yet come across an instance of somebody who chose to represent themselves being refused that right and entitlement. Natural justice dictated it.

As I said in my statement, assurances were given to me by the Libyan Government, and I regret that they were not upheld. Assurances were sought by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office—clearly, there were going to be implications, for UK nationals and others, irrespective of which way the decision went. Accordingly, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the United States Government sought assurances. I regret very much that those assurances were not adhered to.

I stand by the investigation and the conviction, and indeed the fact that the conviction was upheld on appeal. I recognise that there are issues of concern to many; those are matters to be proceeded with by others. If an inquiry in Scotland is sought in the chamber or anywhere else, we can consider that. However, the laws of Scotland are clearly restricted to our small jurisdiction, the powers of the Scottish Parliament are constrained by the Scotland Act 1998, and many of the matters to which Mr Harvie refers are beyond the jurisdiction of the law of Scotland and the restricted powers of the Scottish Parliament. They may be matters that should be investigated, but that should be an issue for those with the powers and the relevant authority to do so.

I stand by the position that I stated on 20 August. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I have great pride in the actions that the police, the prosecution service and the Scottish courts have taken. They did Scotland a great service in seeking to bring Mr al-Megrahi to justice and to trial. I recognise that individuals here and elsewhere have cause for concern. It will be for them and others to decide whether there are to be any further inquiries. I say to Ms Grahame and everyone else that the Scottish Government will fully co-operate in any way to ensure that questions are answered, but it is for others to  decide on future inquiries. Our rules are restricted to the jurisdiction of our land, and our powers are restricted to the limited powers of the current devolved Parliament.

I am not aware of any such visit. We as a Government will do nothing to damage Scotland's interests in the middle east or anywhere else. Duncan McNeil may disagree with my decision, but I refer him to the view of his former colleague Tam Dalyell, who has said: "Mr MacAskill, the ... justice minister, has arrived at the right decision on compassionate grounds."

I made no such reference to Mr al-Megrahi, his counsel, whom I have never met, nor, indeed, his solicitor, who was with him throughout the meeting. No such suggestion was ever made; indeed, such a suggestion would have been entirely inappropriate. At the outset, I said that due process and proper guidance would be followed, and I made it clear that Mr al-Megrahi's appeal was a matter for him and the courts. He made his decision without any interference from me.

Dr McKee is better qualified in medical matters than I am. However, I can say that, at the request of the United States Government, the medical report has been provided to it; indeed, it has been made much more widely available. It is clear from the evidence contained in that report—not simply from the  director of health and social care at the Scottish Prison Service, but from consultants and other experts who dealt with Mr al-Megrahi's situation and treatment prior to, during and after diagnosis—that Mr al-Megrahi is terminally ill. That is a matter of record. He may live longer or not as long, but the information was that the prognosis was terminal. A three-month timescale was reached, and I made my decision on that basis.

We spoke to the deputy chief constable of Strathclyde Police. He is the man in charge of operational guidance. He gives the advice that we have to accept. I do not believe that I should ever seek to interfere with operational matters that are within the domain of the police. Annabel Goldie and Margaret Curran might believe that a hospice should have been made available in Scotland, but I believe that our hospices should be treated with the dignity and sanctity to which they are entitled. I do not believe that they should have had placed on them the encumbrance of numerous police officers, never mind the entourage that would have followed. Our people should have the opportunity to die in dignity and comfort.

As I said, we will be more than happy to produce whatever information we can. We are seeking for others—whether they be victims or national Governments—to provide us with their authority to release it. I cannot comment on what they will do or say because I have not heard from them. It will be for them to justify their actions.

As I said at the outset, such matters are for the Parliamentary Bureau. I do not seek to impose my view. If that is the wish of the bureau, clearly I will answer and account for my decisions as I have been prepared to do today. On such matters, we will be more than happy to co-operate fully.

Costs are not a factor that we take into account in the implementation of our justice system. Had the option been viewed as feasible or operationally appropriate, the Government would have been prepared to bear the cost. The decision was based on the consequences and severe problems that would have been faced by Strathclyde in ensuring the safety of Mr al-Megrahi and of a variety of other people. There would have been consequences for those who would have been living in close proximity to him. I had to consider such matters in relation to the suggestions about hospice care. I had to consider the consequences of a decision that would have forced Mr al-Megrahi on a hospice in Scotland that spends a lot of its time raising hard-earned funds to look after our people in their dying days. I followed operational advice. My decision was based on sound operational reasons, not on the diktats of finance.

According to the laws of Scotland, it would have been perfectly competent for the appeal to continue, even if Mr al-Megrahi was abroad or, indeed, deceased. That is a matter of fact under the laws of Scotland. However, I reiterate that no pressure was brought to bear on Mr al-Megrahi. I refer once again to The Times of London, which made it clear that Mr al-Megrahi was clear in his own mind that no pressure had been brought to bear on him by the Government of Scotland and that he had been returned home to die.

I do not seek to impose my views or my faith, beliefs and values on anyone. As I have said, I made the decision following the guidance that is laid out in the laws of Scotland and my interpretation of the values of Scotland. Many will disagree, as Mr Stephen and Mr McConnell have made clear; equally, I am heartened by the support that I have received from many other people in Scotland, in particular Archbishop Conti and the Rev Ian Galloway.

No, my admissions have never been advised to me as incompetent. My ruling out of the prisoner transfer was clear: I felt it to be entirely inappropriate. It was clear to me that the Americans had either received, or had an impression that they had received, clear information prior to the trial that Mr al-Megrahi would serve his sentence in Scotland. It was on that basis that I made my decision.

As Mr Carlaw will be aware, we do not operate criminal justice social work directly from St Andrew's house, and it is for that reason that the East Renfrewshire Council social work department has become responsible. Officials have been in discussions with that department, because it is appropriate that there should be such discussions at official level and because it was necessary to lay out the terms and conditions of the licence that Mr al-Megrahi required to sign. I will be happy to be kept advised—and I doubtless will be if there are problems. The fact is that the guidance in the law prescribes that the responsibility must lie with East Renfrewshire Council. There is no alternative: that is what is laid down in the due process that I followed. We have sought to ensure the appropriate conditions regarding place of residence, limitations on travel and other matters—conditions that are appropriate not only in Scotland and which take into account the peculiar and unique circumstances of this case.

I remind Mr Whitton of the timeline. The application for compassionate release came in on 24 July. The medical report I received from the director of health and social care in the Scottish Prison Service was dated 10 August. I received the final submissions from my officials late on 14 August. I made my decision on 19 August, and I made a full statement on 20 August. As I said in response to previous questions, there has been a variety of speculation on the issue. Some papers speculated that I was going to refuse compassionate release. Many institutions speculated that I was going to grant compassionate release. The Sunday Post  speculated that it knew all of that four weeks ago. I can only go by what I have stated. I have narrated the timeline. I followed due process.

I followed the three-month rule. That was the medical information given to me. The medical report from the Scottish Prison Service's director of health and social care was dated 10 August and was based on an interview and examination of Mr al-Megrahi on 3 August, when it was made clear that there had been a change for the worse in his circumstances. I do not have the benefit of Dr Simpson's training in medicine or psychiatry, but I follow the rules and guidance that are laid down for cabinet secretaries for justice. I recall that Dr Simpson, too, has served as a justice minister. I followed the same rules and regulations that he would have been required to follow had the issue come before him.

As I indicated, I received full and final submissions late on 14 August and I made my decision on 19 August.

Absolutely not.

On the basis of the medical evidence given to me, I have returned him to Libya to die.

The laws that I followed are the laws that were laid down by previous Administrations. Some of them were laid down under a Tory Administration south of the border and some were laid down under a Liberal/Labour Administration in the Scottish Parliament. I followed due process. I hope and believe that everyone who is given the privilege of serving as justice secretary, whatever political party they belong to, would follow due process without taking account of political, economic or diplomatic considerations.

I am very grateful to Malcolm Chisholm. I am glad that we share the same beliefs and values, and that they transcend our political affiliations. He is quite right—what took place was deeply regrettable. Mr al-Megrahi acted without compassion and showed no sensitivity, but as I said, our values are deeper and different.

I say to Ms Gillon, as I have said to others, that I was not prepared to foist the encumbrance of having to deal with Mr al-Megrahi on any hospice in Scotland that deals with the terminally ill in their last moments. That would have been unfair on them. Accordingly, I and I alone ruled that out. My decision on the other option of Mr al-Megrahi residing in a house was based on the advice that I had from the deputy chief constable of Strathclyde Police. I am a great supporter of our police, both as regards what they did following Lockerbie and what they do on a day and daily basis.

The Government is committed to reducing the number of knives that are carried and used in our communities and we are working with a range of partners, including the national violence reduction unit, to tackle the problem head on. Action includes: coordinated enforcement by the police throughout Scotland, which last year alone resulted in more than 250,000 people being stopped and searched and more than 1,600 weapons being seized from potentially dangerous individuals; education through our new £500,000 youth engagement initiative—no knives, better lives—which will educate young people about the dangers and consequences of carrying a knife; and earlier and effective intervention, such as the groundbreaking community initiative to reduce violence project in the east end of Glasgow, in which our £1.6 million investment is supporting partners to tackle the long-standing problem of gang violence.

Educating school pupils is extremely important. On Friday I was in Inverclyde, where an initiative was piloted at St Stephen's high school in Port Glasgow as part of the no knives, better lives programme. Pupils were shown hard-hitting images and a variety of matters were considered. The initiative was formulated through discussions with young people, to ascertain what they thought was best. The  initiative is being rolled out throughout Inverclyde and might be taken elsewhere. To some extent the initiative replicates what is going on in the east end of Glasgow. We are doing what we can to ensure that we have the appropriate tough laws for enforcement and that we can educate our young people about the consequences of carrying a knife. There was a knife amnesty, and we are not precluding anything. The priority of the police and other agencies is to ensure that the law is enforced and that we prioritise changing the culture. However, we never say never.

Tackling knife crime is not just down to CCTV; it is part of a package, which is why we have the community initiative to reduce violence. The Government thinks that there is a role for CCTV in making our communities safer. The matter tends to be dealt with by councils as part of the community safety agenda. I have witnessed the good work done through remarkable schemes using CCTV in Glasgow and elsewhere, and I do not doubt that CCTV will have a role to play as part of the CIRV project in the east end of Glasgow. It is about having tough laws and enforcing them, and it is about the police, prosecutors and the judiciary doing what they have to do. It is also about bringing together education, health and other partners to ensure that we educate our young people to change the culture of violence. There is no magic elixir or panacea. It is not simply about CCTV; it is about the appropriate legislative process and changing the culture, which is what we are doing.

I am grateful to members for their forbearance. There has been some turbulence in the journey to achieve what I think all of us recognise is necessary. I will attempt to deal with some points that were raised during stage 1 and allay concerns that Mr Brown and Mr Harvie expressed. Legitimate points were made. I thank members for the co-operation that has been shown. It is clear that issues to do with the constitution and the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which is being considered by the Justice Committee, will continue to divide us, but we are talking about a matter that affects the national interest. Therefore, it is right that members have united to ensure that the bill's provisions are delivered and that they recognise the considerable problem faced by the Scottish Prison Service and the anger that that was causing to people outside, who wanted us to deal with matters as expeditiously as possible. Obviously, there was some turbulence in ensuring that matters were dealt with, with the requirement for co-operation from south of the border. However, I do not wish to go over old ground; suffice it to say, we are grateful for the eventual agreement that matters should be proceeded with. It is clear that action still has to be taken, but what has happened shows that, when there is a necessity to solve a clear and manifest wrong, that can be dealt with. I pay tribute to the bill team and everybody else who has ensured that matters have been dealt with as speedily as possible. Many of the matters that have been raised can be summarised as questions of who, when and what. Clearly, the "who" is the Scottish Government and a number of agencies, such as the Scottish Prison Service, that need to be protected. Health boards, which might see  challenges in months and years to come, are currently protected by the Human Rights Act 1998. The bill's purpose is to give the Government and its agencies the same protection that is available to other public bodies under not the Scotland Act 1998 but the Human Rights Act 1998. Indeed, the protection that we seek is the protection that we thought that we had until the Somerville decision came out in the House of Lords. We want protection that, as Mr Aitken said during stage 1 of the bill, is uniform and is to the standard that was discussed in the European Parliament and elsewhere. In those discussions, it was agreed that a period of one year was appropriate for the matters with which the bill is concerned. We are not talking about accident claims or litigation about pecuniary affairs; we are talking about matters that relate specifically to human rights, so it is appropriate that we should operate under the European norm. The question of "when" has two parts. One is the date when the bill should come into force. I am grateful for the forbearance of Mr Aitken and other members. Obviously, we had one view but, as in with legal matters, there exists legal advice that is of a different complexion. Again, we want to achieve consensus and ensure that we avoid challenge. We are conscious that, despite the fact that this Parliament united to bring in compensation in relation to pleural plaques, the Government is being pursued through the courts by those who represent the insurance companies. However, in that regard, I should say that even the first orders of the cases of those who are pursuing us appear to be taking considerably longer than the entire parliamentary process took. That perhaps explains why we look forward with interest to Lord Gill's report. Something is manifestly wrong if the parliamentary process is significantly quicker than the first order in a judicial review. I am grateful to members for the points that they have raised, and I understand why people queried issues. We believe that date in November for the arrangements to come into force will provide greater certainty. It will not prevent people from seeking to make challenges and, as Bill Aitken said during stage 1, there are those who trawl around for issues on which they can base challenges, but that is a bridge that we will just have to cross when we come to it. The issue of when the arrangements will kick in was raised earlier. The issue arose in relation to the Somerville judgment, but, as Fergus Ewing said earlier, that judgment involved a point of principle rather than the question of when the wrong took place. The issues will involve facts and circumstances, to some extent, and the decision will be a matter for judicial interpretation. Clearly, a  breach of someone's human rights can take place over a short time or a long time. If someone has not done much about a breach that has gone on for 20 years and raises the matter after 18 months, it might be that that case will be treated differently from a breach that occurred when someone was detained for a shorter period. To Patrick Harvie, I say that neither the Government nor the Parliament is seeking to prevent prisoners from being able to pursue claims against the Government or the Scottish Prison Service. We have signed up to certain standards, and the recognition of the European convention on human rights is within our founding principles. If there are manifest breaches of people's human rights by a Government agency, it is correct that those people—regardless of whether they are prisoners—should have the opportunity to pursue claims against it. The bill is about closing a gap and ensuring that the public purse—which was in danger of being bled dry—can be used to fund other things. There will be instances in which there are opportunities to challenge, appropriately, the Government and its agencies. Rights are not being taken away; we are simply ensuring that we strike the right balance so that we can protect the public interest. The question of "what" involves cost. There are savings but, as Bill Aitken said, they will not be recurrent. The saving of £50 million is to be welcomed, but it is one 10 th of the sum of the cuts that we are facing as a result of decisions in Westminster. The opportunity for bounty, therefore, is limited. I am grateful for the forbearance of the Parliament, and I thank members for their constructive attitude. It has been a long and difficult journey, which will doubtless continue and go through further turbulence. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Antisocial behaviour should not be tolerated wherever it occurs, and our new framework will help local agencies to work together, in partnership with local communities and others, to respond in a proportionate, appropriate and timely fashion. I recognise the efforts that Sarah Boyack and other members have made in raising the issue of holiday flats. In light of that, we are engaging with local agencies to establish the scale of the problem and the extent to which existing measures can deal with it. Once that exercise is complete, we will be well placed to consider what further action, if any, may be appropriate.

Those matters are under review. I aware that there is an issue even in my constituency—I have had meetings about it in Lochend, as Sarah Boyack is aware. In addition to the Government's work, I have engaged with the City of Edinburgh Council on the issue, and it believes that the current antisocial behaviour legislation is adequate and appropriate. That said, we are reviewing other matters, such as houses in multiple occupancy. We must address the problem because it is clear that it represents a significant nuisance. In my experience, people tend to know who the landlord is. The landlords of the properties in question are frequently absentee landlords. In Lochend, the factors knew that the landlord owned not just one but 40 premises in the locality. It is a question of ensuring the appropriate balance. We must engage with agencies and local authorities to ensure not only that we protect from harassment every weekend those citizens who rent or buy a flat but that we do not constrain people who seek to let property for tourism purposes, as that would damage our economy and many parts of rural Scotland. We are investigating the issue. We accept that there is a problem and we will work with local authorities to ensure that they have the appropriate powers.

From discussions at official level and with councils, it seems that section 7 is not necessarily the panacea that people seem to think that it is, because the short nature of the tenancies means that it is difficult for the  legislation to be used effectively. We are happy to discuss the matter with members. We understand that antisocial behaviour notices have been served on landlords in only a few cases, and not at all in relation to holiday lets. It is not necessarily the case that section 7 offers a quick fix. We recognise that there is a problem. We must keep the issue in proportion and recognise that holiday lets are important in many parts of Scotland, especially rural areas. Equally, we must ensure that people who are trying to get on with living their lives, who have to get up for work the next day and who want their kids to have a sound night in bed are not disturbed by party flats.

As I just mentioned, the bill stems from the House of Lords judgment in the Somerville v Scottish Ministers case. Members will recall that we made a commitment to introduce before the summer recess legislation to deal with the issue. We have delivered on that commitment, so I hope that Parliament will take the final step by passing the bill. The judgment has meant that, unlike every other public authority in Scotland and the United Kingdom Government, the Scottish Government did not have the protection of a one-year time limit for human rights claims. The bill will remove that anomaly by establishing for human rights claims under the Scotland Act 1998 the same one-year limitation period as exists for claims under the Human Rights Act 1998. This is not just a theoretical legal issue. As I have told Parliament, as a result of the Somerville judgment, the Scottish Prison Service had to set aside £67 million of public money to meet claims for doubled-up slopping out, more than £11 million of which has been paid out. The bill will enable us to draw a line under that liability and will provide protection against indefinite exposure to future claims that might arise from alleged breaches of convention rights. Since the issue stemmed from the wording of the Scotland Act 1998, we needed to secure the UK Government's agreement to the proposed change. After lengthy discussions, we succeeded in securing that agreement. The Scottish Parliament then had to be given competence to legislate. An order that gave Parliament such competence was made on 10 June, having been approved at the Westminster Parliament and here at Holyrood. The bill is straightforward and reflects the approach that I outlined to Parliament in my statement on 11 March. It will require proceedings against the Scottish ministers for an alleged breach of convention rights to be brought within a year of the alleged breach, or such longer period as the court or tribunal considers equitable, having  had regard to all the circumstances. That will bring the Scotland Act 1998 into line with the equivalent provision in the Human Rights Act 1998. The new time limit will apply to proceedings that are brought on or after 2 November 2009, which means that it will apply not only in cases where the alleged breach took place after that date, but in cases where the alleged breach took place before 2 November but the petitioner had not brought their claim to court before then. The broad discretion that will be given to the court to allow cases outwith the one-year time period will serve as an important safeguard. It will ensure that the court can allow a case to proceed after one year when it is equitable to do so. In reaching a decision on that matter, the court will be required to act compatibly with the petitioner's human rights.

As I said, the ability to seek to overturn the time limit will be available, as with all damages cases in Scotland. In damages cases, the triennium applies. If somebody breaks a leg or their flight is delayed and they are absent because of circumstances that are beyond their control, so that a claim cannot be lodged within three years, the court takes action. However, such judicial discretion is not intended to apply to somebody who has not bothered to take an interest or make an investigation. The same provision will apply to the one-year time limit in the bill. On the Law Society's point, I make it clear that we are seeking not to introduce anything new, but to restore what was thought to apply in Scotland—the one-year time limit. That position will not be unusual to Scotland. We seek to apply to Scotland what applies elsewhere, to give the Scottish  Government the same rights as other Scottish bodies and bodies south of the border. That is not predicated on a whim or a fancy by either the Scottish Government or the UK Government. The one-year period has been fixed after debate and discussion in Europe. Indeed, in Europe it is viewed as the norm. Damages claims are complicated matters on which, for example, Bill Butler always has interesting points to make. We have a great deal of sympathy with such points, but human rights cases are distinct from cases to do with injuries that may result from asbestosis or a car crash, which is why the European norm of one year should apply, as happened with the UK Human Rights Act 1998. It was the norm that we thought applied in Scotland before the Somerville case made us think again. We are therefore now simply seeking to reaffirm in Scotland the position that we thought was the law, and to ensure that rights here are consistent with those south of the border and elsewhere. The Law Society of Scotland is perhaps gilding the lily. On the issue of the one-year period, people will still have opportunities to claim if they have good reason for not having been able to pursue a human rights claim. That is similar to the way in which people still have opportunities to pursue a damages claim within the triennium if they have good reason for not having been previously able to pursue a claim. I thank members throughout the chamber for the consensus on this important issue. It has been a good example of how all parties can work together in the public interest. I hope that the consensus will continue throughout today's deliberations. Following my original statement, consultation was mentioned. We acknowledge that people need to be made aware of the change that is being made. Robert Brown made a similar point earlier when we considered whether to treat the bill as an emergency bill. That is why we have informed a range of interests—including all serving prisoners—of the proposed limitation period. We stated publicly our desire for a change in the law as long ago as November 2007, so the change should not come as a surprise to anyone. We originally envisaged that the time limit would apply from 31 July, but parliamentary officials expressed concerns that that deadline might breach convention rights. The Government does not accept that view but, given the importance of the issue, we want as much consensus as possible about the bill. The bill therefore provides that the new one-year time limit will apply to proceedings brought on or after 2 November. There has, of course, been comment about our proposals since first we made them. Let us be  quite clear: as I said to Mr Harvie, the bill is not about removing anybody's right to seek redress for breaches of human rights. The grounds on which individuals will be able to make such claims will remain completely unchanged, and the time limit that the bill will introduce is the same as the time limit that currently exists under the Human Rights Act 1998. Any suggestion that the bill will somehow deprive anyone of their fundamental rights is completely unfounded. The Law Society has proposed certain amendments that would change the period from which the one-year time limit runs: instead of running from the date of the alleged breach, it would run from the date when the person became aware of the breach. I cannot support the amendments for a number of reasons. First, and crucially, they are incompetent. The section 30 order, which gives Parliament the power to pass the bill, is narrowly drawn and requires the time period to run from the date of the alleged breach. Secondly, the amendments are unnecessary. No evidence has been provided as to why the formulation in the bill is problematic. Thirdly, they are inconsistent with the time limit in the Human Rights Act 1998. Our aim is to ensure that a consistent time limit applies to all human rights-based claims against public authorities. We should be wary of any amendment that, in seeking to cure one inconsistency, ends up creating another. From day 1, there has been general agreement that the anomaly that was identified by the Somerville decision needs to be addressed. The bill will do that fairly and effectively. I therefore hope that Parliament will endorse our approach. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

I propose that the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be considered under the emergency legislation procedure. If Parliament allows the bill to be dealt with under that procedure, I will explain the background in more detail in the stage 1 debate. For now, I will outline why the bill should be handled under that exceptional procedure. The need for the bill stems from the decision of the House of Lords in the Somerville v Scottish Ministers case, which left the Scottish Government exposed to claims for damages that arise from alleged breaches of convention rights, but without the one-year time limit that was previously thought to apply. That has created uncertainty about which time limit—if any—applies in such cases and has led to tens of millions of pounds having to be put aside to meet possible compensation claims. It is generally agreed that the situation needs to be resolved as quickly as possible: passing the bill today would achieve that. The bill deals with a particular problem that the Somerville decision highlighted. The bill is short and focused and its wording reflects the order under section 30 of the Scotland Act 1998, which Parliament recently considered and which gives Parliament the power to pass the bill.

What Robert Brown said has much merit. It is clear that any Administration will use the emergency legislation procedure only sparingly. The Administration of which he was a part introduced emergency legislation that related to the circumstances of the Ruddle v The Secretary of State for Scotland case. We would have preferred to deal with the current situation a considerable time ago but, because of the need for negotiations with bodies elsewhere, that did not happen. That said, our intention has been on the public record. Through the media and other means, it is clear that people have been aware of the on-going matter. I give the assurance that we will not introduce emergency legislation as a matter of course. Normally, we will involve the Justice Committee—including Mr Brown as a member, and its eminent convener—to ensure that it plays its appropriate part in scrutinising proposals. However, it is clear that it is in the public interest to act expeditiously now, before Parliament winds down for the recess. The Government makes no apology for proceeding under the emergency procedure, although I accept that in the normal course of events, legislation should be subject to the full procedure, which allows greater scrutiny. The proposals have none the less been subject to substantial scrutiny and have been a matter of public record. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be treated as an Emergency Bill.  Motion agreed to.

I last met Chief Constable Stephen House on Tuesday 2 June, when we launched the strategy for tackling serious organised crime in Scotland, "Letting our Communities Flourish", and I had the pleasure of being able to announce a £4 million funding package over the next two years to boost Scotland's capacity to respond to organised crime.

After the launch, I had a meal with the chief constable and the director general of the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. Obviously, I do not interfere with operational police matters, but I can assure Johann Lamont that chief constable Stephen House views domestic violence as being one of the most serious matters facing not only Strathclyde Police but Scotland as a whole. He takes that view because it is part of the culture of violence in Scotland. As I have said before in the chamber, if kids grow up in a household in which it is standard for their mother to be abused by her partner, they will view striking out as the way in which they should deal with matters when they are upset or angry, and that behaviour will manifest itself as early as their nursery-school years. The chief constable has made it clear, from the top of Strathclyde Police, that domestic violence is a serious priority. He has the full support of the Government in that regard.

As well as domestic violence, the pipe band came up in the pleasurable meeting that I had with Stephen House and Gordon Meldrum. The matter that Stuart McMillan raises is an operational matter on which the police board has a responsibility to state clearly where it stands. The question is one of balance. As we know, there are issues around charges for policing in relation to the golf championship at Turnberry. However, the chief constable has been prepared to listen to arguments that there are benefits that go along with that. Stuart McMillan should raise the matter with the chief constable, as should members of the police board. Pipe bands are appropriate: this is the year of homecoming. Clearly, the police have their own priorities, but as with many issues, where there is a will there is a way, and the truth is often somewhere in the middle.

The total amount of financial penalties imposed by the High Court and sheriff courts in the past three financial years, excluding those cases in which civil diligence has been ordered, was £55 million.

The recovery of fines imposed by the sheriff courts has been consistently high. Over the past three years, 83 per cent of offenders have paid. Of the total figure, including civil diligence, 77 per cent has already been collected for fines imposed since 2005. In addition, 6 per cent is in the process of being collected in instalments; 10 per cent was discharged by a sheriff through alternative sentences such as supervised attendance orders or imprisonment; and 7 per cent is in arrears and will be the focus of targeted sanctions by the  newly brought-in fines enforcement officers, who have a variety of powers to ensure that fines imposed are paid.

I wrote to Angus McIntosh of Castlemilk Law and Money Advice Centre on 4 June, inviting him and his colleagues from the Scottish Association of Law Centres to meet me. The date of the meeting has not yet been fixed.

This Government acknowledges the problems that many people in Scotland are facing as a result of the recession. That is why we have extended the eligibility criteria for legal aid to record levels—levels that are far superior to anything offered by the Administration of which Ms Alexander was a member, and far superior to what is available south of the border. This Government is meeting all its obligations to deal with Scots who find themselves in debt and financial difficulties, but we do not have the powers to deal with consumer lending rates. I note that the member does not seem to raise questions with Baron Mandelson. It is scandalous that Scotland remains one of the few jurisdictions in which there is no maximum cap on the lending rate that can be charged. The Government is required to deal with people who suffer through debt and bankruptcy; meanwhile, the Labour Government down south fails to protect people who are targeted by sub-prime lenders or whoever else.

It is a pleasure to open this debate on a landmark piece of legislation. [ Interruption. ]

In reforming the law on rape and sexual offences, the bill will modernise and clarify a complex and sometimes confusing patchwork of common law and statutory provision, sweep away outmoded attitudes and terminology, and put sexual offences law on a statutory footing for the first time. It will provide Scotland with the clear, modern and robust legal framework that is required to ensure that victims are protected and offenders punished. We should take a moment to recognise that the bill also represents a major step forward for the Parliament. For the first time, an entire area of Scots common law is being codified—in other words, placed on the statute book. The primacy of Parliament in determining the law of the land is one of the hallmarks of democracy, and I regard the bill as a landmark that is worthy to mark the 10 th anniversary of devolution. Although the common law has been in place for hundreds of years, it has of course changed over time. It was only 20 years ago that it changed to recognise that a man could rape his wife. Until then, a woman was deemed on marriage to have given her irrevocable consent. It was only in 2001, following an appeal by the then Lord Advocate, that Scots law formally recognised that rape occurs when sexual intercourse takes place without a woman's consent, regardless of whether force is used to overcome her will. The bill consolidates those advances in the law and builds on them. In particular, it provides, for the first time, a statutory definition of consent. That is important because consent is central to the definition of sexual offences—sexual activity without consent is criminal. It is important that the law in this area is clear and easily understood, not only by specialist lawyers, but by ordinary members of the public. The bill defines consent as  "free agreement", which is a term that can be easily understood by all. The bill widens the present definition of rape, which, as the Lord Advocate has said, is one of the most restrictive definitions of rape in the western world. There is no doubt that other forms of attack, including male rape, are perceived by their victims as rape, and it is right that the law recognises that. At stage 2, we amended the bill to respond to the Justice Committee's view that there should be a specific offence of sexual assault by penetration. Such assaults can be particularly horrific for their victims, and the witnesses who gave evidence to the committee made strong arguments for distinguishing such behaviour from other forms of sexual assault. Despite those and other improvements, we must recognise that legislation cannot be the justice system's only response to rape and other sexual offending. That is why the Crown Office's work to improve the investigation and prosecution of rape and serious sexual offences is vital. In 2006, it published a report that made 50 recommendations on the reform of the investigation and prosecution of serious sexual offences, and it is now well on its way to implementing them all, thereby improving the way in which such offences are prosecuted. I take the opportunity to thank the Lord Advocate, who has long championed reform of the way in which the Scottish justice system deals with rape and other sexual offences. Her commitment has been instrumental in driving forward the reform of the substantive law and the modernisation and improvement of the way in which the Crown Office investigates and prosecutes such offences. It is crucial that steps are taken to change public attitudes and to challenge misconceptions. Rape Crisis Scotland has been at the forefront of that work. It has striven to change attitudes and to challenge the significant minority who are still too willing to blame the victim rather than the perpetrator. That is why we provided the organisation with funding for its hard-hitting campaign, "This is not an invitation to rape me", which sets out to challenge the myths and misconceptions about rape and to change the culture that exists in our country. It is vital that we challenge myths, assumptions and unacceptable attitudes if the legislative reforms and the changes that are being made to the prosecution of such offences are to be fully effective. We are on a journey that is not simply about legislation, but is about Scotland becoming a modern and progressive country in which the position of women is recognised and they are treated with the respect to which they are entitled.  The Government remains committed to doing all that it can to strengthen the justice system's response to those who commit these appalling crimes, and to making Scotland a stronger and safer place for all. This bill will provide a solid basis for that work, setting out a clear, modern and robust framework within which to prosecute these appalling and despicable crimes. This is only the beginning of what will be a long road, but I believe that we have made a good start. I am sure that Parliament will continue to take a close interest in the law as it develops in practice. We need to ensure that, as well as providing the legislative basis, we help the nation to make cultural and attitudinal changes. It gives me great pleasure to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Amendment 20 is intended to address concerns that the Subordinate Legislation Committee expressed in its stage 1 report. It provides that any order made under the ancillary order-making power at section 45, which contains supplemental, consequential or incidental provision, will attract affirmative procedure, and that an order that makes transitional, transitory or savings provision will be subject to negative procedure. That means that a higher level of scrutiny will be afforded in relation to ancillary provision that contains supplemental, consequential or incidental provision, because affirmative procedure will apply, whether or not such provision will modify primary legislation. We proposed the change because we recognised that special circumstances apply to the subject matter of the bill, because it replaces the common law and deals with the sensitive area of sexual offences. Therefore, the higher level of scrutiny that affirmative procedure affords is appropriate in the circumstances. Any ancillary order that makes transitional, transitory or saving provision will be subject to negative procedure irrespective of whether it  modifies primary legislation. That is considered to be the appropriate level of scrutiny for provisions of that nature. The transitional provisions that are required for the bill—in particular, those that relate to criminal trials—are significant. As a consequence, we have included the necessary provisions in the bill, which means that they have already been subject to parliamentary scrutiny. The Subordinate Legislation Committee indicated at its meeting on 2 June that it is content with the approach that we have proposed. I move amendment 20.  Amendment 20 agreed to.

This group is a series of minor technical amendments, most of which are consequential on changes made to the bill at stage 2. Amendment 72 amends the consequential amendment to section 10 of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 to take account of the introduction of new offences at stage 2. Amendment 76 ensures that paragraph 2(3) of schedule 4 is amended to ensure that the description of section 7(8)(b)(i) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 reflects the fact that district courts are to be replaced with justice of the peace courts. Amendments 77 to 82, and 84 to 98 are consequential on the introduction of the new offence provisions at stage 2. They extend amendments to the 1995 act concerning the retention of DNA samples of violent and sex offenders; powers to impose extended sentences for sex and violent offenders; prohibition on  personal conduct of defence in cases of certain sexual offences; and provisions concerning offences against children under 17 years of age to which special provisions apply as to when a person can be brought into custody without a warrant, so that they cover the new offences introduced at stage 2. I move amendment 72.  Amendment 72 agreed to.

During stage 2, Robert Brown MSP lodged amendments that were intended to clarify that the remaining offence provisions in section 13 of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 are concerned solely with male prostitution. I am grateful to Mr Brown for raising that issue during stage 2. He pointed out that section 13(9) of the 1995 act contains an offence of soliciting or importuning to procure the commission of a homosexual act, but that it is not clear that the offence is restricted to male prostitution. I agree that the offence as drafted goes wider, but I am informed by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service that it is no longer to prosecute behaviour other than that of those who live off the earnings of male prostitution. However, the offences at section 46 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 and section 1 of the Prostitution (Public Places) (Scotland) Act 2007 criminalise soliciting or loitering in any public place for the purpose of engaging in prostitution, by a male or female. As such, we consider that the element of section 13(9) to which I referred is not required to deal with male prostitution activity. Amendment 75 therefore repeals that element of the offence. That leaves the remaining offence at section 13, which is concerned solely with activity relating to male prostitution. Amendment 74 amends the title of section 13 to "Living on earnings of another from male prostitution", as this is all that the remaining offence provision at section 13(9) is concerned with. Amendments 73 and 116 repeal and replicate section 13(10) of the 1995 act to provide that, for the purpose of offences at sections 11(5) and 12 of the 1995 act, a premises shall be treated as a brothel if it is resorted to for homosexual acts in circumstances in which resort thereto for heterosexual practices would have led to its being treated as a brothel for the purposes of those sections. The amendments also include a definition of a homosexual act in new section 12A  and consequently repeal section 13(4) of the 1995 act. Amendment 123 amends schedule 5, to make further consequential repeals to section 13 of the 1995 act. I move amendment 73.  Amendment 73 agreed to.  Amendments 74 to 82 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

These amendments are consequential on the amendment made at stage 2 to retain the existing provisions requiring an accused to give advance notice to the Crown if he or she intends to claim in defence that the complainer consented to the conduct to which the charge relates. The Scottish Law Commission had provided for the repeal of those provisions, considering them redundant as the offences are now defined in terms of the absence of consent and, as such, that is an element of the crime that the Crown would always have to prove. However, the Crown Office and Rape Crisis Scotland are both of the view that the provisions are valuable in providing advance notice to the complainer of the accused's intent to claim that sexual activity did occur but that the complainer consented to the act, and that the bill's provisions do not change that fact. Amendments 83 and 118 delete the repeals that were consequential on the repeal of these provisions. I move amendment 83.  Amendment 83 agreed to.  Amendments 84 to 98 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

Amendment 99 amends schedule 1 to the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003. It adds the offences that are contained in the bill to the list of offences against children, conviction for which will lead to an offender being listed as unsuitable to work with children. Amendments 115 and 119 reverse the amendments to the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 on the offences that will lead to the offender being listed as unsuitable to work with children and protected adults. The  provisions have not been commenced as yet and a wider consultation will be held later in the year. The question of the treatment of the offences that are contained in the bill will be considered as part of that wider consultation exercise. Amendment 117 ensures that offences of sexual abuse of trust and non-consensual sexual acts with a person with a mental disorder, which the bill repeals, will continue to be considered as sexual offences for the purpose of section 210A of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. The effect is to enable extended sentences to be imposed. I move amendment 99.

The measures will remain in place. Clearly, protection of our children is fundamental. The purpose of the consultation is to ensure that we get right the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007. The member has my assurance that measures will remain in place to ensure the protection of our children. We will consult as widely as we can. I am more than happy to discuss with him at some future juncture how to ensure that we get that right. Our current protection remains in place. We will ensure that we enhance protection in future.  Amendment 99 agreed to.

Amendment 100 deals with shameless indecency and public indecency. It addresses an issue that has arisen as a consequence of the decision in the Webster v Dominick case in 2003 that certain conduct that had previously been prosecuted as "shameless indecency" should in future be prosecuted as  "public indecency". The amendment provides that an offender will be subject to sex offender notification requirements when convicted of public indecency in the same circumstances as would have applied had he or she been convicted of shameless indecency prior to the Webster decision. Amendments 101 to 113 ensure that, in circumstances where an offender would be subject to the sex offender notification requirements on imprisonment, the offender will also be subject to the notification requirements if he or she is detained in hospital due to having been found insane in bar of trial, or not guilty by reason of insanity. Amendment 114 is a technical amendment that preserves the general power to make offenders subject to sex offender notification requirements where there is a significant sexual element to their offending and even where the offence is not otherwise specified in schedule 3. I move amendment 100.  Amendment 100 agreed to.  Amendments 101 to 115 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

The amendments in this group are minor, technical amendments that are consequential to changes that were made to the bill at stage 2. Amendments 15 to 18 will amend the provisions in section 38, which provide a court with powers to convict an accused of an offence other than that charged, to take account of the  new offences that were introduced at stage 2. Amendments 48 to 68 will amend schedule 2, which lists the alternative verdicts that are available in respect of the offences that are contained in the bill, again in consequence of the new offences that were introduced at stage 2. I move amendment 15.

Amendments 13, 14 and 19 deal with offences by non-natural persons, that is, companies. Although the nature of the offences in the bill are such that they cannot normally be committed by a non-natural person as the principal actor, a non-natural person could be found guilty of aiding and abetting or indeed conspiring to commit the offences that are contained in the bill. For example, as sexual offences against children are extra-territorial in extent, a company that is involved in the arrangement or facilitation of child sex tourism might be art and part guilty of offences in the bill. The amendments will ensure that we are fully compliant with our international obligations to establish the liability of persons, including non-natural persons, who are guilty of certain behaviour concerning the exploitation and abuse of children. It is not possible to imprison or impose a community penalty on a non-natural person. Amendments 13 and 14 will ensure that it will be possible to impose a fine on a non-natural person, such as a corporate body or partnership, that is convicted of an offence for which a fine cannot be the sole penalty that is imposed on an individual. Amendment 19 provides that, if any offence in the bill is committed by a non-natural person with the consent or connivance of—or because of neglect on the part of—any director, manager, secretary, partner in a partnership, trustee of a trust, member of an unincorporated association or other similar non-natural person, including any person who purports to act in that capacity, that individual, as well as the non-natural person, commits the offence and may be liable to be prosecuted and punished accordingly. I move amendment 13.  Amendment 13 agreed to.

I thank Robert Brown for explaining his purpose in lodging amendments 121, 122, 124 and 125, and the Justice Committee's convener for his lucid explanation. I am sure that every member agrees with the committee's stage 1 report that a fine is not an appropriate sole penalty for a person who is convicted of a serious sexual offence. That is why we lodged stage 2 amendments to ensure that a fine cannot be imposed as a sole penalty when a person who is tried on indictment is convicted of rape, rape of a young child, sexual assault by penetration, sexual assault on a young child by penetration, sexual assault or sexual assault on a young child. However, as Mr Brown and the committee's convener explained, a person who is tried on indictment for a serious sexual assault might be cleared of most allegations and convicted only of a relatively minor sexual assault that would not normally be tried on indictment. In those circumstances, it would be inappropriate to provide that the court could impose only a sentence of imprisonment or, indeed, an admonition. The full range of sentencing options should be available to the court in dealing with people who are convicted of sexual assault or sexual assault on a young child. I make it clear that the bill will give the High Court the power to jail for life anyone whom a jury convicts of rape or sexual assault. We would  expect any conviction for a serious sexual assault to result in a tough sentence and not just in a fine. It is simply the case that no substantive evidence suggests that that will not happen.

The position is clear. For the avoidance of doubt, I will run through again the list that I gave earlier—it relates to convictions of persons tried on indictment for rape, rape of a young child, sexual assault by penetration, sexual assault on a young child by penetration, sexual assault and sexual assault on a young child. We seek to address the situation, which Mr Brown dealt with lucidly. The intention is to make sentencing options available to the court, as under the current common law. The bill will consolidate and improve the law on sexual offences and will deal with the matter that Margaret Curran raised. We do not want the law of unintended consequences, which was raised in relation to Margaret Curran's amendment 1. If the amendments in the group were not agreed to, we would allow the unintended consequence of not making the option of a fine available, as elucidated by Mr Aitken and Mr Brown. Jail will be available and should be the option in most instances for those who are tried on indictment. However, when the offence is reduced and when the wisdom of hindsight shows that it should have been dealt with in summary proceedings, the court should be in the position that currently applies.

I fully appreciate Robert Brown's comments and will do my best to reassure him that the issue that has been raised is a matter of concern and that how we address and discuss it with our young people is important. However, Stewart Maxwell has made an appropriate point. It is difficult to deal with the matter in the bill, when we are dealing with specific matters relating to sexual offences, or even for me to be able to provide a reassurance in the heat of a debate. However, I can give a general view on the Government's general direction of travel, which is that we will ensure that we deal with the matter.  Amendment 120 seeks to impose two obligations on the Government that it would require to discharge before part 4 of the bill is commenced. The first obligation would be to consult under-18s on their attitudes to part 4 of the bill; the second would be to "undertake an information and publicity campaign about this Part." Both obligations must be carried out before part 4 of the bill is commenced. The motive behind the amendment is to be applauded, but there are considerable flaws in both those aspects, which is why we urge members to vote against the amendment.

Absolutely. I hope that Robert Brown will take what I am going to say in the spirit in which it is meant. A requirement to consult children on their attitudes to part 4 of the bill after it has passed into law seems to be of very limited value. We agree that it would be helpful to consult children and young people to help us to decide how best we should progress the bill, but their attitudes to part 4 should not be the focus. It would be much more productive to engage with children and young people on how best we can communicate with them about the issues that the bill deals with—certainly in part 4, but not exclusively in that part. The bill deals with other issues that will be relevant to children and young people, particularly its provisions on consent and positions of trust.

We are doing what we can. The Government has made it clear that we believe that the bill, as amended by Margaret Curran, Bill Aitken and perhaps by others, is appropriate and that we should have an appropriate legislative base. However, we would delude ourselves if we thought that the problem in Scotland would be entirely solved by the legislative base. We must change the culture and attitudes that are prevalent among far too many people, albeit that those  people represent a minority of our population. It is a journey.

Absolutely. There is a requirement on the Government under the European convention on human rights to make aspects of the law gender neutral. Equally, it is clear that young females face different problems. The pressure that has been mentioned is clearly one matter. The issue is how to implement things—through the police, the prosecution or the health service, for example. We need to raise awareness, change attitudes, do what we can to protect the vulnerable, and have the legislative basis to ensure that we can prosecute predators and those who act against the will of our Parliament and our laws. As I explained when Mr Brown lodged his amendment at stage 2, our response to the committee's stage 1 report on the bill confirmed that "The Government intends to undertake an information and publicity campaign following enactment of the Bill and that this will include age-appropriate material aimed at young people." I am happy to confirm that that continues to be our intention. As I have said previously, as part of our planning for that campaign, we intend to consult children and young people on the most effective way in which to communicate with them on the important issues that the bill deals with and, indeed, on other matters that are, as Margo MacDonald suggested, equally important in terms of getting the message across. I am happy to repeat our earlier commitment that the Government will undertake a publicity campaign before commencement of part 4 of the bill. I am also happy to reiterate our commitment that children and young people will be consulted on the best way for that campaign to communicate with children on part 4. Finally, we consider that there are technical defects in the drafting of amendment 120. It does not make clear what kind of consultation with children and young people is required. It is also unclear whether ministers are required to consult every child under 18 in Scotland. If they are, can very young children be said to have formed attitudes about the content of part 4? If the intention is that consultation should be limited to  certain age groups, the amendment does not set a lower age limit on children who should be consulted.  The requirement for "appropriate" consultation does not appear unreasonable, but it does not answer the question of what appropriate consultation is. In addition, amendment 120 does not set out what ministers should do following such a consultation. In effect, that means that the duty to consult is somewhat meaningless. As mentioned, a statutory requirement to consult children before the commencement of part 4 would not appear to serve any purpose, in light of the fact that the law, which reflects the will of the Parliament, will already have been passed. I acknowledge the points that Robert Brown and other members have made. What matters is that we communicate to our young people and children, whether they are being pressured to engage in such activity or are doing it out of foolhardiness or whatever. We need to get that right. I give Robert Brown the undertaking that we will seek to ensure that the communication is age appropriate. That is perhaps not best dealt with by me. We have people who are better qualified to ensure that we have the appropriate vehicles and mechanisms. However, I give Robert Brown that reassurance.

We are grateful to Margaret Curran for making her valuable points and for lodging amendment 1. We support the amendment. We acknowledge that this is a complicated area of law, and Mr Brown, Mr Harvie and Mr Aitken have acknowledged that too. However, we believe that the amendment is proportionate and balanced. The central principle of the bill is that people should have the autonomy to give their consent but also to withdraw it. A person might be incapable because of alcohol or another substance, or because they are asleep, and the law should make it clear that the person cannot give consent while in that state. That is how the law operates at present, and it is our clear intention that there should be no lessening of the protection afforded to people who are incapable of giving consent. Rape Crisis Scotland and others have expressed concern that the bill fails to protect the sexual autonomy of people who are incapable of consenting to sexual activity because of the effects of alcohol or any other substance. The Government agrees that the law should protect the vulnerable. Amendment 1 will amend section 10(2)(a) so that there can be no consent to sexual activity if the conduct occurs when the complainer is incapable of consent because of the effects of alcohol or any other substance. The Government agrees with that. Furthermore, we consider that amendment 1 will bring greater clarity to the law. It will send a simple message: that sexual activity with a person who is so intoxicated that they are not capable of giving consent is criminal. We are not suggesting that anyone who has consumed alcohol, or even anyone who is quite drunk, cannot consent to sexual activity. The provision that we are discussing is concerned only with protecting people who are so intoxicated as to have lost the capacity to choose whether to engage in sexual activity.

That is a separate matter, and not the one that Margaret Curran has correctly raised. The convener of the Justice Committee rightly suggested that there was a lacuna. The issue was raised by Rape Crisis Scotland and it has been pursued by Margaret Curran. This is about protecting intoxicated people from what might happen to them in their vulnerability. Text messaging and other matters are dealt with in the bill because we realise that sexual offences come in a variety of forms other than rape and sexual activities. However, what we are dealing with here relates specifically to consent to sexual activity. I cannot foresee any circumstances in which sending a text message to somebody who was comatose, for whatever reason, would be relevant to that. The amendment tidies up one specific matter. Mr Harvie raises issues of concern that are dealt with elsewhere in the bill but not in the amendment, which deals with other specific matters. The purpose of the amendment is to protect those who are unable to consent. It is not to interfere with people's opportunity to do whatever they choose when they have had too much to drink. Nevertheless, there are some people—as Mr Harvie has said—who target people and seek to use alcohol or other substances to get people into a state in which they cannot consent. Therefore, we fully agree with Margaret Curran.

We are having belt and braces, to be frank. Yes, there are other aspects of the bill that provide other protections, but the amendment deals with the specific matter of somebody being so incapable that they cannot consent. There are other protections in the bill relating to a myriad of matters from text messaging to the abuse of children, but we believe that Margaret Curran has made an important point and we are happy to support the amendment.

The amendments in the group deal with restrictions on the defence of mistaken belief as to age, which can be a defence to offences against children. Amendment 2 provides that section 20, which states that it shall not be a defence to an offence against a young child that the accused believed the child to have attained the age of 13 years, shall apply to the new offences against young children that were introduced at stage 2. Amendment 10 is a technical amendment that is intended to ensure consistency in the wording of the provision in section 29. Amendments 21 to 47 amend schedule 1Z to add other sexual offences to the list of relevant sexual offences. If an accused person has previously been charged by the police with such an offence, that will preclude an accused from claiming the defence of reasonable mistaken belief as to age, when they are charged with an offence against an older child. The amendments have been lodged to take account of the commencement of the Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 and to ensure that the schedule covers all sexual offences against children in Scotland, England and Wales and Northern Ireland, both current and historical. Amendments 69 to 71 make consequential amendment to section 9 of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995, which makes it an offence to permit a girl to use premises for intercourse. Section 9 of the 1995 act provides that an accused can make use of a defence of reasonable mistaken belief as to age, and sets out the restrictions on making use of that defence. The amendments provide that the defence under section 9 of the 1995 act cannot be used if an accused person has previously been charged by the police with a relevant sexual offence, or is subject to a risk of sexual harm order. That was done to make the defence in section 9 of the 1995 act subject to the same restrictions that are placed on the equivalent defence in section 29 of the bill. I move amendment 2.

These amendments are technical amendments to the provisions at section 30 and 30A concerning circumstances in which it is not possible to establish beyond doubt whether a child had or had not attained a particular age at the time when an offence was committed. Those amendments extend those deeming-of-age provisions to the new offences that were introduced at stage 2. The amendments also make minor changes to the drafting of the provisions for clarity and brevity, but they do not have a substantive effect on how the provisions will operate. I move amendment 3.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

Members have been remarkably united today—and rightly so, because the bill is about doing what is right. There have been excellent speeches by members on all sides of the chamber, and it is recognised that it is appropriate that we pass the bill. Equally, it is clear that the bill alone will not be the solution, because we have to change attitudes, and ensure that the law is implemented. The bill is about doing what is right for our people, irrespective of whether they have disabilities, and whatever sexual orientation they may choose. They have been victims of low-level antisocial behaviour on some occasions, and serious assaults that have resulted in tragic murders on other occasions. Each individual has a personal tale. There are areas not far from the Parliament where what was euphemistically known as queer bashing used to take place, and I remember such instances from my 20 years as a defence agent in these cities. It involved premeditated attempts by individuals to perpetrate serious assaults on people simply because they did not like the sexual orientation of those people, and that is unacceptable. The people responsible for those assaults were punished, but it is appropriate that we not only recognise the gravity of such crimes  but record them so that people do not feel that they have to shy away and make changes. We must encourage people to report such crimes. Margaret Smith is correct to say that the police have come a long way, but it is clear that all of us, including police officers and our broader society, still have a distance to travel. Many people were perhaps sceptical about how disabled people have been affected, but I was at an event in Kilmarnock this week at which an old lady aged 79 complained about instances of antisocial behaviour including the throwing of stones, which is clearly an assault, at her middle-aged daughter, who suffers from learning disabilities. That was clearly distressing not just for the daughter, as the recipient of that bile and anger, but for her elderly mother, who has looked after her throughout her life and is clearly worried about what will happen to her daughter when she passes away. It is important that we make it clear that such behaviour is unacceptable in 21 st century Scotland. I say to Richard Baker that the Government recognises the need to assign codes to aggravations in order to track them. The Crown Office, which is responsible for the matter, has assured us that it assigns codes to aggravations and that it will therefore be possible to record and track crimes. That will help us to determine the extent of the problem that we face and to continue the good work, whether in law enforcement or in education, to change the culture in Scotland. Bill Aitken asked whether the bill will be reviewed in four or five years' time. Irrespective of who the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is at the time or the nature of the Administration, the Crown Office tracking means that we will be able to track the impact of the bill year by year and begin to gather evidence on the extent of the types of hate crime that it covers. Whether that is done by the Justice Committee, the Parliament or the Government, we will be able to consider, to review and to act accordingly. As Patrick Harvie said at the beginning, the bill is not simply about recording how opposed we are to hate crimes and ensuring that society recognises their gravity. It is also about tracking and recognising the extent of the problem, and that might mean that further changes are required. To some extent, the bill simply builds on a journey that we are making as a society, and one that was initiated by previous Executives—Robert Brown and others mentioned the establishment of the working group on hate crime. The bill represents a further small, but significant, step. In the year of homecoming, when we seek to celebrate Scottish identity, both for those who have stayed here in Scotland and for those who have travelled far and wide, it is appropriate to  remember that we are all Jock Tamson's bairns and state that, as a Government, a Parliament and a country, we will not tolerate hatred or the perpetration of low-level or serious assaults against any individual, and certainly not on racial or religious grounds. Equally, in 21 st century Scotland, we will not tolerate, condone or allow to go unchallenged assaults that occur because of someone's sexual orientation or disability. The bill might represent a small step, but it is a great credit to Patrick Harvie and those who assist him. It is an appropriate step towards making Scotland all that it can be and making the law fit for purpose by reflecting all our communities in the 21 st century.

I am pleased to welcome the final parliamentary stage of Patrick Harvie's Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill. I pay personal tribute to him; members' bills are few in this Parliament, they do not come easy and it must have been difficult for him and those who have supported him. The Government is delighted to have been able to give its support, but I pay tribute to his and his colleagues' perseverance. Although it might be a small step, it is a significant one that we should welcome. The bill will create statutory aggravations for crimes motivated by hostility and ill-will towards victims based on their sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability. We promised in our manifesto to carry out the recommendation of the working group on hate crime and introduce such aggravations. We were therefore happy to have the opportunity to support Patrick Harvie's bill and to co-operate with him to take the work forward. Throughout the process I have been especially encouraged by the level of support for the introduction of the aggravations contained in the bill, both in the Parliament and externally. I have been grateful for the support provided to us from organisations with a shared interest in the legislation. I am also grateful to the Equal  Opportunities Committee and the Justice Committee for their careful and thorough scrutiny of the bill. Hate crime, put simply, is an offence motivated by an offender's hatred of a core element of someone's identity. There is no place for that in a modern Scotland; it is as entirely unacceptable as it is entirely unreasonable. The provisions in the bill will improve the way in which we deal with hate crime. If a crime has been committed and it can be shown that the motivation was hostility and ill-will based on the victim's sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability, the sentence should reflect that. The bill requires the courts to consider the aggravation at the point of sentence, as indeed is the case for other statutory aggravations that the Parliament has put in place. One such example came up in relation to questions raised by Bill Butler at question time. The bill provides an opportunity for the sentence to reflect both the serious nature of the offence and its motivation. The bill does not create any new offences. Hate crime can range from harassment to property damage to violence and, in some tragic and extreme cases, even to murder. The aggravations can therefore apply to any crime or offence no matter how serious or trivial. The provisions in the bill will help to ensure that there are appropriate and consistent reporting and prosecution policies from the various agencies in the criminal justice system in Scotland. They will send a clear message that prejudice towards and hatred of social groups as a motive for committing a crime is unacceptable and will not be tolerated. They will allow us to monitor the extent of those types of crimes in Scotland and tailor our approaches to tackling them. The bill will ensure that an aggravation must be acknowledged and taken into account at the point of sentence. It will be clear to the offender and the broader public, at the point of sentence, just how seriously the aggravated nature of an offence is viewed by both the sentencer and wider society. The impact of that on the sentence will obviously remain a matter for the discretion of the judge or sheriff who is presiding, because they are dealing with the particular individual and instance, but the existence of the aggravation will require to be recorded at all stages in the criminal justice system. It is the role of Government and Parliament to put law on these aggravations in place. It will, of course, be for the police, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and other criminal justice services to ensure that the law is made full use of.  We believe that this type of crime is substantially underreported in Scotland, which is rather tragic. The bill will not simply ensure that the law recognises how we wish such crime to be seen, but transmit a message to all those who might be victims that we are taking it seriously. We hope that the existence of the aggravations in statute will encourage more victims of hate crime to come forward. We want people to be secure in the knowledge that what has happened to them will be taken seriously and will be dealt with effectively. Equally, we want offenders to realise that their actions are entirely unacceptable and that they will face stern consequences for them. We believe that the bill will help to make that possible. The bill is not focused on the identity or situation of the victim of a hate crime or the perceived or actual vulnerability of any victim; its sole focus is the prejudiced motivation of an offender. The policy intention behind the bill is to provide criminal justice agencies with an additional means of tackling crime motivated by prejudice. That is why I am pleased to confirm that the Government supports Patrick Harvie's bill. I urge members to do likewise in order to help create a Scotland in which diversity is respected and can be celebrated and tolerated by all.

In September 2007, the Government rolled out to all courts the mandatory use of supervised attendance orders when a custodial sentence might otherwise have been imposed for default on fines of £500 or less. That move is  considered to have been largely responsible for a significant drop in the number of fine defaulters who have ended up in custody. In 2007-08, fine defaulters represented 29 of the average daily prison population—a reduction from 46 in the previous year. Similarly, the number of fine defaulter receptions declined from 5,963 in 2006-07 to 3,610 in 2007-08. We expect a further decrease in 2008-09, reflecting full-year operation of the mandatory SAO provisions.

I do not have the figures to hand, but many have been. Certainly, many offenders in the women's prison at Cornton Vale have been offended against in the past—sometimes, tragically, with the result that they have acquired psychological and addiction problems that can be traced back to the sexual abuse that they suffered as a child.

The member is mixing up two entirely distinct matters. The pursuing of fines is legitimate and was introduced in legislation that was created by my predecessor from the Labour Party. As with so many things on Mr Baker's watch, it appears that he says one thing in administration and another thing in opposition. We believe that the action that is being taken to roll out fines enforcement officers and the powers that go with that are good things. Short sentences are a separate matter, and all the evidence is clear. It is not a matter of what is tough and what is soft; it is about what is most effective. It is clear that community sentences break the cycle of offending to make our communities safer.

The statistics show that approximately 13 per cent of SAO breach applications result in the revocation of the order and the imposition of a custodial term. That is a good result, as it means that 87 per cent of people do not breach and are therefore back on track. As I said to Mr Baker, we should not posture and grandstand and indulge in politicking in a way that endangers the open estate or undermines the position of our prison officers, who are doing a difficult, demanding and sometimes dangerous job. Instead, we should deliver what is effective. That is what this Government is doing, which is why we are happy to build on initiatives that we inherited from Cathy Jamieson. The tragedy is that, although Richard Baker supported her actions when his party was in administration, he seeks to undermine this Government when it does exactly what she did. We are stopping the politicking and delivering what works.

The Scottish Government does not currently hold information on the number of domestic abuse incidents that were recorded by the police after the old firm match on 9 May 2009. However, Strathclyde Police analysis shows that domestic abuse rises by more than 40 per cent on the day of an old firm match. There is no excuse for domestic abuse. Strathclyde Police and I take this issue very seriously, which is why I attended a joint press conference two days before the match to explain the actions that the police were taking to address the problem. I was delighted that the force focused additional officers on proactive and preventative measures and on working with partners before, during and after the fixture, to deter and prevent violence and disorder.

The member's point is quite right. The Government is seeking to build on legislation and initiatives that were put in place by Cathy Jamieson, on the watch of the Administration that Mr McCabe was part of, and by the Lord Advocate, under both the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration and the current Scottish National Party Administration. Where there are legislative requirements, they will be delivered. There is also a requirement to tackle the cultural problems of the abuse of women and domestic violence, which are often fuelled by alcohol—the statistics show that alcohol is almost invariably involved in such violence. In Coatbridge, close to Mr McCabe's patch, I have seen the innovative measures that are being taken by the police to educate, prevent and deter, and to ensure that, when incidents occur, action is taken.

As I said previously, these problems occur across the board. As Mr McCabe said, Scotland faces a particular problem with domestic abuse, which is why I am delighted to do what I can, as part of this Administration, to work with the chief constable of Strathclyde Police, who has recognised that the problem not only involves the denigration of women and the damage that is done to them but contributes to our culture of violence because, if a child grows up in a household in which mum is routinely belted by her boyfriend or husband, the child will deal with problems at school and—tragically—nursery by striking out. To address the scourge of domestic violence and the problem of violence in Scotland, we need to be firm. The problem exists across the board. The solution involves education, cultural change, addressing attitudes and enforcing laws.

Community sentence disposals include probation orders, drug testing and treatment orders, restriction of liberty orders and  community service orders. I assume that the question relates to community service orders. In 2009-10, the Scottish Government gave Lanarkshire community justice authority a criminal justice social work grant allocation of £2,196,942 for community service, which represents an increase of £332,970 on 2008-09. Funding is not provided on a unit cost basis or built up from the assumed cost of a placement, which can and does vary between local authority areas.

The member is right to say that additional resources will be required. That is why the Government has put in an additional £2 million. The matter has been raised by Robert Brown, and we will address it, so Cathie Craigie should watch this space. However, the issue is not simply the money. It is about working both harder and smarter and ensuring that we improve the systems. That will be tackled and addressed, because, as Cathie Craigie knows, we are intent on ensuring that we have community payback, so that those who commit less serious offences in our communities do not end up with free bed and board that is paid for by the taxpayer, because that simply compounds the agony of communities. Instead, offenders should get out and do some hard work to make their communities better places.

I have regular meetings with all eight chief constables. My next planned meeting with Chief Constable Norma Graham will take place in the autumn, although I met her last Thursday at the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland dinner. It was a great pleasure to approve her appointment as Scotland's first ever female chief constable.

I am more than happy to congratulate the chief constable and, indeed, every individual serving officer of whatever rank in Fife and elsewhere, including Strathclyde. Unlike the Labour Party, the Government believes that our police officers and prison officers do a difficult, dangerous and demanding job. We will not tarnish or impugn them, and we most certainly will not undermine them. We are grateful for the service that they give and that many have given.

I hope that Ms Baker read the papers today, as she should have read the information and statistics. Violent crime is the reason why I established the first ever serious organised crime task force and why this Government—together with the Lord Advocate, the Scottish Prison Service, HM Revenue and Customs, the Serious Organised Crime Agency and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency—will take on and take down serious organised crime. That was not dealt with before, but Claire Baker can have an absolute assurance that we recognise the problems of serious organised crime. We have faith in our police and we will properly resource and provide for them to ensure that serious organised crime is tackled.

The Ministry of Defence wrote to the First Minister on 6 May to inform him of its plans to base all classes of United Kingdom submarine at Her Majesty's naval base Clyde. Emergency planning in Scotland already includes the potential for incidents at Faslane. There will be no direct changes associated with the increased number of submarines based at Faslane.

Such matters are of concern, but local contingency planning is a matter for local authorities. It will be for the relevant local authorities, with their local partners, to consider the implications and to make representations to the Scottish Government if they feel that there are new burdens as a result of the stationing of the three vessels at Faslane. The Scottish Government remains concerned that their base should be located there.

We have met the European Police Office to discuss such matters, many of which are more for the Serious Organised Crime Agency than for the SCDEA, given their respective jurisdictions. I give the member and every other member the absolute assurance that we are seeking to map organised crime and to work with other jurisdictions, especially that south of the border. As Mr Simpson says, such matters also concern activity abroad.

I am happy to check with the SRU. The rugby scheme was launched in the east end of Glasgow, and the SRU took the Calcutta cup there. There were international players, and young kids from the east end were there. The SRU is showing willing, but I am more than happy to speak to Colin Thomson, the head of youth development, to ensure that the SRU does what it can. There is certainly no attempt by the Scottish Government—and, I would lay a wager, no attempt by the Scottish Rugby Union—not to grow the game in the east end of Glasgow.

I assure Richard Baker that no chief constable has asked for 50 per cent. We are working with ACPOS on the matter—I will be speaking to it this evening. The member makes the valid point that, as the Crown Office does, we want to ensure that the proceeds of crime go back to agencies so that we have that virtuous circle, but I assure him that no chief constable has sought such an amount, and that we would not consider providing it. We will work with ACPOS to try to strike a balance. I will be more than happy to keep Parliament abreast of developments.

On 6 June 2007, I announced a new approach to reinvestment of the proceeds of crime: we committed to investing the money that we recover from gangsters and criminals in Scotland's young people, in order to give them more choices and chances, and to help to keep away from crime and antisocial behaviour those of them who stray. A small minority stray, but most young people simply need more to do—things that are fun and healthy and which keep them occupied. In June 2007, I set out the challenge. I can now report back on what we have achieved—and we have achieved a great deal. In January 2008, I launched cashback for communities to reinvest the proceeds of crime. Since then, there have been unprecedented levels of investment: £13 million has been committed so far and more than 100,000 young people from Stornoway to Hawick, and from Wick to Portpatrick, have benefited. They are involved in hundreds of projects covering sports, arts, culture and youth work. Such projects give our youngsters something to do. They help them to develop new skills and interests while having safe and healthy fun, and—of course—they help to keep them out of trouble. We know that crime and antisocial behaviour afflict every community, but some are worse affected than others, which is why cashback focuses on the areas that need it most, while ensuring that other areas also benefit. Of course, it is not just the poorer communities that lack facilities and opportunities, which is why we are ensuring that all young people—boys and girls, in the countryside and in the towns and cities—can benefit. Everyone between the ages of 10 and 19 will have a cashback activity or project near them—if not now, then soon. Cashback also benefits the wider community by getting kids off street corners and giving something back to the community through their involvement in things such as volunteering. The benefits go even wider. Cashback has brought together in partnership a fantastic range of national organisations, including YouthLink Scotland, the Scottish Football Association, the Scottish Women's Football Association, the Scottish Rugby Union, basketballscotland,  Scottish Sports Futures, Scottish Screen and the Scottish Arts Council. They are all working together and working in new ways. I thank them for all their hard work, collectively and individually, in making cashback a success, and I thank the volunteers and paid staff in those organisations. Local efforts have also been fantastic. In Falkirk, Dundee, Ayrshire, Orkney and the Borders, hundreds of volunteers, parents, teachers, police officers, fire officers and youth workers are working together for the benefit of young people. I want to say something about the recovery process. I acknowledge the diligent work that has been done by the Crown, the police and the other agencies that are involved. We know that by hitting organised criminals in the pocket, we impact seriously on their activities. That is as it should be. I want increased focus on that, which is why we have already committed to reinvesting £400,000 of the proceeds of crime in the recovery process that is led by the Crown. We are working with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to consider how to help them to identify more criminal profits and recoverable assets so that the police, as well as the Crown, benefit. I want to say something about all the strands of cashback, starting with the small-scale local projects that we support through our YouthLink grant scheme, which gives money not only to those who need it most but to those who can do most with it. It is our biggest investment so far—£3 million in the first year alone, which supports 278 projects throughout all the, which are in every local authority area in Scotland and have more than 21,000 participants. We are still gathering the results, but I have no doubt that the success will be clear. I believe that it is through small-scale local investment of that kind—the average award is about £10,000—that cashback can make the biggest difference. We are investing in groups that do not always find it easy to access funding—groups that are often at the very heart of our communities and are most trusted by young people: from a tractor-restoration project in Stornoway to a community farm in Dumfries; from a sell-out rock concert in Glasgow to an equestrian project in Edinburgh. Cashback is investing in youth cafes, skate parks and environmental projects. It is supporting young people, building networks and capacity, and energising our communities. Because of the success of that approach, I announced earlier today that another at least £1 million would be invested through YouthLink, starting this financial year, which will mean that thousands more young people all across Scotland will benefit. Cashback has also invested a huge amount in sports. First, I will consider our national sport of football. Cashback has provided over £2.5 million  to deliver a significant programme of football activities throughout Scotland. More than 6,500 young people are playing street football and midnight league football. It is giving kids what they want, where they need it, and it is offering diversion and participation.

I am more than happy to draw people's attention to Spartans' undoubted success. I was in my local hostelry on Saturday night as the team celebrated winning the championship. Craig Graham and the others tend to hang out there, so I was happy to congratulate them on winning the trophy yet again in their victory over Dalbeattie Star. I have worked with them and I know the good work that they do. The new ground is magnificent, and the club does a huge amount in the community. I will certainly be hoping that Spartans will be successful in future applications. The Government does not make the decisions in St Andrew's house, but I certainly accept that Spartans are a role model that many other clubs will follow. The activities that I mentioned are not just one-off activities—we are providing sustainable activity. The soccer one programme is reinvigorating schools football in all 32 local authorities, with more than 5,400 young people from more than 300 schools playing each week. There has been a fantastic response throughout Scotland. For example, the Nicolson institute in Stornoway has provided the most new teams—eight. There are also long-term benefits, with more than 440 new volunteers trained as football coaches.

The funding is additional. It is taken from people who have harmed their  communities and is then reinvested in an effort to make those communities better. Clearly, other funding should continue, whether from local authorities or from other departments. The justice department is taking from people who damage our communities, and it is ensuring that those communities—and all other communities—benefit. Some areas suffer from severe and dangerous crime, but many other areas are blighted by low-level antisocial behaviour, which is why we have to target the funding. As I was saying, there are long-term benefits. There are more than 440 new volunteer football coaches, and the aim is to train 1,700 a year. There will also be funding for six schools of football, which will offer intensive engagement, using football as a way to get kids involved. Indeed, I was at Cumnock academy with national coach and team manager George Burley earlier this week. We acknowledge that sports need facilities, as Mr Chisholm suggested. That is why we have invested £2 million in 27 projects the length and breadth of Scotland. There are new grass pitches on Bressay in Shetland and in Aberdeen, and there are new changing rooms in Haddington, Dunoon and Dundee. In Loanhead, Lochend and Lybster, there is a legacy that will last for years. However, it is not just about football. We have provided one of the biggest-ever investments in youth rugby—£1.4 million—to get more than 50,000 young people involved in school and street rugby, and to help us to build a volunteer base for the sport. Through the fantastic efforts of the SRU, we have already exceeded our target, with more than 67,000 young people having participated in cashback rugby activities. We are taking rugby to places it has never been, and we are getting thousands involved. We have also invested £1.74 million in basketball, and thousands more kids are now involved in twilight basketball. More than 130 schools are now involved in the jump2it programme—an inspiring partnership between the Scottish Rocks professional team and Scottish Sports Futures. We know that not everyone is passionate about sports, which is why we are continuing to develop cashback in new areas. We have started an arts and culture fund. In March, we launched with Scottish Screen and the Scottish Arts Council a £1.2 million investment in the creative arts, which will get to some of the most hard-to-reach young people and to some of those who are most deserving of our support. That investment in the arts is only the beginning. We will continue to develop cashback to ensure that it provides what young people want, when they want it and where they need it.  More than £13 million has been committed through cashback and more than 100,000 young people will have been involved and engaged across Scotland. What better way could there be to reinvest the money that is drained from our communities by the gangsters who prey on the weak and the vulnerable? We are doing everything we can to end their evil trade, and while that battle continues, and as long as the police and Crown are stripping the criminals of their ill-gotten gains, I promise that our young people will continue to benefit, along with those in law enforcement. New activities, new opportunities—a new start for many of our youngsters. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the fact that, since its launch in January 2008, the CashBack for Communities programme has provided positive opportunities and activities for over 100,000 young people in Scotland; recognises that providing healthy and fun activities not only gives young people something to do, but can help in reducing crime and antisocial behaviour by diverting the small minority who cause trouble away from such behaviour; welcomes the fact that the CashBack programme has been funded through £12 million recovered from criminals using the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, and commends the significant efforts of partners in the CashBack programme including Youthlink, Scottish Football Association, Scottish Rugby Union, Basketballscotland, Scottish Sports Futures, sportscotland, Scottish Screen and the Scottish Arts Council, as well as the very many local projects and volunteers that are making the scheme a success.

A range of measures can be used at the discretion of the judiciary to assist victims to give their evidence in court. Those include the granting of applications for special measures, under the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004, and the protection of victims of sexual offences from unnecessary questioning, under the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Act 2002. Judges can also clear the court, arrange for frequent breaks, ask the prosecution and defence to modify questions and remove an accused who misbehaves in court.

We are keen to ensure that victims are prioritised and are always at the centre of what is done. Significant change has taken place, which started under my predecessor Cathy Jamieson and which was led in the main by the present Lord Advocate—both as Lord Advocate in the previous Administration and in her tenure as the Solicitor General for Scotland. We are prepared to consider Mr Stewart's proposal. I understand that he has arranged a meeting on the issue. A commissioner would not be cost free. Ultimately, the Parliament must decide whether resources are best put towards a commissioner or towards front-line services for individuals. We will happily discuss those matters. I am sure that Ms Curran and the Government are at one in recognising the importance of looking after victims' interests.

That is a reserved matter. Nuclear and radiological safety regulations require any installation to have contingency plans in place to respond to any type of accident or emergency involving ionising radiation. It is a regulatory requirement that those plans are kept under continual review.

I am more than happy to make it clear that the Scottish Government's position is that weapons of mass destruction are militarily ineffective in dealing with the troubles that we face in the world; economically unaffordable when we have the crisis of cuts in public services; and morally reprehensible in the world in which we live.

I would like to take this opportunity to address Parliament on a matter that I know is a cause of considerable public concern, namely the abscond of Brian Martin from Castle Huntly open prison on 18 May 2009. I am pleased to confirm to Parliament that Mr Martin has been returned to custody and that he appeared in court at Perth yesterday to face charges of being unlawfully at large. He received an additional four-month sentence. Mr Martin absconded from Castle Huntly open prison on Monday 18 May 2009. He had been transferred to the open estate on 27 April and his community access had not yet been approved. Martin is serving a sentence of 10 years and qualifies for parole in September 2010. Prior to being transferred to the open estate, he was located in Her Majesty's Prison Shotts. Last year, I confirmed to Parliament that I had instructed the Scottish Prison Service that when an individual absconded from open conditions there would be a presumption against that individual returning to open prison, and that any decision to the contrary would have to be authorised directly by a senior member of staff in SPS headquarters within the prisons directorate. Those changes and tighter criteria have resulted in a significant—indeed, a record—decline in absconds. The final decision on and responsibility for the transfer to open conditions rests with the prison governor. However, as I have said, when there is a history of previous absconding, that decision should be referred to SPS headquarters. As a result of Brian Martin's absconding, I wrote to the SPS on the morning of 21 May and asked it to review the circumstances surrounding his transfer to Castle Huntly. I was advised by SPS on Monday—the same day that Martin was returned to custody—that he had absconded previously, albeit 22 years ago. The SPS has apologised to me for what appears to have been a failure in its information-sharing processes. The SPS has already instructed a senior governor from another prison to carry out an internal review into the circumstances surrounding the transfer of Brian Martin. However, I believe that it is essential that the process that is in place  is as robust as it possibly can be. With that in mind, Professor Alec Spencer, who was governor of Peterhead, Glenochil and Saughton prisons, has agreed to conduct an independent review of the circumstances surrounding the transfer. Professor Spencer has the practical experience of dealing with some of Scotland's most hardened criminals. He is also a respected academic and widely acknowledged expert on prison matters. As I said, tighter criteria for transfer to the open prison estate were introduced last summer. I have asked Professor Spencer to conduct an independent review of the decision to send Brian Martin to open conditions, and, in light of that review, to consider whether the new criteria for transfer to the open estate are being properly applied in all cases. It would appear that the process that I put in place following the Foye case last year was not, in this instance, properly followed by staff within the Scottish Prison Service. That is not a situation that I or, indeed, any of us find acceptable. If the process had been properly followed, the likelihood is that Martin would not have been transferred to the open estate. Since the introduction of the new criteria post Foye, we have seen the smallest ever number of absconds from the open estate. In 1993 there were 95 absconds, in 2006-07 there were 79 absconds and in 2008-09 there were 16 absconds. I am happy to place the figures in the Scottish Parliament information centre today. As I have said before, one abscond is one too many, and I still believe that to be the case, but as long as we have an open prison estate, there will be occasions when individuals betray the trust that has been shown in them by absconding. We must ensure that the processes that we put in place are as robust as they can be. There is a consensus in the Parliament and beyond that the open estate plays a valuable role in preparing long-term prisoners for eventual release. Henry McLeish said in his report: "Scotland also needs a well-run open estate because it is not in the public interest to release long-term prisoners from closed institutions without preparing them for release and training them for freedom." In January, the chief inspector of prisons, Andrew McLellan, said: "the criteria for admission to the Open Estate have been tightened considerably." It would be wrong of me or any of us to prejudge Professor Spencer's findings. Nevertheless, if he confirms that there has been a significant failure of process in this instance, I would expect the SPS to address that failure. Given that that may include disciplinary action, it is appropriate that we await Professor Spencer's findings before drawing any  further conclusions on the point. I have asked Professor Spencer to submit his report to me before the summer recess. I intend to publish that report and I will meet the chief executive and senior management of the SPS to review the findings of the inquiry and to agree with them whatever actions may be necessary. The Government has gone further than ever before in ensuring that the most robust safeguards possible are applied when it comes to transferring prisoners to the open estate. The measures that I have outlined today will ensure that those safeguards are subject to even closer scrutiny.

My position on the issue as cabinet secretary is the same position that was taken by the Minister for Justice during the Liberal-Labour Administration—the position has not  changed. I cannot prejudge Professor Spencer's report, but I assure Mr Baker that we will take on board any issues that it raises. Any points that relate to general presumptions and criteria will be dealt with, if necessary. If, as I said, matters relating to internal discipline are raised, they will be considered. With regard to the decision to transfer Mr Martin to the open estate, I must say that such decisions are approved by the governor in charge or by his or her nominated representative. Following the Foye case, the initial decisions are now taken at a multidisciplinary case conference, which is attended by a range of individuals from within the establishment. The membership of that group includes prison managers, a social worker, a psychologist, a member of the health care team and a representative of the prisons security department, to ensure that the fullest possible information is available. We will deal with any matters that need to be reconsidered following an internal review and Professor Spencer's review, but that is currently how decisions are taken. We should all take on board the fact that absconds are now one fifth of what they were when Labour was last in office.

I have made it clear on previous occasions and again today that any abscond is a matter of concern and must be addressed and tackled. We must recognise, however, that there is still a requirement for an open estate—I take it that whatever Mr Aitken is suggesting, it is not the abolition of the open estate. As Mr Aitken will appreciate, the Parole Board for Scotland recommends people to be placed in the open estate. That happens so that the Parole Board can be assured that people have been tested to see whether they are suitable for parole. The very fact that someone appears before the Parole Board shows that they are not there for a parking offence but because they have committed a serious offence. We live not just in a world of the European convention on human rights but in a world that we inherited from the Administration of Mr Aitken's party. People are given determinate sentences, which means by definition that they will be released. If we are to release them, it is clear that the open estate can play a significant role in ensuring that they restructure their lives and have opportunities to re-engage with their families. We have an opportunity to see what can be done to ensure that they are fit to be released back into our communities, because they have to be released, just as people had to be released under the Tory Administration. I assure Bill Aitken that we have tightened up the criteria. Following the Robert Foye case, we introduced a presumption against abscondees returning to the open estate. Under the Liberal and Labour regime, and indeed under the Conservative Government at Westminster, there was no presumption against going back to the open estate. We have tightened things up. I assure Bill Aitken that we will learn from Professor Spencer and take his findings on board. As I said, however, the number of absconds is a fifth of what it was in the last year of the Labour Administration and an eighth of what it was in the last year of the Conservative Government.

I confirm that public safety is paramount in all action that the Government takes on justice. We made changes following the Robert Foye case, which I remind the Parliament was investigated not only by the Scottish Prison Service but by the McLeish commission. The seven key recommendations that were made following the Robert Foye case have been implemented: first, that a multidisciplinary progression meeting should take place before the transfer, involving prison managers, social workers, psychologists and other professionals; secondly, that a home background report should be provided before the transfer; thirdly, that clear protocols should be established to ensure the sharing of relevant intelligence information; fourthly, that standard report formats should be introduced; fifthly, that a case management meeting should be held in the open estate as soon as possible after transfer; sixthly, that a standard abscond risk assessment should be introduced; and seventhly, that training should be increased for SPS staff who conduct risk assessments. We also made it clear that there would be a clear presumption against the SPS's returning to the open estate anybody who had absconded. I reassure Mr Brown that, as I said earlier, we will consider carefully Professor Spencer's conclusions. He will consider how the system has perhaps let us down. The criteria were working until the glitch, and we have to ensure that that is addressed. If there are broader lessons to be learned from Professor Spencer, we will take them on board. I accept Mr Brown's point that the open estate is necessary and that we have to check those who go to it. Ultimately, that is a judgment call for individuals, who must be as well versed and well trained as possible. That is why there is broad input and a variety of criteria.  We must recognise that, sadly, some people will breach the trust that is placed in them. Thankfully, however, the number of absconds is at a record low, and I hope that that remains so.

I acknowledge members' great concern about what are operational matters. The SPS and the relevant police authorities have their own procedures which, in this case, are all about co-operation, synergy and integration. The SPS ensures that all its information on the abscondee is made available to the police, who are, after all, the ultimate guardians of public safety.

I cannot prejudge any decision about the timing of parliamentary debates, because that is a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau. However, I give Mrs Eadie the same assurance that I gave in my statement: we have asked Professor Spencer to ensure that the report is available before the summer recess. If it is the Parliament's will that the report be debated, I am sure that the Parliamentary Bureau will consider and reach a conclusion on that. However, I assure Mrs Eadie that we will try to ensure that the report is available for appropriate consideration at that time.

No, that would not be appropriate. The Parole Board's task is already significant. In any case, there are checks and balances. For example, the board might ask for a prisoner to be tested in the open estate, but the prison governor or those on the multidisciplinary group or at SPS headquarters who have specialist advice and know the prisoner better might conclude that such a move would be wrong. We must ensure that the system operates appropriately. Professor Spencer will examine whether the SPS's structures and processes are being followed properly, and we will learn any lessons that have to be learned. However, I think that it is appropriate for the Parole Board, the SPS and prison governors to continue to play their particular and separate roles. In certain instances, they will work together and conclude that it is appropriate to test someone in the open estate. However, we need the fail-safe because, as I said, the Parole Board might ask for someone to be tested but the prison governor might say, "That's not wise." Frankly, I will stick with the judgment of the governor who has the prisoner in his institution.

Absolutely. I am already on record as praising SPS staff, and I do so again. Those who work in the open estate, not just at Castle Huntly but at Noranside in my colleague John Swinney's constituency and in the independent living unit at Cornton Vale, where female prisoners are entrusted with preparing themselves for going back into their communities, do a valuable job. Andrew Welsh is correct. Indeed, I said in response to Mr Baker's questions that the precautionary approach must be primary. At the end of the day, the issue is the safety of our communities and the public. The criteria have been tightened up and they have been working—as I said, the number of absconds is at a record low—but we must ensure that the procedures  operate appropriately. That is why I have asked Professor Spencer to conduct a review. We will learn from that and act on any advice and recommendations that he gives us.

I say to Mr Pringle that their safety is paramount. He makes a valid point. Those who live in the area are closest to the coalface, and we must ensure that their safety is addressed and that their worries and concerns are dealt with. From my experience of visiting Castle Huntly and meeting its staff, the visitors committee and local authority representatives from the area, I know that there is acceptance of the benefits that can be obtained from the prison, such as jobs for locals in that area. I return to the point that Mr Welsh, Mr Baker and others have correctly made: we must take a precautionary approach, because the safety of members of the public, especially those who are located closest to the institution, is paramount. The Scottish Prison Service, the prison's staff and I are more than happy to work with the community to allay its fears. Mr Welsh and others know about that.

It appears that there has been a process failure. That is why there is an internal review by the Scottish Prison Service—which has already brought some information to light—and why Professor Spencer will conduct an external review. Action was taken and lessons were learned post the Robert Foye case. I have narrated the seven criteria that were introduced and talked about the presumption against returning individuals to the open estate. We have significantly reduced the number of absconds—it has fallen to 16 from 79, which was the number in 2006-07, when we took over from the Administration of which Ms Craigie was a  member. The clear lesson that we learned from the Robert Foye case is that there should be a clear presumption against returning to the open estate somebody who has absconded. That does not mean that the presumption cannot be overridden, but there must be clear evidence for doing so. Such a presumption did not exist during eight years of a Labour Administration or under a Tory Government south of the border. We acted and introduced a clear presumption, and we have delivered a reduction in the number of absconds from 79 to 16.

As I have said, criteria were brought in post the Robert Foye case to tighten up a system that had existed for more than 50 years. It is clear that people can go to the open estate in the very early part of their sentence. Many members accept—indeed, I presume that members uniformly accept—that some people should be sent to the open estate relatively early. I do not want to prejudge the outcome of Professor Spencer's review. All we can say is that there was a process error, and whatever it was and however it came about will be brought out in Professor Spencer's report. The presumption against returning abscondees to the open estate should have applied to Mr Martin and should have resulted in his case being considered at SPS headquarters, but that did not happen. That must be examined. If broader lessons are to be learned, we will learn them, but it is fair to say that people can be sent to the open estate two years before the earliest possible consideration of their parole.

The impact would be substantial. The difficulty would be that the Parole Board would not be able to test individuals who ultimately have to be released. Mr Aitken might shake his head, but we live in a world where people are given determinate sentences that mean they can be released, either because their sentence expires or they are serving a life sentence and are subject to review under the ECHR. We must recognise that we can no longer transport such people to Botany Bay; we have to address their needs and wants. The importance of the Parole Board is to ensure that we test those people. As I said earlier, they are not in prison for parking offences. We have to ensure that specialists, whether in terms of security, health, knowledge of the locality or mental health, are involved in the decision. Ultimately, we have to recognise that at some stage prisoners have to return to our communities, and we have to ensure that returns are dealt with based on the precautionary principle and according to a flawless process. That is why we will have both an internal review and a review by Professor Spencer.

I thank the members who have spoken in the debate and those in the chamber who have listened to it. I also thank the members of the Justice Committee, who supported the general tenor of the bill or sought the amendment of certain provisions. I accept the legitimate point that Mr Brown raised. Obviously, some aspects of the bill are not the most dynamic. The EU services directive, for example, may not generate a great deal of interest, but we are obliged to implement it, and it is important that we do so within the appropriate timescale. The directive will benefit services north and south of the border and the Scottish and UK economies as a whole. It is therefore important that we proceed with its implementation. As Richard Baker, Bill Aitken and Robert Brown said, a common approach needs to be taken to criminals who seek to profit by publishing accounts of their crimes. Real-crime or true-crime genre paperbacks can be found at airport and railway station bookstores in Scotland, England and Wales. It is important that we have uniform measures to deal with that genre, albeit that some accounts are perfectly legitimate. The genre may not be to my taste, but I do not seek to demean that style of writing.

It is about exploitation. We must ensure that we can prove that exploitation is taking place. The Justice Committee discussed the ghosting of criminal memoirs. The bill is meant to stop exploitation, but there are limitations as regards proof and evidence. We are keen to do what Mr McGrigor's colleague suggested that we should do. It is one thing for a journalist to write a legitimate book about a heinous crime, but it is quite another for someone who has perpetrated a heinous crime to seek to glorify their exploits or to gain from what they did—that is fundamentally unacceptable and we must ensure that it does not happen. Thankfully, such circumstances have been few and far between, but they have arisen and we need to ensure that there is uniformity north and south of the border. The most important issue is the one that relates to service personnel who have given their lives on active service. I am grateful for the comments of members of other political parties. As a Government, we recognise that whatever differences we might have on the constitution, we need to bury them when it comes to dealing with people who have sacrificed their lives for their country. [ Interruption. ]

Whether they were based at RM Condor in Arbroath or up in the north-east of Scotland, we have a fundamental obligation to try to limit the trauma and agony that their families suffer. Members such as Margaret Smith have highlighted that issue. It is a question of doing what is right. That is why I welcome members' support for the motion. It is appropriate that it should receive unanimous support. The new arrangements will not ease families' grief at the loss that they have suffered, but we must do everything that we can to minimise their suffering thereafter. That is why I commend the motion to Parliament.

The UK Coroners and Justice Bill includes provisions that extend to devolved matters in three areas, in relation to which I am promoting this legislative consent motion. Those provisions deal with the European Union services directive, criminal memoirs, and inquiries into the deaths on active service abroad of Scottish service personnel. The provisions on information-sharing gateways have now been withdrawn from the bill. The bill includes provisions that will allow the Scottish Government to implement the EU services directive through secondary legislation made under the European Communities Act 1972. Those provisions will enable the directive to be implemented on time, before 28 December 2009. The aim of the EU services directive is to open up the internal market for service providers, in the same way that it is already open for people, capital and goods. To implement the directive fully, a new power is required to disapply the penalty limits that can be included in secondary legislation made under the European Communities Act 1972. The Justice Committee has raised questions about the exercise of the power; so, indeed, has the House of Lords, for the same reasons. The UK Government is now considering how best to provide the necessary safeguards in the bill in relation to the exercise of the power. The bill's provisions on criminal memoirs will introduce a scheme that enables the recovery of profits made by criminals from publicising the stories of their crimes. Those provisions will apply to convicted criminals who seek to profit from and glorify accounts of their crimes, and will act as a powerful deterrent. UK-wide provisions will avoid the exploitation by profit-seeking criminals of any difference between Scots law and the law in other parts of the UK. The provisions on deaths abroad of Scottish service personnel represent an agreement that was reached between the Scottish and UK Governments. After consulting the families concerned, UK authorities will be able to notify the Lord Advocate of cases in which an inquiry in Scotland would be preferred to a coroner's inquest. The system requires flexibilities to deal  with, for example, single incidents or multiple deaths. Some of the operational protocols are still being worked on by the Ministry of Defence and the Crown Office, which will have to acquire expertise in this area. However, I am pleased that, under these arrangements, the deaths on active service abroad of Scottish service personnel will be able to be investigated here in Scotland. That has been warmly welcomed, especially by representatives of bereaved service families, and I am pleased to promote them to the Parliament. I am aware that the matter has been of concern to many members in the Parliament. It is a complex issue that involves both reserved and devolved legislation and has required a great deal of co-operation, not simply from the Crown Office but from the Ministry of Defence and other departments south of the border. As members of all parties here and in legislatures south of the border have said, this is a major issue, which has been a huge concern. It is fundamentally wrong that we have not been able to deal with those who have given their lives on active service and address the plight of those who have been bereaved. Therefore, it is a pleasure to be able to deal with the matter now. As I said, there are still protocols to be discussed, given the complexity of the issue. Good discussion and co-operation between the Crown Office north of the border and the Ministry of Defence on a UK-wide basis will be required. Given the common cause that has been shown, I am sure that we can do our best to alleviate the suffering of those whose relatives have given their lives on active service. In all three cases—implementing the EU services directive, introducing a scheme for criminal memoirs and investigating the deaths abroad of Scottish service personnel—I am convinced that the bill will serve Scotland's needs. I am happy to move the motion, which I urge the Parliament to support. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Coroners and Justice Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 14 January 2009, relating to the EU Services Directive, criminal memoirs and the Scottish system of investigation of deaths and fatal accident inquiries into deaths abroad of members of the armed forces and others, so far as these provisions relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Our plans for fair, fast and flexible justice will benefit all the people of Scotland. "Protecting Scotland's Communities: Fair, Fast and Flexible Justice" explains the two key strands of our policy, which are a robust, visible and credible regime of community penalties and strong and proportionate management for offenders whose crimes merit prison. We propose to provide the necessary legislative support through the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which is currently before the Scottish Parliament.

We have made it clear that this is the decision of the project board, which is made up not only of representatives of the Scottish Government justice division but of the Crown Office, Glasgow City Council and the Court Service. It was on the project board's advice that the Government took the decision. Ms Curran should recognise the record amounts of funding that we are putting in. Spending on community justice social work has increased from £36.5  million in 1999-2000 to £103.95 million in 2008-09. That is an increase of 185 per cent over 10 years. There is also an additional £2 million and other moneys. The money continues to rise.

Absolutely. The Government is committed to a visible police presence. We now have record police numbers. In terms of the city of Glasgow, in addition to the Government's record on police numbers, I pay tribute to the respective chief constable and police board. Their actions have ensured not only the rollout of the additional officers who we funded through the 1,000 additional officers commitment but that officers are deployed properly. At the end of the day, as we have always made clear, this is not only about recruitment but about the retention of valuable, experienced officers and the deployment of officers away from needless bureaucracy and back-office jobs that can be dealt with by civilian posts. We want to ensure that we have the visible police presence in our communities that reassures good citizens and deters bad citizens. As Ms McLaughlin pointed out, it ensures that crime is falling.

Through the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill and the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, we will introduce tougher court  orders to impose new obligations on high-risk sex offenders; further strengthen the requirements for sex offenders who declare themselves, or claim to be, homeless; provide additional powers to the courts to impose extended sentences for offences where there is a significant sexual aspect to the offender's behaviour; and introduce new offences to protect children from sexual abuse and exploitation. We have also recently announced plans to pilot greater individual disclosure for parents who may have concern about an adult who has access to their child.

I am happy to confirm to Mr Martin that a letter will shortly be on its way to him. As far as the Government is aware, 29 of the 33 recommendations have been delivered. By the time the letter reaches Mr Martin, we may have been able to increase the figure further. I assure him that the Government is delivering the recommendations of the sub-committee of which both he and I were members, because we recognise the requirement to ensure that our children are protected from those who would seek to exploit or abuse them.

I am grateful for this opportunity to set out my response to last Thursday's vote. First, I will deal with the factual information in relation to the community justice centre, after which I will address the broader issue of the Government's commitment to replace short prison sentences, where appropriate, with tough and effective community sentences. I turn to the community justice centre project. There are lessons to be learned from community courts such as those in Midtown in New York and elsewhere. There are clear advantages to having a strong focus on top quality criminal justice services in the most disadvantaged areas that are often the most blighted by offending, which is why we worked constructively with Glasgow City Council and other partners through the Glasgow community justice centre project board on a feasibility study into the costs of building and running a community justice centre, as well as the benefits that such a centre could bring. The project initiation document, which we will shortly arrange to place in the Scottish Parliament information centre, pulled together the conclusions of the work and highlighted a number of issues. It set out the aims of the court, which are: improved community safety; improved community involvement in the justice system as a whole; taking a problem-solving approach; tackling the underlying causes as well as the actions of offenders; speeding up the delivery of justice in the local area; and more effective payback to the community that has been blighted or damaged. All those aims are important, but delivering them is not dependent on the creation of a new building. The community court would have dealt, at most, with a couple of thousand cases a year. In 2007-2008, over 79,000 people had a charge proved in the sheriff summary court and a further 47,000 were convicted by justices of the peace. The cost of the new building, and the running costs thereof, were substantial. What caused us to support the project board's decision was the scale  of the revenue commitment just to keep the building open, staffed, resourced and safe. The Glasgow stakeholders considered—as the final programme initiation document highlights—that the final costs would likely be considerably higher than the consultant's estimate of £750,000 per year. The document also said that there would be no cash-releasing benefits or offsetting savings. In the current financial climate, that does not seem to offer best value for money. The project board concluded that the project, at this stage, be progressed in its current form should not. The chair of the project board wrote to the chief executive of Glasgow City Council to intimate the board's conclusion. The chief executive's response was positive and realistic. He said: "I appreciate the Board's practical and informed approach to taking the difficult decision not to progress this project further. I note that the Board had some early discussions on how the principles of the Centre could be introduced into mainstream services in Glasgow and that your staff intend to continue that work. I would support further work with the Council and other partners to explore how this could be delivered in the context of the local and national aspirations for reducing reoffending". We have not abandoned our commitment to better justice-system delivery for the citizens of the east end of Glasgow. We will work further with the council to explore how some of the benefits that have been identified—particularly quicker delivery of community payback, with visible reinvestment in the neediest communities—can be delivered through better joining up of services using existing premises. My officials will have a first meeting with Glasgow City Council on that next week. We will work together to find a practical and affordable solution. I want to deal more widely with our stated commitment to move from routine short prison sentences that provide free bed and board, to tough and effective community sentences. Our strategy is clear and coherent, and is based on the independent work of the Scottish Prisons Commission. We published it in December, in "Protecting Scotland's Communities: Fair, Fast and Flexible Justice". It has two main strands: a robust regime of community penalties and strong and proportionate management of offenders whose crimes merit prison. A coherent penal policy is needed. We remain committed to the provision of a modern and fit-for-purpose prison and we are investing a record £120 million in prison capacity each year. Public protection is the Government's first goal. Protecting the public effectively needs prisons that are not overcrowded and which can undertake the necessary work to rehabilitate serious offenders who need to be locked up and detained.  In 2007-08, 76 per cent of sentences were for six months or less. On average, individuals who are given such sentences spend only three weeks in prison. There is no time for the Scottish Prison Service to work with them to tackle underlying drug or alcohol problems: the service can only contain them. The greater the overcrowding, the greater the challenge for the service. The prison population is still rising. There are more than 8,000 people in our prisons, although recorded crime is at a 25-year low. In terms of long-term public protection, we need to develop alternatives to prison that are robust, that take effect quickly and which offer real payback to communities. That is what we are doing, through the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which will create the new community payback order, and through work in partnership with local authorities to improve the standard of delivery on the ground. We are investing an additional £2 million per year in community service and, in conjunction with the Association of Directors of Social Work, we have drawn up revised operational guidance and have carried out training events throughout the country for community service staff. The Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill includes provisions for more flexible sentences, which can be kept under review by the sentencer. It also provides a significant new sanction to support tough action on breach: electronic tagging. We are also investing extra cash to improve delivery this year. We have to prioritise. We need a visible police presence, which reassures good citizens and deters bad ones. That is why the Government took the decision to increase police numbers by 1,000. We need a coherent penal policy and a system that improves management of offenders, Scotland wide. Resources are not infinite and we are in a recession. We are aware of the financial situation and the pressures that £500 million of cuts from Westminster will bring. We therefore need to target our resources. Sometimes that will mean that desirable extras, such as the community court building, do not proceed. If we fund Glasgow community court, we must make cuts in other areas—£1 million is not petty cash. Last week, the Justice Committee voted to retain Annan justice of the peace court. That decision is not cost free, as committee members are aware, and might cost up to £800,000. Our priority is safer communities, with a visible police presence and more robust and immediate community sentences, which communities can see and believe in. We need to invest in front-line services, not in new buildings. I recognise and share members' view that key elements of the community court model,  particularly the clustering of support services and the closer links with communities, are eminently worth pursuing. I have asked my officials to work with Glasgow City Council to do just that, in a way that suits local circumstances. I expect that work to generate lessons for wider application. Moreover, when the financial situation improves and pressures are less severe, matters can be reviewed. I understand local members' desire for investment in the east end of Glasgow and I am happy to reiterate that the Government has shown unprecedented commitment to the east end. However, in the current economic circumstances, the development of the community court building does not offer the best value for money, given the available resources. The building could be delivered only by making cuts in vital police or community justice services.

The Scottish Prison Service would not need to make savings here, there and everywhere if we had got the Barnett consequentials to follow on from the Carter review south of the border. If we had been given what was our right and entitlement, the Prison Service would have an additional £120 million per annum, but nothing is said by Labour members about ensuring that Scotland gets its right and entitlement. The targets are not dependent on a court building. They are not just being rolled out through what would have been the Glasgow community court; they are going nationwide. They concern better systems, not simply new structures. The fundamental point is that, if other parties want to persist with the court building, they should tell us how many officers they want to be taken off the streets, which areas they want to be deprived of a visible police presence, which prison building they want to close, or which construction they want us to delay. The project is not cost free—it comes at a cost. All the Opposition parties should be mindful that the last time they came to the chamber to force us to do something, they forced the citizens of Edinburgh to have £500 million spent on a tram scheme—£500 million that the country could have spent without the mess that the scheme has created for the citizens of this city. Members should beware of what they are asking for—cuts in front-line services in order to build a community building.

This is not just the position of the Government. When Clive Fairweather, the former chief inspector of prisons, was asked about the matter, he said that the position was understandable, with money being tight these days. He went on to say that one or two of the details have not quite been worked out. I hope that, rather than simply being put on the shelf, the project could be put to one side to be worked on,  so that when a bit more money becomes available we could come back to it. That is what the Government has said. We have not said no; we have said that, as and when the financial climate is better, we will be happy to revisit the matter. In the interim, if Mr Aitken wants money to be spent on the project, that cannot be done out of VAT, which is non-recurring; it must be done by cutting funds for something else. The choice is simple. If Labour, the Tories and the Lib Dems wish to build the community court in Glasgow, they do so at the expense of a visible police presence and the circumstances that are essential for community justice.

They cannot just produce the money out of their back pockets. That is the reality of life.

Irrespective of what Mr McLetchie might shout from a sedentary position—

We are in a recession, and we have to make these decisions.

We accept the conclusions of the McLeish report, and we are delivering record funding. We have put in an additional £2 million to ensure that our community justice front-line services—not simply buildings—can be properly resourced. Clearly, however, we must make hard choices during difficult times. I recall that Mr Brown opposed the closure not only of Annan justice of the peace court, with a price tag of up to £800,000, but of Rutherglen justice of the peace court. He is keen to ensure that the Government increases expenditure on buildings, but he will not tell us which front-line services we have to take the funding from. We live in a world in which resources are not infinite. Thankfully, we do not have to make up the £800 million of cuts that Mr Purvis would have imposed upon us—and which the Lib Dems have rolled back from. If members wish to proceed with buildings, they must cut the funding from other budgets. Be under no illusion: those budgets will be for front-line services, and it is police and prisons that we require to fund. We will not cut front-line services simply for a building that we cannot fund at present—but, along with Clive Fairweather, we will work to see whether we can deliver the concept when better financial times come.

Absolutely. We recognise the particular problems that the east end of Glasgow has. That is why our commitment to 1,000  additional officers, and indeed the splendid work that is being done by Strathclyde police authority and the chief constable of Strathclyde, have resulted in a record police presence in the city of Glasgow. Of course, that could be jeopardised if we have to replace police officers with a building. We have supported the community initiative to reduce violence in the east end, through the violence reduction unit. We recognise that specific areas have particular problems, not simply criminal justice problems but problems with drink, drugs and deprivation. We seek to work using a holistic approach, and that is what we are doing. We will have a visible police presence to enforce the law firmly. We will continue to invest in the prison estate to ensure that those who need to be behind bars are put there. That investment is not just for the prisoners; it is to ensure the safety of our hard-pressed officers. We are investing a record amount in front-line delivery services for criminal justice and for tackling alcohol and drug abuse. If members want to spend money on a building, they should be under no illusion: they cannot also spend that money on other services. What they make us spend on some areas—as with the Edinburgh trams—must come out of other areas. On their heads be it.

No. If other parties want us to spend money on something, they must tell us what money should be used. That is the point that I have been making throughout. I am happy to make a deal with Mr Martin: if he wants me to tally up how many officers we will have to take off the streets, I will be more than happy to make him an offer. Then, he can make the decision. In the interim, if all that he is prepared to do is to parrot demands for us to spend more on this and that, without telling us where the money is to come from, he will get the answer that he got.

It is about being fast, fair and flexible. The issue is not simply one of buildings; it is one of procedures and ensuring that the police  and the Crown are locked on and understand the issues. This is not done deliberately, but there have been instances of people appearing in court for something when it is clear that there are other, outstanding offences that will be rolled up. When people are sentenced to community service, we must ensure that it is not weeks or months down the line but immediate and speedy. That is one of the lessons that we learned from the Midtown system. We pick up on those lessons, but one does not need a building to be able to deliver them; one does that by having a better policing system, by improving technology and by ensuring that matters move swiftly. Lessons are learned by ensuring that not simply the police, but courts, prosecution and social work move smarter and work together. However, the building is not necessary.

Costs are involved in doing the right thing and that is why we made the substantial investment to ensure that we have 1,000 additional officers on our streets. However, if one makes an investment there, one cannot make it elsewhere. I refer once again to Clive Fairweather—a person with huge experience and, with all respect to Mr Lamont, more experience than him—who recognises the position that the Government is in. He also recognises that matters require to be worked out. I suggest that Mr Lamont considers and reflects upon Clive Fairweather's views. We realise that the project is not in a position to proceed at present because we do not have the financial culture and climate. That may change. We can continue to work with Glasgow to see what we can do immediately. We can look at the project in due course as money may free up. In the interim, I repeat that if Mr Martin and Mr Baker want to spend money on that, they must tell us which police officers they want us to take off our streets.

Absolutely. In England and Wales, following the Carter review, £1.2 billion was transferred from reserve to the Ministry of Justice to be allocated for the prison estate. That is a reserve claim—the Scottish Government does not automatically receive equivalent funding through Barnett consequentials. The justification for that procedure and emergency funding south of the border was pressure upon the prison estate. However, lo and behold, at the same time as people are living with the problem south of the border, we in Scotland have problems and pressures in our prison estate, as Conservative members are never shy in coming forward to tell us. We did not get our Barnett consequentials from the £1.2 billion. Had we done so, the £120 million could probably have delivered not just the community court in Glasgow, but a community court in every jurisdiction in Scotland. However, until such time as Mr Baker is prepared to stand up to his colleagues south of the border and fight the cause for Scotland, we will continue as a Government to be short changed and to face £500 million-worth of public expenditure cuts.

Robert Brown wanted to save Rutherglen as well as Annan, and Cathy Jamieson wants to save Cumnock and Girvan. None of those is cost free and all of them have a tag. Mr Baker wants to spend the money on the community court and we also have calls to spend on Rutherglen, Cumnock, Girvan and Annan. On and on the price tag goes, but it cannot be done. Do we budget? Yes, and I will tell the chamber where we budgeted. We budgeted for police officers pay and when the police officers' settlement was received the Government honoured the pay deal and did not seek to short  change our police officers as was done by a Labour Government south of the border. We did not budget for the problem with police pensions—we inherited that from previous Administrations—but as well as recognising the obligation that we have to pay our hard-working police officers what they are entitled to, we met our obligations as a Government on behalf of the people of Scotland to meet the pension rights of our police officers. They had to be met: does Mr Baker want us to renege on them?

Absolutely. I am glad that Sandra White, at least, has been listening to what I have been saying. What I have stated is not simply the Government's position, but the position of learned and respected people such as Clive Fairweather. We must get on and do something, and that is what we are doing. As Sandra White correctly said, this is not all about a building. It is about working smarter, changing systems, moving faster and ensuring that the system is fair and flexible. Those can be done and they will be done. However, we acknowledge that if and when money is freed up in due course, we will be more than happy to consider the expense of a building. In the interim, whatever Mr McLetchie may say, our priority is police officers in our communities.

We provided £1.6 million to support the £5 million community initiative to reduce violence in the east end of Glasgow, targeting 55 gangs and 700 young men. If Parliament makes us spend £750,000, £1 million or whatever on a yearly basis, projects such as that will be jeopardised. We believe that they—and not simply having a building—will tackle the root causes of crime.

Yes, we are. Policing requires a balance between protecting the right to non-violent protest and the right of members of the wider community to go about their daily lives without disruption. I am satisfied that the Scottish police service, in conjunction with local authorities and other partner agencies, works hard to maintain that balance.

As I said in response to the initial question, it is a matter of balancing the rights of individual citizens with the broader rights of our communities. Irrespective of the nature of protests, they can have huge implications. We have seen the effects that they can have at airports, for example. We must ensure that the response by the police is proportionate and that their actions are subject to scrutiny and review. That is the case under RIPSA and RIPA—the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000 and the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. Such matters are subject to overall scrutiny not just by myself, in respect of some areas, but by commissioners in other areas. Mr Harvie refers to events south of the border, and those matters must be addressed there, but whatever difficulties we might have—occasionally, officers, like politicians, make judgments that go wrong or that are perhaps inappropriate—we are well served by our police. They act proportionately, and I believe that the actions that they take continue to maintain that balance between rights and broader responsibilities.

Absolutely. I am more than happy to confirm that, and I am on record as frequently praising our police service, who do an excellent job protecting our communities. Sometimes, protests that initially appear peaceful result in significant consequences for communities. We are at the stage of the calendar when the so-called marching season is about to begin. Those events are viewed by many as part of the right of individuals to proclaim things that they claim to be part of their history. Equally, they can have significant effects and be disturbing, if not threatening, to individuals. Those are matters of balance that must be considered not only by the police and local authorities. As a Government, we believe that such events are dealt with proportionately and appropriately, and we will continue to work with and support the police and local authorities.

The term "McKenzie friend" refers to the practice in English and Welsh courts in which parties are given assistance from someone other than a lawyer in presenting their case in court. At present, a party may be represented by a friend, relative or lay representative, such as a citizens advice bureau representative, in the small claims and summary cause sheriff courts. That covers actions up to a value of £5,000. The right hon Lord Gill's civil courts review is considering the issue of McKenzie friends. I look forward to receiving his report, which is expected in June, and I will carefully consider all his recommendations about McKenzie friends and about wider issues concerning those who represent themselves in court. Those wider issues include the funding of court actions, improved court procedure and other methods of dispute resolution.

Anything that makes people more comfortable in a court environment is to be welcomed. There must be majesty of the court and the experience of court can be traumatic for whatever reason, so people's ability to have support is important. The question of who has formal representation rights is of greater complexity and must be considered in the round. We have addressed the issue at small claims and summary levels, and there can be representation in some debt cases in ordinary actions. We have broadened the approach to give the Association of Commercial Attorneys various powers, which have been signed off by the Lord President. One thing that differentiates Scotland from England is that there is wider access to legal aid in Scotland than there  is south of the border, which means that there is greater opportunity for representation. Lord Gill must consider the matter because it is not simply about comfort and people's ability to be assisted in court, whether by a lay or legal representative, but about whether court is the appropriate forum in which to deal with a matter. That is why the issue should be considered in its totality. I look forward to Lord Gill's review, and I will be more than happy to discuss the matter thereafter.

That is an operational matter for individual chief constables.

It is not a question of my being for or against the Scottish Information Commissioner's decision; it is my obligation as Cabinet Secretary for Justice to accept his decision—and I do accept it. Indeed, the chief constables of the relevant forces accepted it, and I understand that the information has been produced. The chief constables and I will abide by the decision. Covert human intelligence sources are important in addressing crime and public disorder. As I said to Patrick Harvie, such matters are supervised under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000, which was passed before the Government in which I serve came into office. It is appropriate that funding should be given to enable the police to have appropriate intelligence and information. It is a question of proportionality and balance: difficult judgment calls must be made, and there might be occasions when a judgment call is inappropriate or the terminology that is used and other aspects of the matter are not the best. In the round, the system works well and has safeguards. I meet the commissioner annually to discuss matters, and the police review the system.  I believe that we are well served by the police. There can be difficulties in public demonstrations. Whether we are talking about Boys Brigade marches, Orange order walks or demonstrations about the environment, such events have implications for traffic and the economy. We must continue to support our local authorities and police to make the appropriate judgment call and to balance the individual rights of the citizen with the broader rights of the community.

Officials are currently considering the report on damages for wrongful death alongside the Scottish Law Commission's two other recent reports on damages. We will take a view about our response to the recommendations in those reports and the timing of any bill in due course.

As I said to the member earlier, I appreciate his interest in the matter. Professor Thomson's report has been welcomed, but it must be considered and reviewed by all the stakeholders who have an interest in it. First, we must consider carefully the terms of the report and see whether they will fit precisely into a legislative framework. Secondly, the report is the third in a series of recent reviews by the Scottish Law Commission of the law of damages. It is accepted universally that the law of damages in Scotland needs to be updated; after all, we are in the 21 st century. Those who, like me, practised some 10 years ago are aware that the law in the area has not changed radically—the recent changes such as those on asbestos have been relatively limited. Whether it would be better to make such change piecemeal through a single action or a single piece of legislation that dealt with a specific aspect of the law of damages or whether it would be better to take time to adopt a more consolidated approach that sought to tackle all the aspects that have been raised rather than just one of the Law Commission's reports is a matter that we will consider and which I will be happy to discuss with the member in due course.

The debate has been wide ranging. Members of all parties have talked about antisocial behaviour problems in their constituencies. We  must get things into context. On a lovely day such as today, we must recognise that huge areas of Scotland are a delight to visit and live in, but some areas are blighted by serious crime and violence. Before I came to the chamber I met John Muir, whose son was, sadly, slain. That shows the problems that we face in some areas. We get lectures about "soft-touch Scotland", but the Government is taking action against serious and organised crime. No other Government has taken the action that we are taking against such crime. The Government is enforcing bail conditions much more strictly, ensuring that our communities are protected, and expanding the use of fixed-penalty notices to ensure that even low-level criminal behaviour is addressed and will not be accepted.

The level of recovery is significantly greater now than it was previously. We have introduced fines enforcement officers and have done a variety of other things that were not even thought of under the Tories. We have seen the unedifying spectacle today of Labour and Tory members trying to outposture each other and prove who is the most macho and right wing. I will leave them to flex their muscles, bare their chests and do whatever else they want to do; the rest of us will get on and tackle antisocial behaviour.

Not at the moment. There are various types of antisocial behaviour. Serious and low-level problems have been mentioned and Michael Matheson mentioned antisocial behaviour that is associated with stationary vehicles. Such behaviour is antisocial; it is ignorant and unacceptable. I also know about the problems that Sarah Boyack mentioned because I have similar problems in my constituency, in Lochend and other areas. Those problems need to be addressed. There are even antisocial behaviour problems with parking. A significant concern at Queen Margaret University and Jewel and Esk Valley College is people parking in an ignorant manner. Disabled people and people who are going to work cannot get in or out of parking places there. That is simply unacceptable and ignorant. Action is not necessarily enforceable under the criminal law, but action must be taken. Other problems surprised me.

As Dr Simpson was speaking earlier, my colleague the minister was meeting representatives of organisations. Actions are being looked into and matters are being addressed. Mr Martin mentioned that he represents Blackhill, and he gave narrations about incidents including acid being poured over vehicles, with substantial damage being done. I, too, represent areas of urban deprivation, such as Craigmillar and Niddrie. If such incidents happen in my area, I will not seek to enforce an ASBO; I will be speaking to the chief superintendent to ask why action is not being taken to enforce the criminal law. Such acts are serious and wanton vandalism and are simply unacceptable. This Government will not abrogate the responsibility to enforce the criminal law and criminal sanctions by passing such acts off simply as antisocial behaviour. That will not be our approach. We recognise that antisocial behaviour comes in a variety of forms. In some instances, mediation is important, but in others, ASBOs remain the necessary tool. In other areas, responsibility lies, and will always lie, with the criminal law being enforced. We will simply not accept that sort of hooliganism and behaviour. The tenor of the debate, starting with Mr Martin's speech and concluding with Mr Baker, seemed to indicate that Labour members are vehemently despondent that we, in Government, have not sought to repeal the 2004 act. It would have made their day if we were to do so. We remind them that we supported them when we were the Opposition, because we said that it was appropriate that action be taken. As a Government, we maintain the powers and repeal nothing.

Those are operational matters for the police, and we will support them where the police feel that they are necessary. Turning to what is unacceptable, I come to Michael McMahon's criticism of Harry McGuigan. I am not a member of the same political party as Mr McGuigan, and I disagree with him on the constitutional status of our country, but I think that he is a genuinely committed individual—and that I  actually have a higher regard for North Lanarkshire's Labour council than Mr McMahon does. Perhaps he should hang his head in shame. Also unacceptable was Cathie Craigie's criticism of the police and local authorities. It seems that, for Labour Party members it is the fault of the police or of the local authority if antisocial behaviour is continuing, it. No—it is not. It is the fault of the perpetrators.

I would have thought that, after almost 10 years in Parliament, Ms Craigie would, as a member of the Justice Committee, be aware of the constitutional impropriety of a Cabinet Secretary for Justice of any political party, directing the police. That practice does not and will not exist under our Government. As I said, we will not abrogate our responsibility and blame police officers—even more of whom we are putting on the street. We think that our police do a good job and we will back them. We think that local authorities, whether they are run by a Labour administration or are of an alternative hue, are doing good jobs, and we will support them. I conclude by saying what action we are taking. We will strengthen the 2004 act and we will improve guidance for local bodies. We will undertake research into intensive family support and other forms of prevention and early intervention, and we will expand the cashback scheme to give our youngsters more opportunities and chances. Also, as was mentioned throughout the debate—in particular by Dave Thompson and Angela Constance, I think—we seek to tackle pocket-money prices. The abuse of alcohol and the availability of cheap alcohol to our youngsters causes so much blight in our communities. We will revamp central support services for local bodies and we will gather and share good practice. We are going to develop the pilot on community engagement in order to allow communities to help direct local funding, and we are going to develop new ways of measuring success based on all the action that is taken—not just ASBOs. We will enforce the law. We will work with the police and local authorities. Together, taking action on alcohol, we will ensure that this  country is safer and stronger. I commend the motion.

Does John Lamont wish to comment on the position that has been taken by Sheriff Kevin Drummond in the Borders? He made it clear that almost 80 per cent of the cases that came before him involved alcohol-fuelled incidents. Do the Tories care to reflect on that?

We do not collect information on the circumstances that lead to an offence being committed. However, we are determined to stamp out criminality in the taxi and private hire industry. Regulations are currently before Parliament on the licensing of taxi and private hire car booking offices. Those measures will both act as a deterrent to unlawful activity and send a clear message that there is no room in the taxi industry for those who want to use it as a front for illegal activities.

I thank Shirley-Anne Somerville for raising the issue. The matter was also raised in the recent discussions that local MSPs had with the chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police down at Fettes Avenue, so she will be aware that the police are on the case. Clearly, improvements are required in how we obtain information on those who come into the country and then apply to become a private hire or black cab taxi driver, but such enforcement matters are not so much for the police as for those who regulate the industry. However, Shirley-Anne Somerville should realise that the Government is happy to work with the City of Edinburgh Council and the police to ensure that all appropriate steps are taken to secure the safety of travellers. Clearly, as she mentioned, there have been some nasty incidents recently, so we need to ensure that we retain the good name of the well-regulated taxi network that exists in the city.

I am due to meet Chief Constable Stephen House tomorrow afternoon. I last met him on 19 January at a meeting of the serious organised crime task force, at which we discussed a number of issues including co-ordinated operations by the eight Scottish police forces against serious organised crime. Such operations resulted in the arrest of 473 people between September and December 2008, the seizure of drugs worth nearly £13 million and the seizure of 42 firearms.

The member makes a valid point. Communities are blighted by those who deal drugs. It is important that, through the police and the prosecution system, the court ensures that justice prevails. The issue has a knock-on social effect on housing, and the question is whether that is best dealt with by me, as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, or whether it would more appropriate for it to be dealt with by the Minister for Housing and Communities, because some of it falls not so much within the justice portfolio as within the housing portfolio. I am more than happy to consider any proposals that the member may have. Whether we are talking about evictions from private and public sector tenancies or closure orders, we have to ensure that our communities are protected from those who peddle drugs and that those who do so are dealt with through formal prosecution or through other methods, such as eviction.

Polmont young offenders institution will open a new hall that is designed to hold 136 young offenders in around September this year. That will ease the current overcrowding in Polmont. In the longer term, the Government's plans for a coherent penal policy, making use of community payback, will reduce pressure across the prison system.

I assure the member that it is already a priority, which is why we are investing £120 million per annum in the prison estate. We have opened Addiewell prison; the planning proposals for HMP Grampian and HMP Bishopbriggs are under way; and we are preparing the ground for new prisons in Inverclyde and the Highlands. The prison estate pressures are being addressed as a matter of urgency.

We are working with community justice authorities on that. I met, in Irvine, Jackie Clinton and Peter McNamara from the CJA in the area. It is clear that we have to ensure that offenders retain links with their families and that, wherever possible, those who have not committed a serious offence or who are not dangerous are not detained. We are seeking to have community payback as opposed to free bed and board. That is the Government's direction of travel. We want to ensure that those who offend against our communities pay back for the harm that they have done. When they are dangerous or have committed a serious offence and no other sentence is due, off to prison they will go. With regard to the others, it is time that they did some hard work and were not given free bed and board at the taxpayer's expense.

We are committed to improving the timescales for the start of orders so that offenders understand that crime will be speedily punished. The intention is that offenders who are the subject of a community service order should start their work placements within seven working days. To assist local authorities to reorganise service provision to meet those much tighter timescales, we have provided an additional £1 million to community justice authorities in 2009-10. Following extensive consultation with the Association of Directors of Social Work, we issued revised guidance on the operation of community service schemes at the end of February. That is  being followed up by a series of staff training events over the coming weeks.

We recognise the fact that rural areas—not just in the Borders, but in the north as well—have specific problems. That takes us back to the point that I made to Mr Coffey. We want to see community payback, which was proposed by the McLeish commission, as opposed to the free bed-and-board culture that has existed at the taxpayer's expense for far too long. We must work with the community justice authorities and social work departments to ensure that we have the appropriate resources and facilities. The issue of speed in dealing with offenders is partly an attitudinal matter. I remember Lesley Riddoch on the McLeish commission challenging the practice by which someone who was given a custodial sentence was immediately sent down to the cells, whereas someone who was otherwise dispatched was dealt with in due course by the social work department. An attitudinal change had to be made. For 20 years as a defence agent, I never challenged that system; it was accepted as the orthodoxy. It has been made clear in Liverpool and in New York—as Bill Aitken often says—that justice should take place as quickly as possible. Whether someone gets a custodial sentence or a community sentence, we must ensure that we provide a fair, fast and flexible response, and that is where the Government is heading.

As I said to Mr Purvis, that is the Government's intention. The matter was raised by the McLeish commission, and we are delivering both through "Protecting Scotland's Communities:  Fair, Fast and Flexible Justice" and by putting in additional resources. I am more than happy to send Mr Aitken an article that I read recently in The New York Times , which says that the United States now has 7.3 million people in prison, on parole or on probation. The US has recognised the fact that continually locking people up does not work. Even Governor Schwarzenegger, who has a Republican ethos, is seeking to reduce expenditure and ensure that investment is made in tackling the root causes, whether they are drug-related or whatever. There is something absurd in the fact that, although the state of California has the fifth largest economy in the world, its second largest item of expenditure is corrections.

Mr Baker criticises the system that we inherited from him and his colleagues. The fact is that there was no previous direction that community sentences should begin within seven days—we are introducing that through "Fair, Fast and Flexible Justice". Yes, bail breaches are unacceptable; that is why we introduced tougher measures and why the matter is being dealt with. Any criticism relates to the situation that we inherited, not to the action that the Government is taking.

In accordance with its obligations under the Scotland Act 1998, the Scottish Government ensures that all policy proposals are compatible with Community law.

As a former minister, the member is aware that such legal advice is never published. Our legal advice from Government lawyers, who previously advised Mr Peacock when he was a member of the Administration, makes it clear that the proposal is lawful and acceptable. It is surprising that so many people accept as gospel the advice of lawyers who are retained by and receive money from those who have vested interests in the alcohol industry. Somehow or other, people seem to believe their advice rather than the advice that the Government has received from its lawyers. I cannot share the advice that we have been given, but Mr Peacock can take it as read that there are many lawyers out there who have a vested interest in opposing the proposal. It is clear to us that we must act against the scourge of alcohol—as mentioned in the chamber—and the proposal for minimum pricing is perfectly legitimate. That is why we have received support for it from the likes of the chief medical officer south of the border.

On 2 March we published "Changing Scotland's Relationship with Alcohol: A Framework for Action". The document is available on the Scottish Government website, and copies have been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. The framework sets out a robust and proportionate package of measures to rebalance Scotland's relationship with alcohol, reduce alcohol-related harm and contribute to a successful and flourishing Scotland. It includes legislative measures and a wide range of approaches for creating longer-term cultural change. Together, those actions will begin to make a real difference to the health and wellbeing of people in Scotland, to our economy and to our communities.

We are doing that. We have been consulting and are intent on taking action. Clearly, our actions do not simply involve criminal justice. The member, who represents the South of Scotland, will be aware of Sheriff Kevin Drummond, who was on the radio today talking about the problems that people in the Borders experience as a result of alcohol abuse and the behaviour that goes with it. Equally, as was mentioned today by Cathy Jamieson and Richard Simpson, alcohol abuse is fundamentally damaging the health and wellbeing of Scotland. It is not simply a small minority who are abusing alcohol; a large majority are exceeding their recommended limits and damaging themselves and others, including children and other people in their communities. That is why we have to act. We have made it quite clear that we are prepared to change the process. We now have to work out a common agreement and strategy to tackle the problem. Part of the solution will involve new legislation, part of it will involve enforcing current legislation and part of it will involve education. However, the fact is that we cannot go on as we are.

I welcomed this morning's debate on the subject, which I closed on behalf of the Government. We welcomed the position that was expressed by Cathy Jamieson, Richard Simpson and Hugh Henry, whose speech was valuable and excellent. There is now a recognition that the issue of the process has been resolved, and that we now need to consider ways of addressing the problem. The Government is more than happy to work with any and all parties in this chamber. We cannot go on as we are, and we have to ensure that we make the appropriate changes.

We welcome the recent report by Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons for Scotland on young offenders in adult establishments and note his recognition of the various aspects of good practice at Cornton Vale prison, including the treatment of the prisoners and the management of women at risk. We also recognise the areas of concern that he raised and will ensure that the Scottish Prison Service considers those issues appropriately. The Scottish Government is  committed to a justice programme that is designed to manage offenders appropriately and reduce prison numbers.

A multifaceted approach is required to ensure that we ease the pressure. The Scottish Prison Service is doing an excellent job in difficult circumstances. The nature of the prison clientele—if I can put it that way—at Cornton Vale is extremely challenging. Many have a history of mental illness, many have a heroin or other drug addiction, and many have been victims of abuse. There are substantial and complicated problems. Clearly, we require to address matters within prisons. However, it is equally important to seek to roll out and expand the turnaround project and build on the excellent work of, for example, the 218 project in Glasgow. The Government is doing that. Sometimes, we have to deal with the underlying problem and not simply the offending, and the underlying problem for so many of the offenders in HM Prison Cornton Vale is heroin addiction.

We welcome the debate. There is a  great deal of consensus around the chamber on the problem that we face. Two strands—the problem and the process—have run through the debate. I thank Richard Simpson for his comments on the process; the Liberal Democrats should have taken those points on board. It would be churlish of me not to say that the procedures that were suggested for many issues were introduced by Tavish Scott and George Lyon. However, at the end of the day, we want to resolve differences over process so that we can concentrate on tackling the problem. We will do so through a health bill. Hugh Henry and Cathy Jamieson acknowledged the huge damage that alcohol misuse is causing to our society. We hope that we can draw a line under debates on process and start addressing the problem that so many speakers have highlighted. Bill Aitken spoke about a road-to-Damascus conversion. Perhaps the biggest such change in the Conservative party is its recognition that there is such a thing as society. Speaker after speaker recognised that alcohol misuse is damaging our communities. Clearly, it is not simply a criminal justice matter, as the effects of alcohol misuse are not limited to problems with behaviour. Frankly, it is killing far too many of our communities and damaging individual citizens. We must move on. Issues to be considered include the action that must be taken, enforcement and education. More can and should be done on enforcement. Richard Simpson referred to the 2005 act, the provisions of which are being rolled out. There will be a big bang in September, when many of the changes will kick in. At that point, licensing boards will have more power to take appropriate action. We are surprised that some people wish to restrict licensing boards to a policy of three strikes and you're out. We want to ensure that boards can adopt a policy of one strike and you're out; if there has been a flagrant breach, licensees should not be given the opportunity of further culpability. That is why we ask members to support the action that is being taken to give boards the power to adopt such a policy. Enforcing provisions against underage drinking is problematic for the police. Reference has been made to pocket-money prices. If we impose fines on our children—as some seem to be suggesting—those fines will be taken out of their pocket money, because some of the youngsters whom the police are taking in as drunk and incapable are not 16 or 17-year-old laddies who are in work or apprenticeships, but 12 or 14-year-old young girls who, if they are lucky enough to have pocket money, are blowing it on alcopops. We accept that enforcement is necessary and will work with members to ensure that appropriate action is taken. The Government will ensure that the police, procurators fiscal and licensing boards  are joined up and communicate with one another, and that licensing boards are aware of who is offending.

We have met COSLA and Alcohol Focus Scotland and have made clear that we think that such a forum is appropriate. However, it would be better for it to come from them than from us because, as today's debate has shown, there may be issues on which they disagree with the Government. We will support COSLA and Alcohol Focus Scotland fully in setting up a forum that is able to deal with Government, but it should come from them, because they are distinctive stakeholders with particular interests in the area. We have addressed the issue of process; the Liberal Democrats must address the issue of what they will do about the problem and, as Christine Grahame indicated, the substance. We have a rather perverse situation, given that the Liberal Democrats are a federal party that recognises that devolution should allow one part of the United Kingdom to go in a particular direction to deal with particular problems. As Richard Simpson and Cathy Jamieson pointed out, the problem of alcohol abuse is greater in Scotland. The irony and shame for the Liberal Democrats is that they do not want to act in the part of the United Kingdom where the problem is significantly greater than it is elsewhere. I compare that position with the courageous steps that have been taken by Christopher Huhne and Nick Clegg.

It is rather tragic that, whereas Nick Clegg can make proposals that this Government supports fully, in the part of the United Kingdom where the Liberal Democrats wish to make a difference and where the problem is significantly greater than it is elsewhere, they take no action. We recognise that issues will have to be worked through and that we must work with the trade. The Scottish Licensed Trade Association is squarely behind the Government on many issues. We will work with the appropriate stakeholders to make  clear that the suggestion that the meal deals and offers will be affected is spurious. We must take action. We recognise the problems that Scotland faces and accept that there is not one quick-fire bullet that will solve them. It is about enforcement, education and making changes. Three years after the smoking ban, we can change the situation. However, we need legislative change to ensure that we deliver cultural change.

There have been three clear issues in the debate and there is uniformity from Mr Baker, Mr Aitken and Mr Brown about how to deal with the issues before us. To Patrick Harvie I say that the bill is being considered at Westminster and it is for those who have been elected there to address it. As a Government, we have made our position on clause 50 quite clear and I am happy to reiterate that point. The issue before us involves dealing with a small existing loophole. A person who is subject to a warrant and whom we do not wish to access or egress Scotland could enter or leave. The  measure will give immigration officers at ports—sea or air—powers to detain such people for three hours until a police officer arrives. I make it clear to Patrick Harvie that the measure is not designated against foreigners; it is designated against anyone who is subject to a warrant. That is what matters, whether the person is a Scottish citizen seeking to leave or somebody from abroad seeking to come in. At an airport, when a police officer is not available, it might be clear to a UK Border Agency immigration official that a person whom they think should be detained is about to enter or to leave, which is perhaps more likely. Rather than allow that person to escape without justice being served, the official will be able to detain them for three hours and hand them into the custody of a Scottish police officer. Nothing more is being asked. Nothing is being specified against anybody on the basis of their nationality or immigration status. The issue is whether somebody is subject to a warrant. If they are, and if a police officer is not present, it is appropriate that we should allow a UK Border Agency officer to detain them for a maximum of three hours, until a police officer arrives.

The functions will not be under the control of that agency, because primacy is given to the Scottish police force. The measure has the consent of the Scottish police, who see merit in it. We will allow Border Agency officials to detain somebody for a maximum of three hours if a police officer is not present. If police officers at Edinburgh or Glasgow airports are called away for some reason, rather than allow somebody to avoid justice and to endanger our communities or other communities, Border Agency officials should have the power to detain that person for three hours, and no more. Primacy will remain with the Scottish police force. That is why I welcome the support from Justice Committee members. We acknowledge that the issues to do with the police complaints commissioner for Scotland are being addressed and we welcome the co-operation from Phil Woolas and the Home Office on that.

Let me make progress, as I am short of time. I turn to the final outstanding matter, which relates to clause 50 of the bill. Tribunals are a  complex matter as some are entirely devolved, some are hybrids and some are entirely reserved. The Government believes that the UK Government has acted inappropriately in ignoring our and the judiciary's request to delay the process because we have an on-going review of the structure of civil courts and law in Scotland. I am more than happy to join other members in raising the issue and making it clear that we would prefer Lord Gill to be given the necessary time and space to complete his review before the clauses to do with tribunals are addressed. I ask members of other political parties to ensure that their representatives in Westminster make those points.

I do not have time. I am happy to go back to the UK Government to make it clear that many members in the Parliament have expressed the view that the UK Government's attitude is not as we would wish. We cannot do anything about that. I ask members to vote for the motion as it is not, as Mr Harvie suggested, about prejudicing anybody on the basis of their nationality; instead, it is about ensuring that people who are subject to a warrant cannot access or leave our country, thereby endangering others and fleeing justice. The motion is not about removing powers from the Scottish police; it will allow minimum detention powers to the UK Border Agency to ensure that our communities remain safer and stronger. The measure has the consent of the Scottish police force, which under no circumstances would allow another organisation to take over its role and remit.

The motion seeks approval for the UK Parliament to apply provisions in sections 1 to 4 of the UK Borders Act 2007 to Scotland. Those sections allow a designated immigration officer to detain for up to three hours, pending the arrival of the police, somebody who is subject to an outstanding arrest warrant. That provision will ensure that Scotland's borders are as secure as those elsewhere in the UK and that Scotland cannot be perceived as an easy way in. Currently, there is a potential loophole in the law that could mean that an immigration officer would have to allow a wanted person to enter or leave Scotland in spite of the officer being aware of an outstanding arrest warrant. The provision will put Scotland on a par with the rest of the UK, but with appropriate safeguards. In practice, matters will be largely unchanged. Police are routinely present at our major sea ports and airports; even when they are not, notification of passenger data normally allows immigration officers to alert them in advance. I turn to issues that were raised in the Justice Committee's report on the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Bill. I am grateful for that committee's thorough consideration, and I have acted on its concerns as far as possible. It identified concerns that the Scottish Refugee Council raised, which highlighted that UK Border Agency staff in Scotland may not be subject to as rigorous a complaints mechanism as that in England and Wales. I wrote to the minister of state responsible for that issue at the Home Office, Phil Woolas, and reiterated the committee's concern that a clear position needs to be established on how allegations of non-criminal misconduct against immigration officers are managed. Powers exist that allow the Home Secretary to make an agreement with the police complaints commissioner for Scotland, so that the commissioner can review complaints that have been made against immigration officers in the same manner as complaints that have been made against police officers, but such an agreement is not yet in place. I have asked for all possible steps to be taken to establish such an agreement as  soon as possible. Clause 54(11) of the bill provides that Scottish ministers are to be consulted before the power of detention is commenced. I have stressed to the UK Government that I would not support commencement until the position on complaints is clear. It is clear that any immigration officer who is charged with a criminal offence is dealt with under the normal course of events. Mr Woolas responded to my letter yesterday, and provided a reassurance that steps were being taken to resolve the matter as soon as possible. I have sent a copy of the exchange to the Justice Committee. The Law Society of Scotland and the Scottish Refugee Council expressed concerns about clause 50, which would make it possible for immigration judicial reviews to be moved from the Court of Session to the UK immigration tribunal. Clause 50 is not relevant to the legislative consent motion, as it is does not touch on devolved matters, but as we have an interest in the effective management of the Scottish courts, we asked the UK Government not to proceed with that provision before the recommendations of our on-going civil court review under Lord Gill are known. The Scottish judges asked for the same consideration. Unfortunately, the UK Government has chosen to plough ahead with clause 50 regardless, and the current devolution settlement prevents us from stopping it. The Scottish Government does not have power over that, and the matter is not within the domain or control of the Parliament. Those aspects are concerning, but they are for another day and another forum. As I said, the Scottish Government has reiterated its position, and I am conscious that there are significant concerns around the chamber. If it is thought that the mood of the Parliament about how the UK Government is acting on clause 50 should be expressed, I will be more than happy to do that. However, I call on members to support the motion today. Opposing it will do nothing to change the UK Government's position on clause 50. As I say, concerns raised by the Scottish Refugee Council remain to be addressed. However, if we do not support the motion, we will leave a loophole that could allow criminals to enter or leave our country when they could and should be stopped. The motion will help to close that loophole and will ensure that immigration officers can support the police in tackling crime effectively. I am aware of the concerns that were raised by the Justice Committee. One particular matter is being addressed by Mr Woolas, and I ask members to accept his indications of support and action in the spirit in which they have been offered. I understand the concerns over clause 50, which have been expressed in the chamber and  elsewhere. However, those concerns are for another day. The Government will be more than happy to take up those concerns, but I ask that the motion is supported, in order to close the loophole and ensure that people who are subject to a warrant cannot access or egress Scotland with impunity. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 14 January 2009, relating to the power of detention for individuals subject to an outstanding arrest warrant and their enforcement, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The Scottish Legal Aid Board helps hundreds of people to defend repossession actions every year, and the Government is making changes to legal aid rules that will benefit many mortgage borrowers facing repossession, along with thousands of others. Regulations to increase the financial eligibility limits for civil legal aid were approved by the Justice Committee earlier this week. That increase means that almost 1 million more Scots will be able to receive free or subsidised legal advice.  About three quarters of the population should come within the scope of the scheme from this April. The Government is also taking steps to secure legal assistance where there might be gaps in private sector provision. We have invested an additional £3 million over the next two years to strengthen the provision of legal advice services, particularly for people facing difficulties as a result of the economic downturn. The Legal Aid Board will use that funding, in the first instance, to employ a small number of solicitors to work in areas where the level of provision is currently low.

As a lawyer of 20 years' standing, I had a great deal of involvement with law centres: I was an agent for them, and I sat on a variety of law centre boards. Therefore, I have a great deal of time and respect for them, although Paisley Law Centre is not one that I know, as it started to operate more recently than my periods of practice. The Government is happy to engage with all parties, and the Legal Aid Board is involved in discussions. We recognise that we have to tackle the situation and that we have to provide facilities where the private sector cannot. We also have to ensure that in-court advice—which sometimes comes from people who are not legally qualified—is provided. If representatives of the law centres wish to meet me, they should write in the normal manner. I would be more than happy to have discussions with them—many of them will be former practising colleagues of mine.

I have praised Paul Rooney before in the chamber in relation to a variety of matters, including policing and the Scottish Police Services Authority. This is a partnership. We have to work with chief constables, police board conveners and police boards. It is a pity that the Labour Party is still so negative and begrudging and that it just will not get on board. If Paul Rooney can, why can he not?

I repeat what I said at the outset: we will recruit 1,000 additional officers and we will deliver 1,000 additional officers beyond the figure that we inherited in March 2007. That is a good-news story. Labour members should recognise and accept that.

This has been a rather rumbustious debate. Throughout the debate, the tenor from Labour in particular but also the Liberal Democrats to an extent seemed to be, "It's no fair." Well, it's a fair cop, guv: there will be 1,000 additional recruits delivered by this Government and there will be 1,000 additional officers beyond what we inherited in March 2007. The doomsayers will just have to accept that and get over it. Mr Baker made a variety of points. He went on about recruitment in Grampian. Let me be clear: we have record numbers of police officers in Grampian. On Monday, it was my pleasure to be  briefed about operation Lochnagar, which Nigel Don mentioned, and to meet some of the young recruits—to which the Scottish Government had committed—who had been involved in operations to make their communities in Torry and elsewhere safer and stronger. Labour and the Liberal Democrats should acknowledge and welcome that good-news story. Mr Baker also went on about training. Yesterday, I met Calum Steele of the Scottish Police Federation, who told me that the SPF has no problem with how matters are being dealt with at Tulliallan, which Robert Brown mentioned. If anything, the problems at Tulliallan are a result of the success of squeezing through the current number of officers; such problems go with the volume and capacity being delivered. Yesterday, the Scottish Police Federation said: "Whilst police recruitment is ultimately a matter for Chief Constables the Scottish Police Federation is aware government is delivering the necessary funding (for the 1000 extra police officers)". Indeed, ACPOS said last year: "All eight Scottish Police Forces are working very actively to recruit the thousand police officers that are to be directly funded by the Scottish Government. They are also recruiting to replace officers who are expected to retire within the current financial year ... Forces recruited 697 officers during 2007/2008 and are planning to recruit 1648 officers during the current financial year". That is the situation. We are delivering on our manifesto promise. It is all very well for Mr Kelly, Cathie Craigie and others to say how important police officers are and for Bill Butler to emphasise the importance of policing in Anniesland but, as Bill Aitken pointed out, let us remember that the Labour manifesto committed to not one new or additional police officer being recruited. Under Labour, not only would we not have 1,000 additional officers or 1,000 recruited officers, we would be facing the retiral spike of 2,300 officers.

The Government's position is quite clear: we are delivering on our manifesto commitment. Labour's manifesto commitment was for zero officers at a time when 2,300 officers will be retiring. As Kenneth Gibson pointed out, the situation here contrasts with that south of the border. This Government recognises the service of our police officers. We did not seek to equivocate on paying  them. We did not seek to renege on what should be provided as part of their salary. We stumped up and we paid up. Sadly, that is not reflected south of the border. Although we are not getting Barnett consequentials to address the pension fund debacle that we face, the Government recognises the importance of the police service to the fabric of our communities. Despite not being given what is due and owing to our country from the Treasury, we are ensuring that our communities are protected by our police forces. We inherited a spike in police retirals, with 2,300 officers due to retire, and the lowest level of police recruitment since devolution. We should contrast that with the Labour manifesto commitment to not one additional officer. Nevertheless, we are able to commit today: we are delivering our additional 1,000 officers into the community and we will ensure that there are at least 1,000 officers above and beyond the number that we inherited in March 2007. To answer John Lamont's fair point about doing more, we are not stopping there, given our commitment to the three Rs of recruitment, retention and redeployment. We will seek to retain valuable officers who might otherwise retire. That depends to some extent on the economic situation and the personal choice of those officers. Mr Aitken is quite correct about that. The study shows that there is flexibility about that. Equally, we recognise that we have to redeploy officers, who give great service to our communities, away from sitting behind desks doing needless paperwork. Paperwork has to be done in every area of life, but far too much of police work is bureaucratic. We are freeing up front-line officers where we can. The doomsayers should just get over it and recognise that the Government is delivering 1,000 additional officers into our community and that it is going to deliver 1,000 additional officers.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member obviously does not believe the statements that I have made that there will be 1,000 recruits and that there will be 1,000 more police officers than in March 2007. If the matter is of such concern, why did the Labour manifesto commit to not one new recruit? Would we not be in an awfy state if Labour was in power and not us? There would not be 1,000 recruits and we would be going backwards.

The answer to Mr Brown's question is quite clear. We are committed to recruiting 1,000 officers and we are committed to there being 1,000 more than the figure in March 2007. It is straightforward and simple.

I welcome this debate on police numbers. I am extremely grateful to Richard Baker for bringing it to Parliament, particularly as it gives me the opportunity to set out the good news about how the Government is delivering on its promise to put more police officers on our streets and in our communities. Following the publication yesterday of the police force projection study, we can say not only that recorded crime is at a 25-year low and police numbers at an all-time high, but that the SNP Government will deliver 1,000 additional recruits; that the total number of police officers will be 1,000 higher than in 2007; and that we will go further by using the three Rs of recruitment, retention and redeployment to maximise the number of officers on our streets and in our communities. We will do all that despite our inheriting a spike in retirals and the lowest level of police recruitment since devolution.  Therefore, although I welcome the debate, I am a bit surprised that Richard Baker wanted a debate celebrating the Government's success on police numbers. Over and over, he told anyone who would listen that we would never recruit 1,000 additional officers. He was a doomsayer and a Jeremiah, but that argument is bust. Over and over, he told anyone who would listen that the head count would never go up by 1,000 officers. Now, that argument is bust, too. He needs to learn that saying something over and over does not make it so. In four quarters, we have seen four increases and we now have record numbers of police officers in Scotland.

The proof of the pudding is in the eating. We inherited from the Liberal Democrat-Labour Administration the lowest level of police recruitment since devolution. We also inherited a record number of retirals. Despite that, we are delivering 1,000 additional recruits and are committing to in excess of 1,000 additional police officers come 2011 than we inherited in 2007. That is a good news story. However, doubtless, Richard Baker will wish to continue with his doomsaying.

We inherited a frankly dreadful situation—the lowest level of recruitment since devolution and a record number of retirals, with more than 2,300 officers projected to go. Despite that, the Government is committing, the proof of the pudding is in the eating and our additional officers will be on the streets. Richard Baker continues to plough on, but the fact of the matter is that we are delivering. Looking at the faces of Richard Baker's colleagues, I do not think that they are too admiring of his having brought the issue for debate this morning. I suspect that they feel that, a little like the grand old Duke of York, he has marched his Labour colleagues up to the top of the hill only to find 1,000 police officers waiting for them at the top. As members know, on 31 March 2007 there were 16,234 full-time equivalent police officers in  Scotland. In our first budget, the Scottish Government funded our pledge to recruit an additional 1,000 police officers over this session of Parliament. We have also provided police authorities with sufficient resources to maintain the numbers with which they started, including £20 million in 2009-10 to cope with the bulge in retirals that we inherited and £55 million in 2008-09 to 2010-11 for police and fire pensions, which were dropped on us by Westminster. Now that we are at around the midway point in our first term in office, we can project what the impact of that investment will be. The police force projection study uses published statistics, together with forecasts from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. There is always some uncertainty in making projections about the future; therefore, we have modelled variations in the number of officers retiring and leaving the service. As a result, the report cites a range of figures. However, the study clearly shows that the number of police officers in March 2011 will likely be at least 17,275 and possibly as high as 17,484. Because of the Government's investment and the work that it has undertaken in partnership with the chief constables, I can say with confidence that we will see the number of police officers rising by 1,000 or more. The Jeremiahs and the doomsayers will just have to accept that. I can also say with some confidence that Richard Baker now needs to march his weary troops back down the police numbers hill. I suggest that, the next time that he is tempted to march them up it, he should remember that saying something over and over again does not make it so. I take pleasure in moving the amendment in my name and confirm to Mr Baker that we will recruit 1,000 additional officers. There will be 1,000 additional officers in 2011. The Government is delivering on its commitment to the three Rs and is providing a visible police presence in our communities. I move amendment S3M-3726.1, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "notes that police officer numbers are at a record high; welcomes the findings of the Police Force Projection Study that show that by March 2011 police officer numbers will have increased by more than 1,000 over the March 2007 level and will reach between 17,275 and 17,484 officers; commends the Scottish Government for its investment in funding 1,000 additional recruits; further commends the eight Scottish police forces for delivering additional police officers, and calls on the Scottish Government to continue to maximise the total number of police officers through a combination of recruitment, retention and redeployment."

Perhaps I could put it on the record. Will there be 1,000 more officers? Yes.

I am pleased to reiterate the Scottish Government's support for Patrick Harvie's bill. I concur in his thanks and tributes to individuals who have campaigned for the issue to be dealt with and legislated on. I am pleased, too, that the Justice Committee recommended in its stage 1 report that the general principles of the bill be agreed to. It is encouraging that the committee has recognised that it is appropriate to create the statutory aggravations in the bill. As part of our manifesto commitment to working towards a safer, stronger Scotland, we promised to carry out the recommendation of the working group on hate crime and introduce these aggravations. We were therefore happy to have the opportunity to support Mr Harvie's bill and to co-operate with him to it take it forward, as we are doing today. People—whoever they are, whatever disability they are afflicted by and whatever sexual orientation they possess—are entitled to the full protection of the law, to be treated with dignity and compassion, and to be fully and properly protected. We aim to improve the way in which crimes motivated by hatred are dealt with. The aggravations that are created by the bill will protect victims of crime who have been targeted as a result of their sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability—actual or presumed. We need to remember that, as Patrick Harvie said,  that does happen—far too often, frankly. That is why action is needed. If a crime has been committed and it can be shown that the motivation was hostility and ill will based on the victim's sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability, the sentence should reflect that. As Patrick Harvie commented, that is already the case for crimes motivated by a victim's race or religion. The bill does not create any new offences. Hate crime can include harassment, property damage, violence and, in extreme cases, murder. The aggravations can therefore apply to any crime or offence. The bill is simply a reflection of our belief about the view that we, as a society, should take on the basis of the aggravation added to the offence perpetrated. Evidence that was presented to the Justice Committee by organisations such as the Equality and Human Rights Commission expressed clear and strong support for the use of statutory aggravations in the case of hate crime. Not only do statutory aggravations help to underline the seriousness with which hate crime is viewed, they help to ensure a consistent approach from law enforcement and criminal justice agencies. The Justice Committee considered that matter in some detail and examined the arguments for and against the creation of statutory aggravations. Similar aggravations that are already in place for racially and religiously aggravated offences have been shown to serve a number of purposes: they ensure that, throughout Scotland, there are appropriate and consistent reporting and prosecution policies from the various agencies in the criminal justice system; they send a clear message that prejudice and hatred towards social groups as a motive for committing a crime are unacceptable and will not be tolerated; and they allow us to monitor the extent of such crimes in Scotland and tailor our approaches to tackling them. The bill will ensure that an aggravation must be acknowledged and taken into account at the point of sentence. It will be clear to the offender at the point of sentence how seriously the aggravated nature of an offence is viewed.

These matters are dealt with and recorded in a variety of ways. We have the Scottish Court Service and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, and we are building on what we already do. As Patrick Harvie said, we  already have information on the existing aggravations in relation to race and religion and, quite correctly, we record information when we have a significant social problem such as assaults on emergency workers. The systems exist, and the Government will ensure that such matters are taken into account. The impact on the sentence will be a matter for the discretion of the judge, but the existence of the aggravation will require to be recorded at all stages in the criminal justice system. That will enable Government and practitioners to build up a much more accurate picture of the extent of such crimes in Scotland. Both the Crown Office and the police, in their evidence to the committee, acknowledged the value of more accurate knowledge and a better understanding of hate crimes, and the value of giving the victims of the crimes more of a voice in the criminal justice system. We believe that this type of crime is substantially underreported in Scotland. That is shameful, but one of the aims of the bill is to tackle the phenomenon. We wish to encourage people who have experienced hate crime to come forward, confident that they will be taken seriously and that the crime that has been committed against them will be dealt with appropriately. The working group found evidence of some social groups being proportionately more often the victims of harassment and crime. Much of that is motivated by prejudice against those groups. Research that was commissioned by the Disability Rights Commission in 2004 showed that 47 per cent of disabled Scots had experienced hate crime because of their disability. Research that was undertaken by the beyond barriers project in 2002—Patrick Harvie commented on similar projects—showed that 23 per cent of LGBT people in Scotland had been physically assaulted as a result of their sexual orientation or transgender status. The evidence shows clearly that LGBT and disabled people are much more likely to be the victims of crime—and, too often, crime that is motivated by prejudice against them. The Justice Committee discussed the fact that our courts can, and do, take into account a wide range of factors when sentencing offenders. Why then focus on hate crime? Hate crime has a destructive effect not just on victims but on whole communities. As the working group discovered, hate crime not only causes greater damage to a victim than crimes that are not motivated by hatred but is socially divisive. Hate crime damages communities. It prevents people from engaging fully in their social and working lives. Hate crime demands a priority response because of its particular emotional and psychological impact on the victim and the victim's community. The damage that hate crime causes cannot be measured solely in terms of physical injury or cost.  Such incidents can damage the fabric of our society and can fragment our communities. These are hard times for businesses and families, and we need to move forward as a nation. We need a vision of a more successful country—a country that will tackle crimes motivated by hatred or prejudice. No one in Scotland should be targeted or victimised because of their sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability. Our clear aim is to prevent and deter crimes, but where crime does happen, it will not be tolerated. We want a Scotland where all are treated with dignity and respect. The Government is committed to tackling inequality and creating strong communities. The bill is part of the work that we and many others are doing to help to create a Scotland in which people can live alongside one another, respecting difference and celebrating diversity. Patrick Harvie is correct to say that the common law is good and has served us well. However, it will be important to take account of aggravations and try to drive attitudinal change. I thank the Justice Committee for its report, and I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for its consideration of the scope of the legislation. I congratulate Patrick Harvie on bringing the bill so far. The Government looks forward to it making continued progress. We will give it our full support.

In answers to previous parliamentary questions, I reported to Parliament on the House of Lords judgment in the Somerville case about a time bar for claims of alleged breaches of human rights. As Parliament will recall, those claims arose in relation to the period from the beginning of devolution to the ending of doubled-up slopping out in February 2005. I have previously told Parliament that the Scottish Prison Service had to set aside £67 million—I apologise to colleagues to whom it was suggested that the figure was £50 million—of public money to pay to prisoners who were claiming that doubled-up slopping out breached their human rights. Today, I will provide a further update on our efforts to address the consequences of the judgment. We are working constructively with the United Kingdom Government, the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament to enable the release of up to £50 million of that £67 million to be put to better uses. As I will explain in more detail later, we believe that the issue can be resolved before the summer recess. However, time is of the essence and swift action is needed if that timescale is to be achieved. The judgment, which was made in October 2007, means that unlike every other public authority in Scotland, and unlike the UK Government, the Scottish Government does not have the protection of a one-year time bar for human rights claims. Thus, for instance, human rights claims arising from conditions in English and Welsh prisons are subject to a one-year time bar, whereas claims from Scottish prisoners are not. We estimate that the Scottish Government could, as a result of the judgment, face more than 20,000 claims arising from doubled-up slopping-out conditions in prisons. My answers to previous parliamentary questions in November 2007 and June 2008 described more fully the impact of the judgment, along with the practical measures that we have taken to address it. I also undertook to keep Parliament advised of developments in our attempts to persuade the UK  Government to remove the anomaly that has been created by the judgment. That is an issue of major importance. Since I last reported to Parliament in June last year, the number of claims for doubled-up slopping out, and the claims' associated costs, has continued to rise. At 5 March this year, 3,737 cases had been settled at a total cost of more than £11.2 million in compensation payments and associated legal fees. A further 1,223 cases are being dealt with and, on average, around 200 new claims are being raised per month. We are thus faced with a continuing and substantial liability that shows no sign of abating. The Scottish Prison Service has had to make provision in its annual accounts for £66.7 million in the current financial year to meet the costs of such claims. That is bad enough, but there is also the possibility of claims on other human rights grounds being raised in the future. The absence from the Scotland Act 1998 of any explicit statutory time bar greatly increases the potential liability on the Scottish ministers for such claims. We therefore concluded that the Scottish Government should have the same protection that is afforded to public authorities south of the border. To achieve that, a change in the law is needed so that claims against the Scottish ministers under the Scotland Act 1998 are subject to the same one-year time bar that applies to claims against other public authorities under the Human Rights Act 1998. As the Somerville judgment related to a provision of the Scotland Act 1998, such action requires to be supported by the UK Government. Therefore, on 25 October 2007—the day after the Somerville judgment was pronounced—I wrote to the Lord Chancellor, setting out the case for change and seeking urgent action. In his initial response, the Lord Chancellor agreed that this was an important issue and said that he and his colleagues would engage with us constructively on it. I and my officials subsequently had very extensive correspondence and discussions with the UK Government. Those discussions culminated in December last year when the Lord Chancellor told us that the UK Government was not persuaded of the case for action. However, because of the overriding public-interest aspect, the First Minister took the matter up with the Lord Chancellor. Two weeks ago, the First Minister and the Lord Advocate went to London to meet the Lord Chancellor and the Advocate General for Scotland. Yesterday, following those discussions, the First Minister wrote again to the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Chancellor has replied, saying that there might be scope for our two Administrations to come to an agreed view on this issue, and suggesting further  urgent discussions between senior officials. We welcome that response, as it seems to indicate a desire on the part of the UK Government to arrive at a solution. However, the time for action is short, for reasons that I will describe shortly. The UK Government had suggested that we in Scotland might address the Somerville issue by changing the law on time bar more generally. However, that would reduce the rights of many deserving claimants, such as those who suffer from pleural plaques or who have been injured through the negligence of employers. We believe that there is no case for such sweeping change: indeed, the Scottish Law Commission has recently argued that the time limits for personal injury cases should be extended, so a reduction in all time limits to one year would be completely wrong. Time bars are a common concept and exist in most jurisdictions. The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg applies a six-month time limit for bringing cases, so what we propose is not unique or even unusual. It was always intended, from when the Human Rights Act 1988 was enacted, that a one-year time bar for bringing human rights claims should apply. It is completely wrong if claimants circumvent that by instead using the Scotland Act 1998. The situation that has been created in Scotland by the judgment is untenable and unacceptable. The introduction of a one-year time bar would enable us to draw a line under our liability in relation to claims of the kind that are being made in respect of the Somerville judgment, and so could release up to £50 million for spending on more worthy purposes. It would also reduce our liability in relation to other human rights claims that might arise in the future. Fifty million pounds is a large amount of money. It could pay for the construction of eight new primary schools or 500 new affordable housing units, or it could be used to employ 1,250 teachers or 1,600 nurses for a year. This is, therefore, a real and important issue. We have proposed a straightforward course of action involving minimal time at Westminster. It would involve an order under the Scotland Act 1988 that would allow the Scottish Parliament to introduce the time bar, followed by urgent legislation in the Scottish Parliament. We have drafted the measures and, with support from both the Scottish and Westminster Parliaments, the legislation could be in place before the summer recess. However, the matter is now extremely urgent, as completion of the process that I have outlined by the summer recess would require that the necessary order be laid before the end of March. We will have to move quickly to achieve that, but I believe that it can be done.  I hope that there will be broad support for that course of action. I am arranging to meet the other parties and look forward to discussing the matter with them. I have also arranged for copies of our proposed draft legislation to be placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. In the light of the delay in progressing the necessary change, and because time is now very short if legislation is to be on the statute book by the beginning of the summer recess, the Scottish Government also raised the issue at the meeting of the joint ministerial committee in London today. We have brought the matter to Parliament now, because we will all share responsibility for taking the issue forward on the lines that I have described, and because we believe that Parliament ought to be kept fully informed in case it needs to take a view. The issue that has been created by the Somerville judgment is a matter of deep and justifiable public concern. Too much public money has already had to be paid out to prisoners, some of whom have committed extremely serious—indeed, appalling—crimes. We need to bring that situation to an end. The public rightly expects that we should do so as quickly as possible. I hope that that position will enjoy broad support in the chamber.

I assure Richard Baker that we are dealing with the letter from the Ministry of Justice in the spirit in which we believe it was sent. We have been attempting to negotiate and to seek a solution to the issue since 25 October 2007. It would be fair to say that we now want to concentrate on what can be achieved, especially given the urgency of the situation, as the clock ticks towards the end of March. I also assure him that we will work constructively in the chamber—as we have sought to do, so I am grateful for his opening comments—and with those south of the border. We must resolve the issue. That is what the public expects. They should expect no less, so that is what we will do. The question of how the £50 million might be spent is broader, but what we have said—I have said it previously—is that it is about time we started looking after our pensioners rather than pandering to our prisoners.

I am grateful to Bill Aitken for the spirit in which he asked that question. I confirm  that we will work with him and his colleagues to achieve a settlement. As I said in my statement, 200 claims a month are being received. However, we see no reason why there should be a late flurry of such claims if action is being taken. As we know, there is a small industry of firms that deal with such issues. Of course, that is their right and entitlement, although some might wonder about how such work benefits greater society. The matter has taken on urgency since October 2007 because we do not have the necessary protection. If we are to bring in legislation before the summer recess, the order has to be laid by the end of this month. After all, we must also remember that at Westminster there is a 40-day laying period for instruments and that emergency legislation will then be required here. If we do not lay the necessary order by the end of the month, either there will have to be emergency meetings of the Parliaments north and south of the border, or the matter will not be resolved until the end of the year. Frankly, we think that any late rush—if I can put it that way—that might arise as a result of people trying to get under the wire before legislation comes in would be offset by the need to deal with all the other claims, 200 of which continue to come in every month and, indeed, keep arriving almost every day. With regard to Mr Aitken's final suggestion, it is quite clear that we have invested substantial amounts in the prison estate. However, it is about time we invested in honest law-abiding citizens, instead of always shelling out to those who damage our communities.

I assure the member that, in coming to the chamber, we are being as open and as frank as possible. With regard to putting the correspondence in the public domain, we have both sent and received correspondence and any move to put such material in the public domain will have to be discussed with the Ministry of Justice south of the border to find out its perspective on the matter. I do not think that we would stand on ceremony in that respect. In any case, the freedom of information procedure is available to anyone who wishes to act on the matter. I can certainly assure Robert Brown that we have been trying to reach a solution since I first wrote to the Lord Chancellor, Jack Straw, on 25 October. To be fair, some of the responses that we have received from the Government south of the border have been technical; for example, it was suggested that we might be able to resolve the problem by changing the law of damages in Scotland. However, given the important step that we are likely to take this afternoon with regard to pleural plaques, it is rather retrograde to suggest that Parliament should make those who suffer from pleural plaques and other asbestos-related conditions, or who are knocked down in car accidents and so on, subject to a one-year time bar when, in fact, the Scottish Law Commission has recommended that the current three-year limitation be extended to a quinquennium. We do not quite know what the UK Government's final position is. However, as Mr Baker pointed out, it has indicated that it is willing to continue discussions, so that is what we will do. However, we have ruled out making matters worse for citizens who suffer industrial injuries, vehicle accidents or whatever else. All that the Government seeks for our people and our Government is the rights and protections that exist south of the border. We do not seek something better; we just seek parity. [ Interruption. ]

The matters in question are extremely technical, but Nigel Don is right. An order in council in Westminster would require 40 laying days. My understanding is that 40 laying days in Westminster are not 40 consecutive days, but 40 parliamentary sitting days. I also understand that matters there are complicated by the Whitsun recess, which we do not have. Once matters are dealt with in Westminster, we can deal with emergency legislation, which we have done in the Parliament recently with the Budget (Scotland) Act 2008, and at other times since 1999. As I have said, because of the complexities that are involved, unless the instrument is laid by the end of this month we will not be able to deal with the problem before the summer recess. If we do not do so by then, we will have to reconvene both Parliaments during the summer or, as is probable, not resolve matters until the end of the year. Mr Aitken raised that matter earlier. There is a ticking clock. Equally, we must recognise that 200 claims are coming in to us every month, each and every one of which can mean our paying out compensation to a prisoner, and paying out even more on the legal costs. We must restrict the damage to the public purse. It has been mentioned that it is not simply that there is indignity in our having to pay out, as that £50 million could be released for the Scottish Government to spend. Whether Mr Aitken wishes to argue for investment in the prison estate, or whether other members or the Government wish it to be spent on other things that would make our communities better, it is better that we use that money than for it to languish in accounts.

The Cabinet will have to make a decision on that—I cannot take such decisions alone. However, I can say that the Government has always said that we want to ensure that we look after our pensioners, not pander to our prisoners. We are putting record investment into the prison estate because of the state of the estate that we inherited. The Government has, in the recession, genuine priorities in respect of getting our economy moving and making it better, building houses, providing schools and creating hospitals. Funding lawyers and their clients is not a priority.

Mr Maxwell asks an excellent question. It is clear that individuals are aghast that prisoners are receiving substantial claims payments at a time when pensioners often go without. If the tabloids are to be believed, prisoners sometimes spend the money that they are given on making things worse for themselves and our communities. Section 84 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced on 5 March, will provide for courts that have made an order of compensation to be able to review that order. If a prisoner, an accused person or a convicted person receives such funds from the Government, wins the lottery or receives an inheritance from their granny, it should be possible to review the situation. We hope that members of all parties support that measure. I assure Stewart Maxwell that we will also consider other measures that may be capable of ending the scandal of the Government's having to shell out money to prisoners when many people who have been their victims are in much worse conditions than they are.

I give Margo MacDonald an absolute assurance that that is the position. As I mentioned in my statement, we have lodged in SPICe the draft proposals, which are clearly restricted solely to addressing the anomaly. This is about protecting our communities and ensuring that those who have committed crimes against them are not unjustly rewarded. As I said, we will happily restrict that. However, the Government reserves its right to argue on the constitution in future elections. In the interim, we urge everybody in this Parliament and elsewhere to work together to make our communities safer, to free up the £50 million and to end the manifest injustice whereby the victims of crime lose out while the perpetrators gain at our expense.

The most recent meeting between ministers and representatives of the Scottish Human Rights Commission took place between me and the commission's chair, Professor Alan  Miller, on 22 December last year. We discussed a range of issues at the meeting, including Professor Miller's update on the commission's activities since it became operational.

If the appropriate request is made to the relevant minister, I have no doubt that it will be considered. I can comment only in the terms that my colleague Mr Russell used in an intervention earlier today. The Government is delivering for kinship carers, which contrasts with the lack of action between 1999 and 2007.

We know how much damage alcohol-fuelled crime can do to communities, particularly over the festive period. That is why we announced in October 2008 that a third year of safer streets funding would be provided to community safety partnerships to conduct high-visibility and high-impact initiatives to reduce alcohol-related violence and disorder over the festive period. Total safer streets investment since 2006-07 now stands at £2.2 million. There were significant successes in 2007-08, including in the member's constituency. There was a 45.8 per cent reduction in breach of the peace offences in South Lanarkshire and a 37 per cent reduction in violence and disorder incidents in hotspot areas of Midlothian compared with the same period in the previous year. We are currently evaluating the outcome of the 2008-09 initiative, and the initial indications are very encouraging.

Absolutely. It is clear that local authorities use the money that we provide to them in a variety of ways. Some local authorities have used it for taxi marshal initiatives to reduce disorder, and others have been successful in the ways that I mentioned. The member is correct: there have been shocking incidents involving alcohol abuse. As the Government has said, the problem is not the drink but how some people are drinking. It is clear that those who are responsible for law and order require to deal with the matter, but alcohol-related crime is equally a health and education issue. The member is well aware of the Government's commitment to ensuring that Scotland gets its relationship with alcohol back on to an even kilter and that we enable our communities to enjoy the festive period without its being blighted by the abuse of alcohol.

We are determined to maximise the benefits of the proceeds of crime legislation. It has already helped to secure more than £23.5 million from major underworld figures, but we are not complacent. We will shortly consult on improvements that we can make in the Scottish Parliament through secondary legislation. The serious organised crime task force has commissioned a review of the asset recovery process to see whether improvements can be made to its effectiveness. Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland and the inspectorate of prosecution in Scotland are conducting a joint review of asset recovery performance. Both those reviews will assist us in making even more effective use of what is a powerful tool in the fight against serious and organised crime.

The member may rest assured that we will look wherever there is good practice that we can build on. There are some aspects in which Ireland does well, although we must recognise that the Irish model is different. The Irish use the criminal assets bureau, which is a division of the Irish police, and they have a multi-agency approach, which includes taxation. In Scotland, we have the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. We deal with breaking up criminal activity but also try to ensure that we take assets and use financial measures both to ensure that people do not make money out of criminal offending and to drive home the message that ultimately they will be proceeded against and prosecuted and will lose their assets. If we can learn lessons from the Irish, we will be happy to do so. We can consider the system in the Irish Republic, but we should realise that our  system is remarkably good in many respects, even if it is formulated in a significantly different way.

I do not know the precise details of the Scottish football museum's scheme, but I visited the museum not that long ago with various friends and enjoyed it immensely. We have put in a significant amount of money along with partners such as the Scottish Football Association, and we work with individual clubs on their initiatives to tackle drugs. If there is a viable and appropriate scheme, we will be more than happy to look at what the museum has to offer and establish how we can put money made from damaging our communities back in to improve and benefit those communities.

The legal aid system already provides free or subsidised legal assistance for those who cannot afford to pay for it themselves, including those seeking financial compensation through the civil courts. We laid regulations last week that will increase the disposable income limit for civil legal aid to £25,000 from this April. That should bring more than a million Scots into potential eligibility. Our forthcoming criminal justice and licensing bill will also introduce greater flexibility for criminal courts to award compensation against offenders.

Absolutely. That applies to all offences, and it clearly applies to the heinous offence of domestic violence, which is a significant problem in Scotland. One difficulty with always providing a compensation order for some elements of domestic violence is that, rightly or wrongly, families sometimes get back together and  any compensation order or fine would affect the family budget and any children. We must ensure that the sheriff or judge has the appropriate tools, but whether a compensation order or financial penalty should be used—in addition to or as an alternative to a period of imprisonment—is a decision for them. I agree that in many instances it is appropriate to ensure that a compensation order should be made available to the victims, but we must take cognisance of the fact that some cases of domestic violence are very complicated. We must ensure that the legislative framework is in place and encourage our sheriffs to use it imaginatively.

Young offenders should have access to the same opportunities as all other young people to ensure that they develop the communications skills that enable them to grow, live and work in the contemporary world. Local authorities have a statutory duty to provide those educational services to all young people of school age, including young offenders. When in custody, young offenders have access to a community speech and language therapy service, following referral from prison health care services, as well as a wide variety of learning opportunities that aid the development of communication skills. As the independent Scottish Prisons Commission found, we need better outcomes for offenders and communities. We took account of that in "Protecting Scotland's Communities: Fair, Fast and Flexible Justice", which is our plan for a coherent and comprehensive management strategy to reduce reoffending and tackle the underlying causes of crime.

The Scottish Prison Service is consistently on that case. Some services are provided by local authorities, some are provided by health boards, and some are required to be provided by the Scottish Prison Service. At my meeting with the Prison Reform Trust next Tuesday, one of the matters under discussion will be how we care for and deal with young offenders who have such difficulties. Clearly, many young offenders are in custody because they have committed serious offences—that goes with the turf—but we should also recognise that many have problems, whether with drug or alcohol addiction, learning or other difficulties. Our hard-pressed Scottish Prison Service cannot possibly provide such youngsters with the skills and assistance that they need when it is overburdened with the continual churn in and out of prisoners on short-term sentences. The service tells us that assessment of such youngsters usually takes something like eight weeks. If a youngster is in prison for only a short period, the service cannot possibly carry out the literacy and numeracy analysis that is necessary. That is why, if we are to allow the service to do what is necessary, we need to provide it with headroom by ensuring that prisons are only for serious and dangerous offenders. Those who commit less serious offences should be dealt with either under the summary justice reforms or through tough community sentences.

As I said, we as a Government are continually on the case. We recognise that youngsters coming into the system can have severe educational and learning difficulties. Not that long ago, issues such as dyslexia were not even identified or considered, but we now know that a significant element of the prison population not only has learning difficulties but suffers from conditions such as dyslexia. Clearly, we require to deal with that.  I have seen for myself how HM Young Offenders Institution Polmont tries to address the specific problem of the culture of violence that we face in Scotland. I can assure the member that the Scottish Prison Service is continually looking to beef up provision to ensure that we deal with offenders' needs and wants, which may involve not simply drug or alcohol addiction but the learning difficulties or disadvantages that they have when they come into prison. Equally, we need to deal with challenging behaviour, which can sometimes be due to personality disorders or other matters. On Marlyn Glen's point, the position at Cornton Vale is frankly quite shameful. We know that many of the women come in with a mental health problem or a drug or alcohol addiction. Many of them have been victims of abuse in their own lives and have suffered a lack of educational attainment for a variety of reasons. Such matters are not simply a criminal justice problem but a social problem. We need to recognise that prison should be for those who commit serious offences or who are a danger to our communities. We should not continue to lock up people who would be better dealt with by having their alcohol or drug addiction treated in the community or by paying back the harm that they have done through the sweat of their brow.

I understand from the Scottish Prison Service's chief executive, Mike Ewart, that the redevelopment of HMYOI Polmont includes the provision of a new residential unit, which is currently under construction and is due for completion in September 2009. Once opened, the new unit will provide an additional 137 prisoner places, which will increase the design capacity of that establishment to 760 prisoner places.

Absolutely—that is a valid point. There has been a substantial rise in numbers in Polmont, and the member is correct to say that that is due in many instances to the same offenders repeatedly going in and out of the institution. Some go in for a long time and then move on to the adult establishment, but far too many other youngsters go in for short sentences, after which they come out probably having learned more about criminality than they knew before they went in. That is why we have to make changes. We face a specific problem with regard to the numbers of young men who are remanded. First, we know that almost 50 per cent of those who are remanded pending trial—it might be slightly more—do not get a custodial sentence. That is not to say that remand is not appropriate in some instances, but it is clear that there is some dislocation. We need to ensure that, for example, we have supervised bail facilities to ensure that, in the main, only those who need be remanded are remanded and that those who are remanded are there because they will in all likelihood face a custodial sentence. As members know, we still face a problem in Scotland in the possession and use of knives, and we must remain vigilant on that. Tackling the knife culture does not come cost free. As the Solicitor General for Scotland has made clear, young men who carry weapons will not be dealt with under the summary justice reforms and through accelerated procedure. Because of that specific problem, we will ensure that the problems that there are in Polmont and elsewhere are faced. Prisons should be for those who need to be there, and not to give people free bed and board for three weeks or three months.

We have an inspectorate of constabulary to do just that, and which was established long before my tenure in office. The purpose of the inspectorate is to ensure that we have the opportunity for review and that good  practice is shared. That said, it is not simply a case of our forcing matters; the police should also be learning. I believe that that carrot-and-stick approach is working.

I welcome the convener's comments and the Justice Committee's report on community policing. I am grateful for his words about the progress that is being made. Like the committee's previous report on police resources, the report on community policing is a timely, thorough and well-researched piece of work. It addresses important issues, and the Justice Committee has certainly contributed to our thinking on them. As the convener mentioned, policing is not partisan or political. That is how it has always been and how it should remain. We require a partnership between political parties to ensure that we get the best out of our police forces, just as we require a partnership between our communities and police forces to ensure that we have the safest and most secure communities possible. I echo the favourable comments that the convener made regarding our policemen and policewomen. The Government wishes to put it on record that all ranks in all parts of our country serve our communities well. Policing is a difficult and sometimes dangerous job, but Scotland is well served by its police officers, who make a great contribution. From experience, I know that many not only contribute through their day jobs but do a great deal in our communities above and beyond that. Scotland is a diverse country, with a diverse population, a diverse landscape and diverse communities in which we choose to live. That is part of the fabric of our society. Our police work well to reflect that diversity and strive to police each community in the most appropriate manner. They are able to do that job well because they are not only from our communities, but for our communities. Effective policing of our communities needs to reflect those communities. What operates in Gairloch is not necessarily what is needed or what we want in Glasgow. That is why the Scottish Government has worked with stakeholders, including the police, to develop the Scottish community policing engagement principles, which I have already shared with the committee as a work in progress. I firmly believe that communities should have a clear understanding of the level of policing that they have a right to expect, how that is being delivered and how their views are taken into account. Clearly, sometimes it is hard to achieve that, and those matters have to be worked at. The story about Fife Constabulary's attempt to gain information through a survey is not to be seen as a criticism of the force; it shows the difficulties that can be faced. We have to try to engage and, if it  does not work in one way, we have to try other ways. The community policing engagement principles set out how each force will produce its own community engagement standard that will tell communities how to get in touch with their local officers. That is not meant to be twee; we need to ensure that people do not have to dial 999 or other numbers and that they have other ways to get in touch with officers. The standard will also tell people the maximum length of time that they should have to wait to see a police officer on a non-emergency matter—because that can be a frustrating experience—and it will set out how the police will engage with communities, local businesses and other organisations to help solve problems in the community. I have also been struck by the work that is going on in each Scottish force to reassert the priority of community policing. I will pick just a few examples. Central Scotland Police is undertaking a mixed-economy pilot, which seeks to release more officers for front-line and community policing, ensuring that others who are not qualified police officers—who do not have the badge of office—deal with matters with which they can appropriately deal. Fife Constabulary is undertaking an internal strategic review that will enhance front-line service delivery and, in Lothian and Borders Police, there is a resource allocation deployment review. Unprecedented police numbers in Strathclyde have allowed Chief Constable Stephen House to develop a robust community policing model. The number of people engaged in community policing in Strathclyde will rise from 527 last year to 1,127 by the end of March 2009. However, community policing also involves responding to incidents. We all know that we must get the balance right. People must be available to chew the fat, discuss problems and spend time allaying fears with elderly and young people in our communities to ensure that they see that the police are the fabric of the community and can be approached. Equally, information must be gathered, things must be found out and our constituents' clear requirements must be met. If a serious incident happens, an officer must arrive at it quickly and efficiently. As MSPs, we repeatedly hear from our constituents that policing needs to be both community based and responsive in order to meet our needs. That is not impossible, but it is difficult to manage. Officers are doing both types of policing to the best of their abilities—they are doing remarkably well. Having spoken about the work that is being carried out in forces, I will touch on the work that  the Scottish Government is doing to support policing for our communities. I firmly believe that Government's role is not to micromanage the delivery of policing on the ground; rather, it is to add value at a national, strategic level. We have done that, and are seeking to continue to do it, in a variety of ways. We have added value through our commitment to deliver 1,000 more police officers. We are delivering on that commitment, with 450 police officers now coming through. We are fully funding the policy through payments to forces of £16.5 million to date. I will give further evidence of our support for the police. In the current year, we have provided an additional £32.8 million to fund the additional costs of changes in the pension commutation rates for fire and police officers. Those costs were not initially factored in, and considerable dismay would have been caused in our communities if they had not been addressed. We therefore sought to work with the conveners of police boards and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to ensure that the problem, which was not anticipated, was addressed. What we have done will ensure both that 1,000 additional officers will be delivered and that we will be able to meet the legitimate pension rights of officers who have served our communities well. The pensions issue may have come from left field, but officers had an entitlement, and the national Government, police boards and local government are obliged to meet officers' rights and entitlements. After all, they have served our communities. We have put in place arrangements to measure the recruitment of and spending on the additional officers, and we will capture the impact of that work through developing a basket of measures from the annual Scottish policing performance framework. We are supporting a pilot shared recruitment service with the aim of bringing greater consistency and reducing the burden on forces, and we are examining ways of improving the retention of valuable policing skills in the workforce. The Government is committed to the three Rs: recruiting 1,000 additional officers; redeploying officers, which has been especially successful in Strathclyde and elsewhere; and retaining valuable officers who have served our communities well, are popular, have great knowledge and can continue to do an excellent job. We cannot make all those officers stay if they choose to retire, but it is clear that the retention of some of them would benefit our communities. The police have demonstrated their ability to innovate through delivering nearly £67 million in efficiency savings in 2007-08. They will continue to identify efficiency savings.  However, all those initiatives are simply a means to an end. Our vision is of safer streets, reduced crime and reduced fear of crime through an effective, efficient and visible police service that has the trust and respect of the communities that it serves. I put on record my thanks for the efforts of Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary, Paddy Tomkins, who will step down in April this year. Throughout his career, he has contributed greatly to Scottish policing. In the "Independent Review of Policing in Scotland", which was published on 23 January, he identified a number of issues that we still have to tackle in order to ensure that we can be confident in our abilities to police all the risks that all our communities face. I am determined to take action to address the issues that are raised in the review. In doing that, it is important that I draw on the views and expertise of others, particularly those of stakeholders and COSLA. The Scottish Government is committed to engaging with partners and stakeholders in the coming weeks to consider how we can address the issues that have been raised on the provision of specialist services, accountability, governance and service standards. Those are important issues that we need to consider carefully and fully. Paddy Tomkins's review and the work that it has set in train will stand us in good stead for the challenges and opportunities that face policing in the 21 st century. In the spirit set out by the convener of the Justice Committee, I look forward to working with the committee to ensure that we continue to allow our police service to provide an excellent service for our communities.

This has been a consensual debate. Most, if not all, debates in the chamber are more hotly contested—indeed, Thursdays, with First Minister's question time, are usually more rumbustious, but this debate has shown the Parliament at its best. We recognise that there is a significant problem, which was flagged up by the Lord Advocate and correctly remitted to the Law Commission by the previous Administration. Now, the Government, the Justice Committee and the Parliament as a whole are considering how we can get matters right. It is accepted—Richard Baker mentioned that the issue was raised by the Law Society—that the bill alone will not necessarily deal with some of the more shameful aspects that still exist in our society, which are driven by attitudes. Further legislative changes will be necessary; nevertheless, the bill is a start. It builds on what was done before and the fine work of the Law Commission.

No, I do not think that it would be appropriate for the Government to issue  guidance. Such matters are dealt with through the Crown and the Lord Advocate. The Government's decision was based on the clear advice of a variety of organisations and, in particular, the Lord Advocate that such a measure would be misused by those who would make spurious defences after perpetrating heinous attacks on people. We have discussed a variety of issues, including consensual sexual relationships between 13 to 15-year-olds. The Government disagreed with the Law Commission's proposal, and I welcome the comments on the issue that have been made from all parts of the chamber. It is important that we make clear the possible health consequences of such relationships and the view that, as a society, we cannot justify or condone the actions of those who seek to have consensual sexual relationships between the ages of 13 and 16. Furthermore, anybody who seeks to have such relationships in a manner beyond consent will be most vigorously treated. Equally, we must recognise the fact that such individuals are children who, in the main, will act misguidedly. The comments that have been made by members are, therefore, welcome. When the Crown considers whether such matters should be dealt with by the children's panel or through the courts, the Lord Advocate and other law officers will have to take account of what has been discussed and debated in Parliament. I welcome the general acceptance around the chamber that we, as a society, must send out the message that the age of consent is not being lowered. There are good reasons for setting the age of consent at 16 to protect our youngsters. Nevertheless, in the main, when youngsters participate in sexual activity for a variety of reasons, unless there is some good reason, we should not seek to prosecute them.

Such a situation could come about, as the committee convener has commented, but nobody seeks to deal with the unintentional consequences of those circumstances. We are talking about circumstances in which there is a flagrant abuse. It is important that we put on the record the fact that Parliament seeks to deal with those who would act in an entirely inappropriate way that would be an abuse of a child, as opposed to circumstances that are regrettable but may come about. Those matters are dealt with by the sound common sense and judgment that is exercised not only by  the Lord Advocate and the Crown, but by police constables and regional procurators fiscal day to day.

It is accepted that we have a significant problem in Scotland, but we have to accept that although some steps are being taken through legislation, other matters require information and action through a variety of other measures, some of which are not governmental but relate to health boards and other bodies. The problems that we face such as unwanted teenage pregnancies and relationships between youngsters cannot be resolved simply by legislation. It is clear that Parliament does not seek to lower the age of consent, but nor do we wish to criminalise youngsters who are acting in a manner that we think is inappropriate. I think that all members accept that, to protect our youngsters, we have to do better to try to change the patterns that have grown up. With regard to the question of rape with an object, which was raised by Bill Aitken and Cathie Craigie, the Government accepts that there has to be action. We want to ensure that all members in the chamber wish that action to happen, and that it is correct. It is clear that there are some differences between the Crown and some agencies, including Rape Crisis Scotland, about what should be done. I reiterate that I am happy to sit down with the Justice Committee to ensure that we get the appropriate law. The phrase about legislating in haste and repenting at leisure is sometimes used. We want to ensure that the committee and the Government sit down and bring in what we feel is appropriate to ensure that we deal with the matter. Nobody disputes that certain circumstances occur that are heinous and have to be punished, but we must ensure that we get the correct legal position and statutory protection. The Government has said that it is happy to listen to the clear will of Parliament on the matter of oral sex. We have heard from members on all sides of the chamber a desire for action to be taken on that point, and I tell the committee that we will seriously consider the recommendation and seek to bring it forward. The issue of gender neutrality that Bill Butler raised relates to the matter that was raised by Bill  Aitken, Robert Brown and others: one of the purposes of the bill is to attain gender neutrality to deal with male rape and other such matters. That is understandable, but the bill does not simply address male rape; we live in a world in which we have to recognise that the ECHR exists and that we have to deal with matters in a more gender neutral way. Cathie Craigie is correct to say that the consequences for young females are significantly different—a lot of that comes down to common sense. We are happy to share with the committee the advice that we are allowed to disclose—the clear advice that we have received is, as I said, that we require gender neutrality when we live in the world of the ECHR. That does not, however, detract from how we implement the legislation and—

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. Paul Martin was correct to raise the issue of fines for rape—it has been, to some extent, a lacuna in the drafting of the bill. We have made it clear that we are intent on ensuring that any gap is closed. I remind Paul Martin that nobody has ever intended to impose a fine for the crime of rape; the provision was intended to deal with a wealthy person who commits a heinous crime of rape by not only imposing the criminal sentence and the period of imprisonment they merit, but taking their assets away. Not only the poor perpetrate the crime of rape; the wealthy do, too. The Government will ensure that if people have the assets, we will take those from them under the proceeds of crime legislation. If they perpetrate the crime of rape, they face a criminal and jail sentence in addition to a fine if they have the wherewithal. We are grateful to the Parliament for the consensual way in which it has considered a bill that deals with an extremely difficult issue. Legislative change on its own will not deal with some of the significant problems that we face, such as those to do with the health of our youngsters, which Margo MacDonald mentioned, nor will it necessarily change attitudes, but legislative change is necessary and I believe that it will drive cultural change. We are on a journey. I reiterate that I will work with the Justice Committee in due course.

I begin by acknowledging the work of the Justice Committee in preparing the stage 1 report on the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill. I also thank the groups and individuals who gave oral and written evidence on the bill. The bill deals with difficult and legally complex matters, and I am sure that the whole Parliament acknowledges people's contributions. The Justice Committee's stage 1 report is considered and balanced. I thank the committee for its agreement to the general principles of the bill and I appreciate its detailed and careful consideration of the issues. I wrote to Bill Aitken on 3 February to record our response to the report. I do not wish to repeat everything that was said in the letter, but I will say something about the main issues that were raised. First, though, I want to set out the broader context of the bill. The previous Administration asked the Scottish Law Commission to review the law on rape and other sexual offences in Scotland and to make recommendations for reform. There is widespread agreement that existing law in this area is unclear and derives from a time when attitudes were very different from today. The bill presents an historic opportunity to reform a complex patchwork of common law and statute, replacing it with a clear, robust legal framework that reflects the values of our modern society. The question of consent is absolutely central to the definition of sexual offences. Sexual activity without consent is criminal, and yet at present "consent" is not defined in law. It is important that we ensure that the law on consent is easily understood, not only by specialist lawyers but by everyone. That is why there has to be a definition. For the first time, the bill provides a statutory definition of consent as "free agreement", which I think is a concept that can be easily understood by anyone. The bill makes it clear that consent may be withdrawn at any time and that consent to one instance of sexual activity does not automatically mean consent to any other. The bill widens the definition of rape to include anal and oral rape. Such attacks are perceived by their victims as rape, and it is right that the law should recognise that. Currently, as the Lord  Advocate has remarked, Scotland has one of the narrowest definitions of rape in the world. By equalising at 16 the age of consent for boys and girls, the bill also addresses a number of inconsistencies in law that protects children from sexually predatory behaviour. The bill will also enable us to prosecute anyone from Scotland who commits a sex crime under Scots law against children abroad. I take this opportunity to thank the Scottish Law Commission for its detailed and considered report on reform of the law on rape and other sexual offences. The report formed the basis for the bill, and I would welcome the views of members on the provisions. I will now outline the Government's position on some of the key recommendations in the Justice Committee's stage 1 report. The report recommends that the Government give consideration to the creation of a separate offence of "rape with an object", which would be distinct from sexual assault and would cover situations in which the victim was subjected to a penetrative assault on his or her anus or vagina with an object or other body part. There can be no doubt that penetrative assaults involving objects can be extremely violent and may be perceived by their victims as constituting rape. In view of that, I recognise that there are strong arguments for distinguishing such behaviour from other forms of sexual assault and including it within the definition of the offence of rape. However, there is a risk that if the definition does not match the public conception, and hence jury members' conception, of what constitutes rape, juries may be reluctant to convict people of the offence of rape with an object. It might, therefore, be more appropriate to create a separate offence of "assault by penetration", which is the approach that was taken in the Sexual Offences Act 2003 in England and Wales. I have made it clear, in my response to the Justice Committee on the matter, that I am keen to reach a consensus on the issue, and I have offered to discuss it with the committee before lodging amendments at stage 2 that reflect the consensus view on this important issue. Turning to the question of sexual activity between children, I welcome the committee's support for the retention of the age of consent at 16, which the Government considers to be essential. I am pleased that the committee also agrees that children below the age of consent who engage in sexual activity should, in the overwhelming majority of cases, be dealt with by the children's hearings system, which is best placed to consider the welfare of the child, rather than be subject to criminal prosecution.  The committee has recommended that the offence concerning sexual intercourse between consenting teenagers be extended to include oral sex. Members will recall that the Scottish Law Commission proposed decriminalising all consensual sexual activity between 13 to 15-year-olds. However, we had concerns that that might be interpreted by young people as a lowering of the age of consent and a condoning of underage sex. We therefore amended the commission's draft bill to ensure that consensual sexual intercourse between 13 to 15-year-olds would continue to be unlawful. We had restricted the scope of the offence to those activities that carry the greatest risk of adverse consequences, including sexually transmitted infection and unintended pregnancy but, in the light of the committee's recommendation, we will consider whether the scope of the offence should be extended before lodging amendments at stage 2. Before reaching a conclusion on the matter, I would welcome the views of Parliament more widely. The report states that the committee considers that there is objective justification for treating the genders differently with respect to the criminalisation of consensual underage sex. The committee gives the example of two children engaging in consensual penetrative sex that results in the girl's becoming pregnant. It is stated that it would be highly undesirable and potentially damaging to subject the girl to a criminal prosecution and that referral to the children's panel would be a more appropriate response. It is important to emphasise that the vast majority of children who commit criminal offences will continue to be dealt with by the children's reporter rather than be prosecuted in the criminal courts. It is highly unlikely that the Crown would consider it to be in the public interest to prosecute a girl or boy—pregnant or otherwise—for engaging in consensual sexual activity. However, the Government's view is that there is a risk that criminalising the conduct only of boys who engage in such activity would violate articles 8 and 14 of the European convention on human rights. In our view, there is not sufficient objective justification for providing as a matter of law that one of the parties is guilty of an offence and the other is not when the act is consensual. We therefore take the view that the offence at section 27 should apply to both boys and girls.

The best legal advice that we have received to date is that the ECHR requires us to be gender neutral. However, I am happy to give an undertaking to the member and to the Justice Committee to ensure that we provide a more fulsome explanation of the basis of that legal advice. We are driven by the legal advice on the matter, although we note that there are other good reasons. The bill is not the complete solution to the justice system's response to rape and other sexual offending. We must recognise that reform of the legislative framework alone, although it will bring much-needed clarity to the law, will not in itself be sufficient to address Scotland's low conviction rate for rape. There are other strands of work to reform the law on rape and other sexual offences. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service conducted a review of how cases of rape and serious sexual offences are investigated and prosecuted, and published a report in 2006. The report made 50 recommendations for reform, which the Crown Office is now well on its way to implementing to improve the way in which rape is investigated and prosecuted.

Absolutely. We as a Government are clear that matters need to be addressed in relation to legislative changes, which is why the previous Administration asked the Scottish Law Commission to report, and why we are driving the issue forward. Other matters need to be addressed, such as the treatment of victims by the Crown and by police, and attitudes that are held in Scottish society need to be challenged. That is just one part of the way in which we are driving matters forward. The Scottish ministers recognise that other matters—the law of evidence in particular—need to be addressed. We have therefore asked the commission to undertake a review of certain aspects of criminal procedure and evidence, including the use of the Moorov doctrine. The commission has indicated that it believes that the Moorov doctrine would be best considered in the context of a wider review of the requirement for corroboration. Its conclusions on those issues will be particularly important for the prosecution of rape and other sexual offences. We as a Government recognise that we need to challenge attitudes. Too many people are prepared to blame the victim. It is shocking that a recent survey found that 25 per cent of people  thought that a woman bore some responsibility for being raped if she wore revealing clothing, and 24 per cent thought that a woman can be at least partially responsible if she was drunk at the time of the attack. That is why we have provided funding to Rape Crisis Scotland for its campaign, "This is not an invitation to rape me", which sets out to challenge myths about rape and negative attitudes towards women. Challenging myths, assumptions and unacceptable attitudes can contribute to the culture change that is needed to underpin the legislative reforms that we are making as we seek to make Scotland a safer and stronger place. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill.

We are implementing the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 in line with the previous Government's timetable. The act allows licensing boards to take tough action and crack down on rogue retailers. We have rolled out test purchasing, thereby providing the police with an additional tool—one that is based on intelligence—to tackle underage sales. The police have carried out more than 1,200 test purchases and there is already evidence that that work is proving successful. However, we need to get out of the mindset that this issue is only about enforcement and only  about young people. We know that many young people get alcohol from their home, not from shops. We also know that alcohol misuse affects all age groups, not just young people. That is why we need to kick-start a culture change and to try some new approaches, and that is what we will do.

That is the law that was brought in by the previous Administration in the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which will kick in in September. Retailers should not sell alcohol to under-21s unless they are absolutely certain that they are over 18, and should require proof of their age where there is any doubt. Any retailer who breaches that instruction is in breach of licensing law. Mr McAveety is behind the times. That is the law. We accept that it should be enforced, and we commit fully to ensuring that it is. Having been out in Mr McAveety's city with members of the licensing board on Saturday night, I can assure him that I know that his colleagues on the licensing board also view the matter as vital.

The Government has been discussing and consulting on that matter. A variety of interested groups and parties are taking positions on the issue of minimum pricing. I agree with the member that there has been a continuing professionalisation of the on-sale trade and that there is a benefit from the supervision of alcohol consumption by a professional body that should seek to ensure that that consumption is regulated. Last Saturday in Glasgow, I saw that the situation is, in the main, well policed and that matters are well dealt with, and I am aware that the situation is the same in other jurisdictions. As the Deputy First Minister has said, the sale of alcohol at pocket-money prices is unacceptable, and there is, frankly, something wrong in our society when someone can buy cheap, high-strength alcohol for far less than a bottle of water.

There is some merit in that suggestion. These matters are under constant discussion. In my experience, the arrangement between the police and the licensing standards officers works well. If I may hark back once more to my visit to Glasgow on Saturday night, I can tell the member that I met two sets of two licensing standards officers who were out and about. In rural areas, the situation might be different, because the size of the area that is involved often means that the role of licensing standards officers is conjoined with the role of trading standards officers. We must ensure that the law is enforced. Who should do that is a matter that is, perhaps, best dealt with in partnership, bearing in mind the fact that different arrangements will apply in different localities. The issue depends fundamentally on the vigorous enforcement of the law to ensure that our youngsters are not sold alcohol when they should not be. Frankly, that is not just a matter for enforcers. As Alasdair Morgan implied, each and every person in the community has a responsibility in that regard. Far too many adults purchase alcohol for youngsters. The real problem is not so much rogue retailers but agency purchase, whether deliberate or misguided, and that has to stop.

We have already invested £2.5 million of cashback for communities funding, which is money straight out of the pockets of gangsters, in a significant programme of football activities. That funding is now giving thousands of young people more choices and chances. I will shortly announce how we will invest a further £2 million in sporting facilities that are aimed primarily at football. Every non-professional football club in Scotland was given the chance to bid for a share of that money, and I expect to see a great many clubs throughout Scotland benefiting from that significant investment.

I thank Michael Matheson for bringing the matter to my attention. Obviously, I have seen the good work that is being done at Stenhousemuir. The criteria that we set for the sporting facilities fund were considered for non-professional clubs. I recognise that something is askance. Although Stenhousemuir also acts as a community club, it is classified as a professional club and is thus precluded from applying for funding. I give the member an undertaking that we will seek to review the matter. It is clear that professional clubs that are multimillion pound organisations do not deserve the same level of public support as smaller clubs do. Such clubs doubtless have ambitions, but perhaps they are more restricted or less global. We accept that Stenhousemuir is doing good work and we will seek to try to address the issue in future funding.

Absolutely. The purpose of the cashback for communities programme is to  deal with a wide spectrum of matters. We have put in an initial tranche of money to support the development of football, for example in the midnight leagues, and we intend to extend another football programme to secondaries 2 and 3. Equally, we have put in money specifically for the girls game to try to ensure that girls continue into the women's game. We have also put money into the facilities fund. It is a question of balance. We are working with national organisations so that football schemes can be rolled out in all 32 local authority areas. Equally, we are trying to ensure that we grow the game in Scotland, perhaps from the bottom up, rather than concentrating on the success of a couple of clubs at the top.

I last met Chief Constable Kevin Mathieson on 28 October 2008, when we discussed recent developments within Tayside Police and a number of other police-related topics. We also met very briefly on 16 January 2009, when I opened a new forensic teaching facility at the University of Abertay Dundee.

That particular matter was not discussed, but I am grateful to the member for drawing it to my attention. The Government takes the view that we need to ensure that agencies work together to try to solve the problem. Clearly, many people face difficulties and the police have difficulties dealing with them. If we ensure that all the organisations work together to achieve a solution to the problem, that is to be supported. I am more than happy to consider the issue further if the member wishes to make further representations on it. In the main, I am delighted that Chief Constable Mathieson is getting on and doing what is sensible.

Again, that particular matter did not come up in my conversations, but I am aware of that on-going scheme. I am also aware that, for several years, Sheriff Stein has been extremely innovative in trying to resolve matters. The issue is about agencies working together to solve problems and to divert youngsters who are on the cusp of offending, but it is also about  ensuring that the police are there to deal with youngsters who offend and cause a nuisance in their communities. I am more than happy to consider the scheme in greater detail. I commend the good work of the chief constable of Tayside Police, the agencies with which he is collaborating and, in particular, Sheriff Stein, who for many years has been leading the charge.

I am more than happy to ensure that those matters are discussed. I discussed elements of substance abuse with Chief Constable Mathieson. I accept that there are difficulties and practical problems for the police, but there is no one simple solution that will resolve those. A lot depends on the nature of the police custody suite to which a person is taken—for example, whether it is in a large urban area with easy access to health service facilities. Given the interaction between drug abuse and offending, the problem is significant and must be considered. I certainly undertake to continue to have dialogue with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland on the issue to try to ensure that our communities are made safer.

Police and fire pension costs are provided for within the local government settlement. However, we are making available an extra £32.8 million this year and £22.3 million in 2009-10 to meet the additional costs of changes in the commutation rates for police and fire officers. In addition, we will provide an extra £20 million in 2009-10, and the local government family will contribute £20 million, to meet the additional pension costs that will arise from the increased number of retirals in that year. That amounts to an extra £32.8 million in 2008-09 and £42.3 million in 2009-10. Together with the £20 million share from local government, that  brings the total extra funding available to £95 million.

I cannot amend legal aid rules, as they are dealt with by the Scottish Legal Aid Board, but I can tell the member that the Government is concerned about the matter. In a world of finite resources, and in which there is pressure on legal aid, we wish legal aid to go to those who have suffered great injustice, as opposed to those who have perpetrated injustice. I will discuss those matters with the chief executive of the Scottish Legal Aid Board.

Following detailed evaluation of numerous sites, we have decided that the most suitable site for the construction of a replacement facility is at the existing Peterhead prison. The new prison will be community facing and is a new initiative in the accommodation of prisoners from the north-east of Scotland. The facility will have huge benefits across the whole area: it will meet the needs of a full range of prisoners and avoid the necessity for most females and young offenders to be held at Cornton Vale and Polmont respectively in the central belt. Instead, they will be located considerably nearer their homes in the north-east. There are no plans to have any prison facilities in Aberdeen once the new facility is operational.

As I made clear, it is significantly easier to get to Peterhead from Aberdeen than it is to get to Stirling, where Cornton Vale is located, or to Polmont, where the young offenders institution is located. If Mr Rumbles wishes to insist on there being a facility in Aberdeen, perhaps he can tell us—bearing in mind the £800 million-worth of cuts that we would have to bear as a result of the Liberal Democrats' 2p income tax cut—where we would get the £140 million to £200 million to pay for it. He  must explain where that £1 billion-worth of public expenditure cuts would come from.

As the member will be aware, I have numerous meetings with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, local police representatives and the Association of Directors of Social Work, all of whom are supportive of the Government's direction. I have to say that I am gobsmacked that the member thinks that security implications are greater on journeys from Aberdeen to Peterhead than on journeys from Aberdeen to Stirling, Polmont, Shotts, Barlinnie or other prisons to which prisoners are regularly transferred.

Elements of allowing such inquiries are reserved, and questions on those elements should be addressed to the United Kingdom Government. However, I wrote to the Secretary of State for Defence on 19 November 2008 to propose a way to resolve the issue. Following a subsequent exchange of letters—one from the Minister of State for the Armed Forces to me, dated 15 January 2009, and my reply to him, dated 22 January 2009—the Lord Chancellor confirmed to the Westminster Parliament on 26 January that the UK Government intends to table amendments during the passage of the Coroners and Justice Bill to provide for inquiries to be held in Scotland. The bill committee starts its work on 3 February 2009. Officials from the Crown Office, the Scottish Government's justice directorate, the Ministry of Defence, the England and Wales coroners unit, the Scotland Office and the Ministry of Justice Coroners and Justice Bill team are scheduled to hold a videoconference on 28 January 2009 to resolve the four outstanding details of the mechanism by which such inquiries could be held in future, on which I understand there to be an agreement in principle.

Absolutely. I am aware of Keith Brown's interest in the matter. The Government and the Lord Advocate have made it clear that looking after the interests of grieving  relatives must be at the heart of the matter, which is why we are working with the Government south of the border to ensure that the pragmatic solution we suggested some while ago can be introduced and that such matters can be resolved with as little inconvenience as possible being added to the trauma that the families suffer.

The Scottish Prison Service is currently preparing to apply for outline planning permission from Aberdeenshire Council for the construction of the new prison at Peterhead. Subject to planning consent, the SPS will then conduct a procurement exercise for the prison's construction. It is estimated that planning, procurement, construction and commissioning will take a minimum of four years.

I am unaware of any delay or uncertainty. We moved swiftly to make it clear that the new prison for the north-east of Scotland—which, as I said to Mr Rumbles earlier, will serve Aberdeen and Peterhead—would be in Peterhead. That announcement ended the uncertainty and was welcomed by the prison officers and their families there. The Government has acted expeditiously and is doing what it can to drive through the project, and we will do so in the knowledge that what matters is public safety, not private profit. The new HMP Peterhead will be a public prison and will be run to ensure the benefit and safety of the people who work in it and the communities that require to be protected from the people who are incarcerated in it.

As was made clear in my reply to Mr Rumbles, and as Mr Macdonald will know if he was in the chamber and listening, the new prison will be community facing and will hold youngsters who would otherwise be sent to HM Young Offenders Institution Polmont and women who would be sent to Cornton Vale. As a former minister, Mr Macdonald will probably recall numerous instances of female prisoners being sent around Scotland in Reliance vans in great discomfort; they will now be able to go the short distance from Aberdeen to Peterhead. It seems to me a significant improvement for female prisoners and young prisoners from the north-east of Scotland to be dealt with there and not shipped down to the central belt in a Reliance van.

I fully appreciate the member's concerns. We accept that resources are fundamental, which is why we are seeing a 185 per cent increase in the spend on community justice authorities over a 10-year period. We are seeking to build on that. Despite the suggestion from the Scottish Prisons Commission, we have not set a target for the prison population—

We have not set a target; we are leaving the matter to the judiciary. However, I assure the member that we have increased spending and that the necessary resources will be provided.

We could conclude from that point that Bill Aitken might suggest that the current sentencing guidelines and the work of the Sentencing Commission for Scotland are an interference with judicial discretion. Does he not accept that such measures are on-going and that all that we propose is to legislate for what currently exists?

Is the member arguing that we should have proceeded with a private prison? That goes against the position that David Whitton and Wendy Alexander have taken. Is Labour once again campaigning for private prisons?

If the member is of the view that the prison estate that we inherited was in such pristine condition, why have we now not only had to commit to Grampian prison—to replace Peterhead prison—and to Bishopbriggs prison, but started work on planning permission and investigations regarding both Greenock and Highland? We are now committed to four prisons because the estate that we inherited was not fit for purpose.

Will the member give way?

On Wednesday 17 December, the Scottish Government delivered on its commitment to publish before the end of the year our plan for a coherent offender management strategy. I was visiting the young offenders institution at Polmont when the plan was launched. Polmont is in the throes of a major refurbishment that will give us a modern, fit-for-purpose young offenders institution. However, in common with the majority of our prisons, it is full. What makes the situation at Polmont particularly distressing is the fact that that the offenders there are all young men aged under 21, many of whom have been in prison before. Youth is not an excuse for serious or dangerous behaviour, and the young men who have been convicted of serious crimes deserve to be there. [ Interruption. ] Nevertheless, that is nothing like the whole story. Records show that, in 2007-08, there were more than 1,100 receptions into Polmont for a sentence of less than six months. Those receptions will not have involved 1,100 different young men; more likely, a substantial proportion of them are the same young men caught in a cycle of reoffending. That is the picture across the whole prison estate. In 2007-08, there were more than 11,000 receptions for adult males and 829 receptions for women. [ Interruption. ] The Scottish Prisons Commission report said that, in 2006-07, nearly 7,000 offenders who got a prison sentence had already accumulated between them a staggering 47,500 previous spells in prison—at a time when the level of recorded crime is at its lowest for 25 years.

It is off. We remain committed to providing a modern, fit-for-purpose and, for the most part, publicly run prison service. We have committed to three new prisons and we are investing a record £120 million each year in prison capacity. However, we cannot and will not keep building more and more prisons  to fill with offenders who are caught in the cycle of low-tariff reoffending.

That is just not true. There has been a delay in the construction of Low Moss because, for two and a bit years, the previous Administration faffed around deciding whether the contract should be awarded to the public sector or to the private sector. That cost us £2 million when we could simply have delivered a public sector prison whose first wall might have been up or at least started by now. We are delivering not simply a new prison at Low Moss; we are delivering a public sector prison, where the top priority is safety, not private profit. However, prisons do not come free. One new prison means fewer new schools or hospitals or less support for our elderly. At a time when resources are tight and must be spent prudently, we want to provide for our pensioners, not pander continually to prisoners. Today, Parliament has the opportunity to debate our plans for a modern offender management strategy that is based on the twin planks of a robust regime of community penalties and strong and proportionate management of offenders who are sentenced to prison. Our aim is to deliver immediate, visible, effective, high-quality, flexible and relevant justice. Our plan has grown out of the major reforms to the Scottish criminal justice system that are already under way or are complete, such as the 2007 review of community penalties and the valuable and much praised work of the Scottish Prisons Commission. The commission's key themes of swift justice, payback, reparation and better management of offenders for whom prison is the right option underpin our vision for change. Reflecting all those developments, our plan will bring about the introduction of a new community payback sentence to allow courts to impose a range of requirements on the offender, including taking part in unpaid work, supervision, alcohol or drug interventions and programmes to address offending behaviour. We want to speed up the process for delivering community sentences. Under our proposals, the offender will have to sign off on their undertaking before leaving court and will have a first appointment with criminal justice social work within one working day. Any unpaid work or activity will have to start within seven days and the entire sentence will have to be completed within six  months, instead of the current 12, unless the court decides otherwise at the point of sentencing. We will legislate to make it clear that judges should not impose a custodial sentence of six months or less unless they believe that the circumstances suggest that no other option is appropriate. We are not doing this on a whim or a fancy. The Scottish Prisons Commission recommended that approach based on the available evidence. In 2004-05, three quarters of those sentenced to six months or less were reconvicted within two years. In comparison, three fifths of those given community service orders were not reconvicted in the same period of time.

I dispute the assertion that we are comparing apples with pears. We are comparing the rates of reoffending of those who were sentenced to six months or less with the rates of those who were given a community service order. I do not think that the two groups cannot be compared. On resourcing, the member will be aware of the record funding that the Government is investing. We have also committed to an additional £1 million this year and another £1 million next year. Further, the issue is being addressed in conjunction with local authorities, which I will talk about later. For now, I merely point out that Councillor Harry McGuigan, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' spokesperson for community wellbeing and safety—who is a member of the Labour Party—is driving forward in unity with us on this agenda.

Obviously, that will be, to a certain extent, dependent on primary legislation. However, as I have said to Mr Brown elsewhere, there is a journey that must be undertaken, and some decisions that have been taken on the bench demonstrate that that journey is already under way. We have to ensure that adequate resources are provided, and I can give members an assurance that they will be. Equally, we have to ensure that the process can be ramped up. We accept that, in an ideal world, even more money would be invested. However, we live in a time of economic problems, we have inherited a  prison estate that is not fit for purpose, and we are having to invest £120 million a year to sort out what was not dealt with before. We are doing what we can, and we will ensure that the appropriate measures are in place. We will make the necessary changes to the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007 to deliver, in due course, a more proportionate and effective system for end-to-end sentence management of offenders, and consequently end the current arbitrary system of early release that is provided for in the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993. Our plan is not starting from scratch. We have already invested heavily in the criminal justice system. We are completing the justice reform package that was started by the previous Administration, to its credit. We have invested an extra £1 million for speedier and more immediate delivery of community service orders and will be investing a further £1 million through community justice authorities to assist local authorities to reorganise service provision to meet much tighter timescales in delivering community sentences. We have also funded three community justice authorities to evaluate new approaches to improving the visibility of community sentences in their areas. We will move forward to deliver the key elements of our new offender management plan. However, the reform agenda is huge and we cannot deliver it alone. The key to success is commitment from our local authority partners, health and third sector providers, the community justice authorities and the judiciary at every level. When our plan was published, Councillor Harry McGuigan, COSLA's spokesperson, said: "We welcome this latest and important step on the road to tackling re-offending and making communities safer." He added: "We ... look forward to continuing this productive partnership as CoSLA, the Scottish Government and the Community Justice Authorities"— that is, the strategic partners at the local level— "work to deliver our shared objective of fewer short prison terms and more offenders paying back to communities for the harm they have done." In many respects, there is nothing new about the agenda. We have debated the same points for a number of years while prison numbers have continued to grow and more and more offenders get drawn into the hopeless cycle of reoffending. As Cathy Jamieson said on 6 December 2004, "There are no simple ... solutions to tackling crime and offending in Scotland. However, I am clear that locking up offenders for short periods of time, and releasing them back  into the community without action to address their behaviour, is not the answer." We have always said that prison is absolutely the place for serious and dangerous offenders. Through tough community penalties, however, I want minor offenders to give something back to the communities that they have damaged, instead of their simply sitting in prison for a few weeks or months at the taxpayers' expense. Reducing the number of people whom we imprison will also free up valuable Scottish Prison Service resources and enable it to deal more effectively with those whose crimes are serious and who present an unacceptably high risk to public safety. As the Scottish Prisons Commission said, Scotland has choices. Let us make sure that we make the right one. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government's plan for delivering a coherent offender management strategy built on a robust regime of community penalties and payback and a strong and proportionate management for offenders sentenced to prison and welcomes the publication, on 17 December 2008, of Protecting Scotland's Communities: Fair, Fast and Flexible Justice , which sets out the Scottish Government's strategy to tackle reoffending and enhance public safety through a system that will deliver immediate, visible, effective, high quality, flexible and relevant justice.

Disclosure Scotland has no knowledge of whether any individual applicant was previously a looked-after child and no information would appear on a disclosure that identified an individual as having previously been looked after.

I thank the member for the prior intimation of his substantive question. First, I apologise for the difficulties in the timescale, which were due to administrative oversight. Lothian and Borders Police have now addressed the matter. We accept that there is an anomaly here, but it is clear that this is a question of balance. We do not seek to prejudice the situation of someone who was a looked-after child, but we need to ensure public safety and the care and welfare of our children. Ministers are considering a variety of options. I assure the member that we are seeking to ensure that we get the right balance between protecting children and ensuring that people who  were looked-after children subject to an element of protection are not further prejudiced.

I last met Steve House on 12 December in Easterhouse in Glasgow—I think that the member was present at that meeting—when I announced the Government's £1.6 million funding package in support of the national violence reduction unit's ground-breaking community initiative to reduce violence project to tackle gang violence in the east end of Glasgow. I am sure that the member will join me now—as he did then—in welcoming the project and acknowledging the good work that is being done in his constituency and throughout east Glasgow by Glasgow City Council, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board, the violence reduction unit and the police to tackle this most serious issue.

The Government has made it clear, on the record, that it is trying to ensure that victims remain at the heart of our justice system. We want to ensure that victims are treated with dignity, respect and compassion. I have discussed the specific issue that the member raises only tangentially with Mr House, and I have not discussed the proposal for a victims commissioner. We have said that that is an interesting suggestion that we are happy to consider, but our first priority is to ensure that victims are treated as victims and that the agony that they have endured and the injury that they have suffered are not compounded. That means that they must be treated with the respect and dignity that they deserve in their first interface with the police, the prosecution and the courts. Equally, we must ensure that we fund and resource victim support properly, as we are doing. Record funding of £5 million has gone to Victim Support Scotland, and £25 million has gone to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority. We are more than happy to consider the concept of a victims commissioner, but our clear priority is front-line services and ensuring that victims are treated with dignity and compassion, as opposed to having a commissioner deal with problems once they have arisen.

Hear, hear.

Anybody who saw "Police, Camera, Action!" last night will be all too aware of the tragedies that occur as a consequence of drink driving, and of the delusions that some people have regarding the amount of alcohol that they can consume before it becomes unsafe for them to drive. It continues to be the case that one in nine road deaths in Scotland is caused by drink driving. Behind that stark and simple statistic are families and communities that have been devastated by the deaths of loved ones. Last year, during the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland's festive campaign to tackle drink and drug driving at Christmas, 839 drivers were arrested for numerous drink-driving or drug-driving offences. That means that 839 drivers in Scotland took a chance and drove while they were over the limit or incapacitated and that 839 drivers were willing to risk causing death and injury on our roads—and those were only the ones who were caught. That is clearly unacceptable. The majority of Scotland's citizens recognise that drink driving is dangerous and deplorable, but too many people still die every year on our roads as a result of drivers being over the limit. If we want our communities to be safer and stronger, we must tackle drink driving as being the cause of too many injuries, collisions and deaths. The current drink-driving limit has been in place for more than 40 years, but Scotland, along with the rest of the United Kingdom, is now a very different place. Our  laws have rightly evolved and adapted to reflect the changing society in which we live. Although the number of deaths and injuries on our roads has declined since the limit was set, that limit is now outdated and unfit for purpose. Scottish Government research that was published this year found that, although there has been a reduction in the level of drink driving, 5 per cent of people who were surveyed thought that they had driven while over the limit in the past 12 months. The research recommends a reduction in the drink-driving limit to a less ambiguous level, as there is still confusion about how drinks and units of alcohol relate to the legal limit. Some of the confusion is not simply down to individuals. Glasses of wine may now contain substantial volumes, and beer that is sold in public houses and elsewhere often has a higher alcohol content than it did in the past. In addition, cars are faster and roads are busier than they were in the past. All those factors make drink driving significantly more dangerous. Research indicates clearly that the number of deaths from drink driving is slowly coming down, but still too many people are dying or being seriously hurt on our roads. I wrote to the Secretary of State for Transport on 12 March, outlining the Scottish Government's support for a reduction in the drink-driving limit from 80mg to 50 mg per 100ml of blood and for the police to be given the power to carry out random breath tests at the side of the road. Those would be life-saving measures, so we have continued to put pressure on the UK Government to make those changes. It is not a new issue: in a 1998 consultation paper, figures that were produced by the Department for Transport suggested that reducing the blood alcohol limit to 50mg could prevent 50 deaths and 250 serious injuries throughout the UK every year.

The motion is quite clear. As Mr Rumbles correctly points out, we are dealing simply with the matters that are before us. For factual accuracy, however, I point out that my letter referred to two matters. Recently, academics from University College London have suggested that as many as 65 fatalities a year in the UK could be prevented by a reduction such as I suggest. In July this year, the UK Government's chief medical officer, Sir Liam Donaldson, stated publicly that the limit for drivers aged between 17 and 20 years old should be cut to zero.  The British Medical Association Scotland has said: "Lives could be saved simply by reducing the drink-driving limit. There is evidence that driving is impaired with a Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) level of over 50mg/100ml and it's estimated that around 65 lives could be saved in the UK by lowering the drink drive limit." The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has said: "Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom are among a small group of European nations that have still not lowered the blood alcohol count. Too many motorists are ignoring the law and continue to drive after drinking. We need to look at lowering the limit to tackle one of the major reasons for loss of life on our roads." The Automobile Association announced earlier this year that 70 per cent of 14,000 members who were polled favour a reduction in the limit, and the 2007 report of the European Transport Safety Council demonstrated that, in the last 10 years, the nations with the lowest blood alcohol limits have had the greatest success in tackling drink driving.

I accept that any limit is mandatory. The Government's argument is that the level of 80mg per 100ml has now passed its sell-by date. A zero level has difficulties because alcohol stays in the bloodstream for a long time. The level of 50mg per 100ml is a European norm, and we believe that adopting that level would drive home the message that there is no safe or tolerable level, and that the idea that someone can safely have two pints of beer or two glasses of wine is false. We hope not only to save people's lives on the road, but to ensure that people can avoid the tragic consequences of being arrested for drink driving.

Absolutely. We have made it quite clear that we would welcome an across-the-UK reduction to the European standard—it is not a constitutional matter. However, we believe that, if the Government south of the border does not wish to head in that direction, we should have the opportunity to follow the European norm. I accept that there are good reasons for harmonisation and standardisation across Europe. Our proposal to have a level of 50mg per 100ml takes us some  way towards that. The UK, Ireland and—I think—Malta are out of kilter with the rest of Europe, which has a safer standard.

We are not in favour of varying the current penalties. Mr Rumbles asked about random breath testing: as I said, the motion does not address that and the Government has a different perspective on it. Today's motion relates to the blood alcohol level. We believe that the current sanctions are appropriate and that sheriffs have the right to act appropriately. I have disagreements with some people on mandatory sentencing—although, I believe that Mr Aitken is in tune with me on that matter—but I accept that there are good reasons why we have mandatory sentences for drink driving. It is appropriate that people who are caught drink driving lose their licences—unless there is a medical reason for alcohol being present in their blood—and that if the person is caught drink driving again within the following 10 years, the sentence should be a minimum of three years, as is the current position, I think. Paul Martin seems to be suggesting that Europe is benign in relation to drink driving. It is true that some jurisdictions take that approach, but anyone from this country who thinks that they can safely drive under the influence of alcohol in a Scandinavian nation will find that they will be treated significantly more severely there than would be the case in the United Kingdom. The UK was one of only five European countries to record an increase in drink-driving related deaths in the period that was covered in the ETSC report. It is clear that there is massive support in Scotland and across the UK for a reduction in the limit, and evidence from other countries suggests that the lower limit that we are proposing saves lives. A driver's reaction times and motoring skills deteriorate after even a small amount of alcohol. Those of us who saw the programme that I referred to earlier will have heard people repeating the old adage that drinking makes them drive better: obviously, the clear scientific and medical evidence is that that is total bunkum. There is clear substantiation that a lower limit will reduce the number of deaths and serious injuries that are caused by drink driving. That is why we are pursuing the lower limit. In November, the UK Government published the "Road Safety Compliance Consultation". Although the consultation raises some discussion of the reduction of the drink-driving limit, it does not ask  directly whether the drink-driving limit should be lowered. My colleague Stewart Stevenson, the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, wrote to the Secretary of State for Transport expressing our disappointment that the UK Government has been so unwilling to engage on the question of a lower limit.

If Bill Butler checks the Official Report , he will find that in regard to a reduction my words were: "it does not ask directly whether the drink-drive limit should be lowered". I did not say that the limit was not mentioned—I said that the consultation did not pose the specific challenge that we have to address. To suggest that the drink-driving limit should be increased seems to be utterly absurd. I would be bemused if Bill Butler or any of his colleagues were to suggest that we should make it okay for people to drink more before they get behind the wheel. The specific question is this: "Do you want to lower the limit or do you not?" We, as a Government, certainly want to lower it. There has been a wasted opportunity to respond to the widespread and growing consensus in favour of a change. Just how much more evidence does the UK Government need?

Bill Butler has had his say. The UK Government must stand up and recognise the strength of evidence and the strength of feeling in favour of a reduction in the limit. It should not continue to sidestep or delay. The matter is not about the constitution or about a constitutional battle—it is about saving lives on our roads. The position that I have set out is not that of only the Scottish Government, but of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and of the British Medical Association. We in Scotland are ready to make the change and to reduce the limit. We would welcome support from anywhere else. Although the safest option for drivers must be not to drink and drive, a 50mg limit would be a simpler message for drivers and drinkers to understand. Lowering the limit will also bring us into line with most other nations in Europe.

I have cited a substantial amount of evidence from ACPOS, the BMA and Sir Liam Donaldson—Dr Simpson can check the Official Report . As I stated in response to Mr Adam, the limits are arbitrary. One could set a zero limit, but we are persuaded that that would have unwanted consequences because of the length of time for which alcohol stays in the bloodstream. A 50mg limit is the accepted norm in Europe and is supported by ACPOS, the BMA and a broad range of other reasonable opinion in this country. It triggers a message that people cannot have two pints or two glasses of wine—or sometimes a bit more because they have had a Christmas dinner at the staff outing. That is why we believe that reducing the limit to 50mg is the correct thing to do. If evidence emerges that the limit needs to be lower and that other nations go down that route, we will be happy to follow. It is clear that the 80mg limit is now past its sell-by date, is jeopardising lives and is not delivering safety on our roads. We need action, rather than another discussion document from the UK Government. The direction in which we are heading is part of a wider Government agenda regarding Scotland's relationship with alcohol. We have made it clear that we cannot go on as we are. It is not simply about danger on the roads; it is about the effect on our health service, the impact on our criminal justice system and people's inability to maintain their involvement in the labour market. The cost of alcohol abuse is damaging us in Scotland and we must tackle it. As we have often stated, the Government is not anti-alcohol, but we are anti-alcohol misuse. The stark truth is that our relationship with alcohol is holding us back as individuals and families, as communities and as a nation. The statistics, which we have presented on many occasions, are breathtaking. Many of us experience the effects of alcohol-related violence and antisocial behaviour in our communities, and almost half of prisoners report being drunk at the time of their offence. We have to dispel the myth that alcohol-related harm affects only people with chronic alcohol dependency, or so-called binge drinkers. It is not a marginal problem. The uncomfortable truth is that many people—probably many of us in the chamber—fall into that category. Up to 50 per cent of men and 30 per cent of women regularly drink more than the amount that is specified in guidelines on sensible drinking. Those people place themselves  at increased risk of being involved in accidents, becoming the victims or, tragically, the perpetrators of crime, contributing to family break-ups, and developing cancer or liver disease. That is why we believe that there must be a change and why the Government has committed to a consultation on the issue, the responses to which we will publish in due course. Respondents, including ACPOS, generally welcome the Scottish Government's stance and support tightening the laws on drink driving, especially to reduce the legally acceptable blood alcohol level. I say to Dr Simpson that several health organisations went further and called for a zero-tolerance approach to drink driving, especially for young people under 25. We do not preclude such measures and will be happy to consider them, but as a first and interim step we need to reduce the limit to 50mg. The responses to the discussion documents are being analysed, and we will announce the way forward early in the new year. Early next year we will also publish a 10-year road safety strategy for Scotland. My colleague Stewart Stevenson has convened a road safety expert panel to advise on measures for the strategy. We have also consulted groups of young people aged 17 to 25—the age group that we know is particularly vulnerable on our roads. Action must be taken—that is why we believe that the time for consultation has ended. The annual ACPOS festive campaign is an important weapon in the fight against drivers who still think that it is acceptable to drink and drive. We are committed to improving the safety of people on our roads and are delighted to support ACPOS in all its campaigns, particularly on drink and drug driving, which is why we are happy to accept the Conservative amendment. Drug driving is more difficult to analyse, but it is a serious and growing problem that must be addressed by whatever means are at our disposal. we hope that the campaign will help us to realise a further drop in the number of people who are killed or injured as a result of drink or drug driving, and to remove from the driving population those who are responsible. I send my best wishes and thanks to the police officers who are out on the roads over the festive period, working to ensure our safety. I move, That the Parliament expresses concern that one in nine road deaths in Scotland is related to drink driving; calls on the UK Government to reduce the 80 mg limit, which was set over 40 years ago, to a 50 mg limit in line with much of Europe; wishes Scotland's police forces success with their campaign over the festive season, and sincerely hopes that no one has their Christmas and New Year destroyed by those who choose to ignore the anti-drink-driving message.

Discussions are on-going with the Treasury as to the retention of fiscal fine moneys in Scotland. We want those funds to be retained in Scotland and put to good use in Scotland to help the justice system to deliver benefits for the people of Scotland.

Absolutely. We want to ensure that the communities benefit. Clearly, in some instances, the funds are used to ensure that the wheels of the court service run. However, I support the general ethos that the member expresses, which is that fines, levies or compensation orders that those who commit offences against our communities are forced to pay should be used to compensate those communities in some shape or form, whether through the bureaucracy that enforces justice or, more particularly, by making those communities better and alleviating their problems.

I assure Mr Aitken that the fines are in the process of being collected. Many have been paid. I do not recognise the reference to "derisory levels of payments". A system is in place. The fine has to be intimated to the individual, who must have an opportunity to decide whether to accept or decline it. Thereafter, the individual has a period of time in  which the payment can be made. That process must be gone through. I assure the member that we will seek to ensure that those who are given fines are forced to pay. If they do not pay, the whole system will be brought into disrepute. Matters are being dealt with, and the new system of fines enforcement officers is being rolled out, which will ensure that we enforce justice.

There has been no decision to close the Aberdeen laboratory. The provision of police forensic science services is an operational matter for the Scottish Police Services Authority. There is a pressing need to invest in modern police forensic science facilities, which is why this Government is funding a new forensic laboratory as part of the Gartcosh crime campus project and why I gave approval in May for the SPSA to proceed with a new forensic laboratory in Dundee. I asked the SPSA to engage in fresh consultation on the delivery of forensic science services to the north and north-east of Scotland and to let me have further advice. That consultation is on-going.

I can only reiterate what I have said: there has been no decision to close the Aberdeen laboratory. The matter is under  consultation, and we should allow that process to proceed. Equally, this is a matter for the SPSA. In that regard, and in the light of remarks that were made earlier to the First Minister, we should be clear that Grampian's chief constable sits on the board of the SPSA—

The matter is one for the SPSA, and we should allow it to proceed. We should also bear in mind the fact that a new chairman has been appointed. We should trust him to consider the matter, and allow him and the board—which includes Grampian's chief constable—to make a decision in due course, whatever that decision might be.

Absolutely—that is why we should allow the SPSA to get on with the consultation. I recently met Ian Latimer, the chief constable of Northern Constabulary, and he raised no concerns with me. Vic Emery has been appointed as the chairman of the SPSA, and there are a variety of people on the board: not simply the chief constable of Grampian Police but the Labour convener of the Strathclyde joint police board and the chief constable of Strathclyde Police. We should trust in the wisdom, good judgment and integrity of those individuals to make a decision in due course, based on a proper consultation.

We live in what is sometimes described as village Scotland. I am remarkably surprised that those remarks should be made by Northern Constabulary. When we decided on a new police board representative for the board of the SPSA, we had to choose between Stephen House, the chief constable of Strathclyde Police, and Ian Latimer, the chief constable of Northern Constabulary. Mr Latimer, for whom I have the greatest respect and whom I believe is an excellent police officer, has been dealing with other matters since Mr House was appointed. Members seem to be alluding to some sort of conspiracy, which frankly does not exist. If there has not been any direct consultation, the chief constable or any other member of Northern Constabulary should raise the matter with the SPSA board. We should remember that when people are nominated and put on the board of the SPSA, they attend not as the chief constable of Grampian Police or Strathclyde Police, or as the Labour convener from Strathclyde joint police board, but as individuals who are appointed to represent Scotland and the broad community. I have faith in those individuals, and it is a matter of regret that some people should seek to impugn the integrity of those who sit on that board.

The police automatically notify local licensing boards of any reports that they make to the procurator fiscal about offences concerning the sale of alcohol to under-18s. I will ask my officials to consider whether the procurator fiscal could automatically notify local licensing boards of any prosecutions that arise from such reports.

I think that I made matters clear. The police automatically notify local licensing boards. If that is not happening, I am more than happy to investigate. It might be more appropriate for the member to write to me, and I will seek clarification from the relevant police authority. My understanding is that notification happens automatically. If there are problems, I am more than happy to correspond with or to meet the member to ensure that notification happens. As I said, I will discuss with the Crown whether there are measures that would, without causing any huge logistical difficulties, ensure that matters go  further down the pipeline, so to speak, and that boards are kept informed.

There are currently no plans for ministers to meet Mr Osama Saeed or other representatives of the Scottish Islamic Foundation. However, Deputy First Minister Nicola Sturgeon recently addressed an SIF event in Glasgow.

What I can say is that all applications to the RRRI funding stream were scrutinised and considered for their match with Government priorities and value for money. They were considered according to the normal rules, which are required to be followed by all ministers of whatever Government. If Mr Foulkes wishes to raise certain matters, he should feel entitled to do so. However, it is not appropriate for me to answer questions about matters that have not properly been put before us. We have no reason to believe that anything was done other than to support an organisation that seeks to support religious tolerance and harmony. If Mr Foulkes knows of matters that he believes to be inappropriate, he should mention them. I should mention Mr Foulkes's outrage in the past regarding decisions by Government ministers, particularly by this cabinet secretary on matters concerning the British Transport Police. I hope that Mr Foulkes now retracts, and that he accepts that the British Transport Police were overzealous in their treatment of people from an ethnic minority population.

We are still in the transition period to the new regime, so it is premature to reach any conclusions about the impact of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 either on the licensed trade or on the communities across Scotland that are affected by alcohol misuse. However, I am pleased to advise the Parliament that the Accounts Commission has agreed to consider the impact once the 2005 act is fully up and running. It is important that the licensing regime is fair to the trade and fair to the taxpayers who have, after all, been subsidising the current system for many years.

As Mr McGrigor knows, fees are set by local licensing boards. If he thinks that fee levels are causing concern, he should discuss them with the boards. Under the 2005 act, the Government has set the maximum fee that can be charged, but individual licensing boards must decide on the level of the fee. Not all licensing boards have—if I can put it this way—gone to the max: some have dealt with issues in other ways. As a result of Government action to minimise the difficulties and hardship that small businesses face, there has been a substantial reduction in business rates and in the burden that small businesses must bear. I hope that the member acknowledges and welcomes that.

We promised that in 2007-08 we would recruit 150 additional officers, and that is what we delivered. This year, we are committed to recruiting 450 additional officers and, already, 440 of those officers have been recruited, with the remainder to follow. Forces will be recruiting more than 1,600 officers this year—an all-time record. We will also recruit a further 200 officers in each of the subsequent two years. We are well on our way to recruiting 1,000 additional police officers, as we promised to do in our manifesto. As I have said before, all of those officers are over and above recruitment that was already planned by forces. We inherited the lowest police recruitment since devolution, but we have tackled that head on. As I announced on Tuesday, with 16,526 full-time equivalent police officers, we now have the  highest ever recorded number of police officers in Scotland.

Absolutely not. If Labour had remained in power, it would not have committed to recruiting even one additional officer. We inherited from Labour the lowest level of recruitment since devolution, despite the fact that we also faced the highest level of retirals due to demographic trends. We made a commitment to deliver 1,000 additional officers; we delivered 150 in our first year; and we are 10 short of delivering on our commitment for this year—and we will deliver. We have a record number of police officers but, as we have said, the issue is not simply the number of officers but how we deploy them. That is why I pay tribute to the chief constables for ensuring that the officers that we recruit are supplemented by officers who are taken from behind desks and put into our communities to make those communities safer and stronger.

Absolutely. It was a pleasure to meet Chief Constable Stephen House on Tuesday when we were confirming the record number of police officers—I know that he has done a fantastic job in recruiting. I also pay tribute to the Strathclyde Police joint board—and to Councillor Rooney in particular—which has ensured that it brings in recruits, in addition to those that are delivered by the Government, and that it redeploys officers. I concur entirely with my colleague's sentiments.

Between 1 April 2007 and 31 March 2008 there were (a) 156 offences recorded as "drunk and attempting to enter licensed premises" and (b) 35 offences recorded as "licensed person, employee or agent drunk in licensed premises". That is a total of 191 offences under those two crime codes.

We are aware that people who are under the influence are being served alcohol. The licensed trade has made considerable strides in improving the professionalism of the service. Given recent tragedies and events that have been drawn to the attention of licensees by the police, the Government and the Lord Advocate, there is an understanding that this is a journey. We accept that it can be difficult for licensees when people who are unsafe or unfit enter their premises, but it can become clear when someone is well under the influence of alcohol. Fatal accident inquiries have shown that there are serious and tragic consequences. We must be ever vigilant on this matter.

I regularly meet representatives of all Scotland's police forces. I last met Chief Constable Steve House on the morning of Wednesday 5 November. Later that day, I met the chair, vice-secretary and treasurer of the Strathclyde Police Muslim association. The First  Minister will formally launch the association in Glasgow next week.

Absolutely. Scotland has been well served in the past by organisations such as SEMPERscotland—Supporting Ethnic Minority Police staff for Equality in Race. The Strathclyde Police Muslim association is a welcome venture, and it was a pleasure to meet its officials. I hope to be able to join the First Minister next week. The association has two purposes. The first is to try to reassure those coming into the police force that there is no institutional racism—I do not believe that there is any in the Scottish police force, but we must be ever vigilant and ensure that people feel safe and comfortable in joining the police. Secondly, the association can provide a good element of bonding and trust to show our communities that our police represent them all. I have said previously that we are all Jock Tamson's bairns. Our police force comes from all our communities; it must do so. Equally, the police must represent all our communities fairly and equally.

I have seen evidence of and we are watching with interest what is happening south of the border. Evidentiary matters may arise, and police safety is paramount. If such technology can assist in prosecutions, in the prevention of crime, and in the protection of police officers, we will be happy to consider it. However, these are operational matters for the chief constables and it would be wrong for me to interfere. The justice department and I will monitor the situation. If the chief constables or the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland feel that such technology is appropriate, we will be more than happy to work with them.

HMP Peterhead has developed, in line with normal Scottish Prison Service practice, an action plan to address the recommendations in the recent HM prisons inspectorate for Scotland report. The Scottish Government announced in August 2007 that a new, publicly operated, fit for purpose prison, HMP Grampian, would be built in the Peterhead area to replace the existing prisons at Peterhead and Aberdeen. In the meantime, a maintenance programme for HMP Peterhead will continue. I was pleased to note that Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons also reported that "the good things referred to in recent reports are still part of the life and culture of Peterhead." That reflects the hard work and dedication of the staff and managers at Peterhead.

Absolutely. This Government has set out with a will to ensure that we deliver that necessary prison for the north-east. We did so having inherited a crumbling prison estate. Thankfully, one new prison will open next month, two new prisons will follow shortly and HMP Inverclyde and HMP Highland are also being sourced.

We have a world-renowned treatment centre at Peterhead. Such facilities also exist in other institutions within the SPS. There are also difficulties when prisoners do not seek treatment. The problem is that treatment cannot be foisted upon them; the old adage is that although we can take a horse to water, we cannot make it drink. We are dealing with difficult and sometimes dangerous people. The expertise that we have at Peterhead and elsewhere in the SPS serves us well. We should seek to support the SPS in dealing with those difficult people and we must ensure that once they are released—because most of those prisoners are on a determinate sentence—we have in place the appropriate multi-agency public protection arrangements to secure our communities.

Licensing boards cannot yet remove licences in the circumstances that Tom McCabe describes. The situation will change from September next year, when legislation that was brought in by the previous Government will give boards much wider powers to take tough action against rogue retailers. We expect boards to use those powers to complement our ambitious programme for rebalancing Scotland's relationship with alcohol.

There is a significant problem, which is why we are seeking to address it. I would have thought that Mr McCabe would support the legislation that the previous Administration brought in and which we supported, because the position at the present moment is that, although licence applications can be suspended, immediate action cannot be taken by the boards. The boards can only suspend, not remove, licenses, and their decisions can be immediately appealed. The legislation that we supported and which we inherited from the previous Administration will enable boards to take immediate action, and that is action that we will fully support.

HMP Addiewell will open on 12 December 2008. The opening of a new prison requires careful planning and careful, staged testing of operational provision. The staging of the opening of HMP Addiewell has been planned over the past three years. In order to preserve both public safety and operational stability, it is important to adhere to that plan. Precipitous opening would jeopardise that. The prison will take its full capacity of 700 prisoners by early March 2009.

If Ms Brankin wishes to increase prison capacity beyond the aims of this Government, I look forward to her telling us what elements of public expenditure she wishes to cut. Prisons are not cost free; they come at a significant cost to the public purse, and, if we build prisons, we cannot provide schools, houses and hospitals. I reiterate that this Government is committed to the opening of HMP Addiewell. We will then, through the public sector, build the new HMP Bishopbriggs and HMP Grampian, and commence site searches for HMP Inverclyde and HMP Highland. If Ms Brankin wishes us to build beyond that, she should tell us what cuts she would make. We want to look after our pensioners rather than pander to our prisoners.

I said in my initial response that it would be precipitous to bring forward the opening earlier than had been arranged or is actually possible.  The editorial in The Scotsman to which Rhona Brankin referred made it clear that public sector prisons scored higher than private sector prisons on public safety and security. The Government believes that the paramount role of a prison is to provide safety and security for our communities rather than to pander to private profit. We will not put private profit before public security, and that is why we will neither bring forward the opening date nor undermine the important role that the public sector plays in running prisons.

The possible extension at Kilmarnock would be limited and extremely costly. We are committing to public sector prisons in Bishopbriggs and in Grampian, and we are site-searching in Inverclyde and Highland. Mr Aitken has written to me to suggest that we should consider the use of the Royal Air Force bases at Machrihanish and Edzell. That idea has understandably been treated with some disdain by local members. Planning applications, security and barbed wire would be needed. The idea might have worked in a second world war movie, but it will not work in 21 st century Scotland.

Kirkwall sheriff court was completed in 1877 and has undergone numerous renovations, most recently in 1996. It is an old building but it serves its purpose, being suitable and sufficient for the volume of business that is conducted at that location. A balance needs to be struck between the resources that are spent on Kirkwall and the need for improvement across the wider Scottish Court Service estate.

I do not have information regarding the most recent assessment, but I am happy to write to Mr McArthur about the matter. I can confirm that ramps are available to facilitate access to the disability legislation-compliant counter and the disabled toilet on the ground floor. The courtroom on the first floor has sound enhancement and hearing loops for the hearing impaired. In addition, local arrangements are in place to house the court in council facilities on the limited number of occasions when a specific mobility requirement cannot be met. We accept that, in some instances, people who come to court in whatever capacity will have some difficulties, and the Scottish Court Service is addressing those. We need the right balance between the public purse and the ability to provide services. Mr McArthur might be suggesting that we have a new building at great cost, but I believe that the action that the Scottish Court Service is taking is appropriate for the current volume of users, and it appears to have been acceptable to previous incumbents of the post of Minister for Justice, including the member who represented Orkney before Mr McArthur did.

We have put in place a comprehensive programme of detailed monitoring and evaluation to ensure that we can monitor the impact of the summary justice reforms. The initial data are encouraging, and we are seeing early resolution of summary prosecutions. In July, more than 2,000 witnesses were spared being called to court and more than 1,000 police officers were released from court paperwork and appearances to do other work. Clearly, we must continue to monitor the impact of the reforms to ensure the maximum benefit for all those who come into contact with our criminal justice system.

The Lord Advocate informs me that the number of those who were involved in assault was only a small proportion. Like many common-law offences, assault is a wide category. A charge of breach of the peace, which is often welcomed by the police as their best weapon, can cover everything from an extremely serious offence to a minor matter. Equally, assault can cover a variety of offences, ranging from the serious to the minor. Clearly, we cannot have a serious assault being dealt with in the way that I have described. We have had an undertaking from the Crown Office that, if any errors have been made, it will investigate them. The public can be assured that assault, per se, will be treated seriously and that any serious assault will not be countenanced. Nevertheless, there are instances—both for breach of the peace and assault—when the offence is relatively trivial or minor and it is appropriate for us to free up the witnesses and our police officers. The police should be out there, protecting our community, not reading newspapers while they wait for trials that never take place.

Those matters are under discussion. We receive information from the Crown Office, the police and all those who are involved, and in due course we will advise members about when the matter will come before Parliament. We continue to be kept appraised of the views of members, the public and all those who are involved. Information is being provided, but we must collate that information over a reasonable period to ensure that we get a broad snapshot, not a view based on a one-off occasion.

The Government is strongly committed to a robust voluntary sector delivering services that meet local need. The voluntary sector provides a range of services to the justice system, from Women's Royal Voluntary Service facilities at courts to criminal justice social work services for offenders who are serving sentences  in the community and support for victims. The Government does not routinely monitor the voluntary sector's share of the spend. To ensure that the voluntary sector is fully engaged in the development of single outcome agreements with community planning partnerships, we are taking part in a task group with local authorities and the voluntary sector.

I do not know to what cuts the member refers. I meet voluntary sector bodies on a variety of issues. The Government is delivering section 10 funding of £874,563 to support the head office operations of Apex Scotland, Sacro, Families Outside and Action for Children Scotland. We are also providing ring-fenced funding to the community justice authorities, and we committed to £1 million in additional expenditure for those authorities a few weeks ago.

The Scottish Government has been engaged in a wide public consultation on its proposals to change Scotland's relationship with alcohol. As part of the consultation, the Minister for Public Health met representatives of the coalition against raising the drinking age in Scotland and the National Union of Students Scotland on 26 August. We are pleased that CARDAS and NUS Scotland support our proposals to crack down on loss-leading and irresponsible promotions in off-sales and recognise the need for minimum pricing to be part of a comprehensive alcohol strategy.

Absolutely. I am happy to look at that. The issue is one of reconfiguring  Scotland's relationship with alcohol. Pauline McNeill and I, and others who have been students, are well aware of the fun times that students have, but it is a matter of balance. It is clear that some aspects are totally irresponsible, and those who promote and suggest them should be brought to heel. I am more than happy to take on board the points that Pauline McNeill has raised. We are seeking to allow students to enjoy student life without endangering themselves or blighting the lives of others.

I am grateful for that question. We have asked people to contribute their views on those issues to the consultation. I have met residents groups in my constituency, and I also had the opportunity, as did my ministerial colleague, to meet people in communities where action has been taken, such as Stenhousemuir, Armadale and Cupar, where there has been a substantial reduction in antisocial behaviour as a result of pilots to restrict the ability of people between 18 and 21 to buy alcohol in off-sales.

As Mr Fraser is aware, we are engaged in a consultation and we will respond shortly. I recall that earlier this year, NUS Scotland complained bitterly that student unions were facing collapse because students were preparing to fuel up—that seems to be a recent concept that has arisen since I was a student—and were buying their alcohol from off-sales. We have met NUS Scotland and CARDAS, but we do not forget that CARDAS in particular has taken funding from alcohol companies, which perhaps tempers how we view matters.

In September 2007, Audit Scotland, in its report "Police call management—An initial review", recommended that police authorities should regularly receive and scrutinise reports by chief constables on the effectiveness of local call management arrangements. My officials have written to the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Scottish police authorities conveners forum encouraging forces to make information on non-emergency response times available to boards. Forces and boards both confirm that the subject is actively considered by boards. Later this year, Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland will publish its first annual report on the Scottish policing performance framework, which will for the first time report comprehensive police performance data on a national basis. It will include agreed national indicators for emergency calls. National indicators for non-emergency calls are being developed.

Statistics are one factor. We seek to ensure that chief constables can meet their operational requirements. Police boards represent their communities and challenge chief constables and hold them to account on the operation of police forces. The role of the trident's third part—the Government—is important to funding and resources. Statistics have a role to play, because we must be able to check against delivery, but they have difficulties. For example, a response time in a rural area of Northern Constabulary or of Lothian and Borders Police will be different from a response time elsewhere. I take on board the fact that statistics are an aspect, but they are only one part. The best way to proceed is to work together as communities with boards and chief constables to make Scotland safer and stronger.

Yes—I am satisfied that the requirements of core policing are not being compromised by police forces charging for their services in appropriate circumstances. The police's primary duty is to protect the public and to ensure the safety of our communities. They also have a duty to ensure that local taxpayers are not called on to subsidise policing operations that do not benefit the wider community. That is why I consider it right that they should recover the costs of policing highly significant commercial events such as major sporting fixtures, pop concerts and film shoots. We are committed to increasing policing levels in our communities and we are supported in that by all Scotland's chief constables and police boards.

Such matters involve a balance. We want events such as pop concerts and football matches to pay for policing because they are commercial. Equally, the police should go to remembrance Sunday, Boys Brigade and other events to ensure that the community provides benefit. Private security firms have a role. The Parliament endorsed the Security Industry Authority and the Private Security Industry Act 2001, and the profession is now much better monitored and regulated. However, it is still inappropriate to hand over to private security firms  what happens on the public street, which must remain a part of core policing. At a rugby or football game or a pop concert at Murrayfield, Hampden or elsewhere, Rock Steady Security and other private companies deal with many matters, but police are also present in many instances. However, external to stadia, it would be appalling to hand over to private security some activities that should remain a part of core policing.

Prior to 10 March 2008, local authorities collected and retained 100 per cent of all fiscal fines. From 10 March 2008, responsibility for their collection transferred to the Scottish Court Service, with the agreement of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Discussions are currently under way between the Scottish Government and HM Treasury to agree the arrangements for retention from 2008-09 onwards. The SCS collected £400,000 from 1 April 2008 to 31 July 2008.

That is an excellent question. The matter has been raised by the Lord Advocate and we are considering it. Part of our drive for instant justice is that people should realise that, as well as rights, they have responsibilities. If they breach those responsibilities, they will be brought to book and held to account. We also want to ensure that the communities that suffer the most should benefit from those moneys. Those matters are being investigated and I assure Ms White that we are sympathetic to the idea.

I do not have that information but I am more than happy to discuss the matter with the Lord Advocate to ensure that we can give a full explanation.

No discussions have taken place at ministerial level yet. The proposals will have major implications for the manner in which police officer pay is determined. I want to take into account the views of our partners and stakeholders before coming to any decisions on what might be best for Scottish police officers and the service as a whole. The Police Negotiating Board's Scottish forum met last week to discuss the proposals in detail. I will reflect on the views expressed at that meeting, and any others expressed by our partners and stakeholders, before I formally submit the Scottish Government's response to the consultation. I would also welcome the views of members who might feel strongly on this issue.

Not only does the member have such an assurance, but he can go on the record of this Government. When the situation arose last year, we did not hesitate to ensure that our police officers—who have served our communities well, often in difficult and dangerous circumstances—received the judgment that had been decided on. We felt that to be an appropriate view then, and I see nothing to change it now. I assure the member that we meet regularly with the Scottish Police Federation to take on board its concerns. The Government believes that, if someone enters into arbitration, they should accept the result—other than, as the member suggests, in the most exceptional circumstances.  That is why we honoured the position for our police officers last year.

The Government expects the highest standards to be maintained in all aspects of public life in Scotland. With regard to parking, it is for each individual local authority to ensure that it complies fully with all relevant legislation, taking into account any particular local circumstances that require to be addressed in its area.

Absolutely. Alex Johnstone can rest assured that the Government will support  local authorities that implement the law. We must, however, recognise that local factors need to be taken into account, which is why we recognise and respect local democracy. There is a national strategy, which was commenced by a previous Administration, for managing unauthorised camping and dealing with Travelling people, but there will be local issues. Therefore, although I give the member the undertaking that he seeks, I ask him to accept that it is appropriate for local authorities, in acting within the confines of the law, to take their local circumstances into consideration.

Information on warnings that boards have issued is not held by the Government, but we know that licensing boards suspended for various reasons 29 licences in 2007, of which 14 were for on-sales and 15 were for off-sales. We are also beginning to see the effects of test purchasing, which the police are using to crack down on rogue retailers. Since December, 1,073 premises have been tested, of which 176 failed their first test and a further 14 failed a second or subsequent test. That shows that test purchasing is working and licensees are sharpening up their act. A number of those who failed have had their licences suspended, which is the maximum sanction that is available at present. That will change next September when boards will have wider powers, including the power to revoke immediately a licence, which we support.

This evening, I am going to the Scottish Licensed Trade Association's annual dinner. I do not know whether the association expects me to attend in a temperance capacity but I am certain that I will enjoy its hospitality, which I do not think will be dry, whatever the member may think. We are enforcing the legislation. The changes in September 2009 are based on legislation that was not introduced by this Government but which was passed in the previous session of Parliament. We are enforcing existing legislation and implementing and rolling out legislation that is taking time to implement because of the transition period. As we said this morning, we will not hesitate to take action where appropriate to tackle the significant alcohol abuse problem that we face in Scotland.

What about the legal advice on the Iraq war?

A great many members have concentrated on the pilot schemes in Armadale and Stenhousemuir. We heard an excellent contribution from my colleague Michael Matheson, the MSP for the area incorporating Stenhousemuir, who spoke from experience, having talked to communities and police officers in the area. We also heard speeches that uniformly trashed the pilots—pilots that have been welcomed by police and communities. Some of the contributions, such as those from the Baker family and John Lamont, were shameful. I signed off a letter to John Lamont yesterday, and his one contribution to the debate was to ask about extending the opening hours for a variety of premises in his community. Far from tackling drinking, his obsession is the liberalisation of access to alcohol.

Not at the moment. I have spoken to police officers in central Scotland who say that they would like Bo'ness to have the same pilot as Stenhousemuir because it has addressed the issue. When the pilots ended, criminal offending went up. The pilots were welcomed by communities, which is why we support them.

There were no increased resources. From the chief constable down to the beat bobby, the police welcomed the pilots, which they said made a significant difference. Rather than provide the solution, Labour wishes to spend days trying to find out what the problem is. We want to provide a solution as part of a broad package. Dealing with Scotland's alcohol problem means broadening out—not simply tackling the problem of off-sales but tackling problems elsewhere. When I have chatted to people in Armadale and Stenhousemuir, many youngsters have welcomed the ban. They face intimidation on Friday and Saturday nights, when they want to go dancing, hang around with their pals or play football. They face the old culture of "Have a drink. You're Scottish", and victimisation and assault.

Not at the moment. Statistical evidence shows that many youngsters welcome such bans. We cannot ignore the problem. There was a story on a BBC web page yesterday, headed, "Teenagers admit six figure damage", about two teenagers who set light to changing rooms in Edinburgh. According to the story, what did the lawyer say? "Gordon Stewart, defending, said alcohol had been 'a major factor'" in the behaviour of one of the defendants, and the other accused, Whyte, "had also been drunk".

They were 16. Where do members think that they got the drink? Kenny Gibson made a similar point. Carry-outs are bought for them, primarily by 18 to 21-year-olds. The youngsters then go drinking at the back of the changing rooms. As night follows day,  mischief happens, and those two young men now face the possibility of a severe and lengthy custodial sentence for idiocy and bad behaviour fuelled by alcohol. Members of the Opposition say that nothing can be done about it.

Oh yes. The Opposition has made no contribution to the debate. The only contribution from Mr Martin was his suggestion that we soften the position on those who are given the right to sell alcohol and who abuse that trust. He wants to give them three months' suspension. The current law, which we want to enforce, says that if someone breaches it badly, they should be suspended forthwith, indefinitely and forever. Why should we curtail that? We will drive on with it. The contributions from the Opposition have been sadly lacking in that they have focused on one aspect of the debate and have failed to recognise the requirement to address the alcohol problem. Members paid lip service to the extent of the problem that the Government inherited and now faces. Under the Tory Government, there was a 31 per cent increase in off-sale provision, and we are now reaping the consequences. The Government is acting on that, in support of, and in conjunction and agreement with partners such as the health service, the BMA and the police. When I went to meet the ambulance service in Lothian and Borders—I noticed that no Tories were there—what was the biggest single problem? Alcohol abuse. We recognise that as a Government we must tackle the problem we face with alcohol. It is affecting our health service and our criminal justice system, and it is undermining our economy. It has to be a whole-population approach, across the board. We cannot underestimate the problem that we face.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is ironic that on the day when the SNP Government rolls out free school meals to five to seven-year-olds, some members obsess about providing alcohol to 18 to 21-year-olds. That speaks volumes about the Government's values and the minority interests of others. The problem with the Conservatives' position on alcohol—as with so much—is that they carp and complain from the sidelines but have no ideas and make no input into the consultation. They have instigated today's debate on an issue that has been cherry picked from a comprehensive package of measures. They arrogantly dismiss the proposal out of hand on the basis of nothing more than dogma and a desire to play to the gallery. Murdo Fraser, who comes across increasingly as a spokesman for Wal-Mart, either has his head in the sand or walks around with his eyes shut. He pursues the outdated line that alcohol misuse is a minority issue. It is not. It has an impact on everyone in Scotland in some shape or form in relation to health, the economy and justice. We cannot go on as we are. We should not be surprised by the Conservatives' lack of understanding, given their past convictions and previous sins on passive smoking. We remember that Margaret Thatcher was the milk snatcher. Now Annabel Goldie appears to be the cairrie-oot provider. The party that sought to be tough on law and order now seems to accept the disorder that flows from a free-for-all in alcohol retailing.

Not at the moment. The Conservatives have moved on from David Cameron's hug-a-hoodie plan to Murdo Fraser's free bottle of Buckie or David McLetchie's gie-them-aw-a-cairrie-oot idea. I was interested to read that the London mayor, Boris Johnson—good old Boris—backs a proposal for an age 21 initiative in Croydon. Why are the Tories so dismissive of proposals in Scotland but so protective of their home counties heartland?

Mr Fraser well knows his past predilections in the Federation of  Conservative Students. I leave him to account for those. We are not adopting Boris Johnson's suggestion; he is accepting as appropriate for the home counties what we have suggested. The Conservatives do not care about housing schemes in small-town Scotland. Of course, the Conservatives are happy to accept the council-tax freeze—we are delighted that Mr Cameron has come on board. Perhaps the Conservatives should take a few more of our policies. I am thankful that people in Scotland recognise that the problem exists and that we cannot go on as we are. Scotland has one of the fastest-growing rates of alcohol-related liver disease and cirrhosis in the world. Each year, 40,000 people are hospitalised with an alcohol-related illness. As Mr Fraser admitted, the estimated cost of alcohol misuse is £2.25 billion per year. That is why we need a serious debate, with serious suggestions from serious people. The difference between us and the other parties is that we recognise the scale of the problem and are willing to try new approaches to tackle it. We will not sit back and watch problems arise. The Tories must account for the fact that, when they were in office, the number of off-sales premises in Scotland increased by 31 per cent—from 4,900 in 1980 to 6,400 in 1997. That happened on the Tories' watch. They built not one new prison, but they increased the number of off-sales outlets by 31 per cent. It is no wonder that our communities pay a price in antisocial behaviour these days. Our work to deal with alcohol started in opposition.

We are consulting. The consultation period has finished and we are considering the issue. It is a pity that neither Mr Purvis nor anybody else in the Liberal Democrats took it on themselves to contribute to the consultation, but it is for them to answer for that. It is easy to dismiss the age 21 discussion out of hand but, where the system has been tried, the results have been positive. Other factors have been at play in Armadale, Stenhousemuir and Cupar, and restricting the sale of alcohol to those aged 21 and over was only one element. However, the police and communities were grateful for the successful outcomes. The statistics speak for themselves.

Not at the moment. We need to consider the complete picture. Debating the purchase age is only one part of that. We acknowledge that the Government does not have all the answers and that we need to work in partnership. We also recognise that we require not simply legislation but a culture change and enforcement of current laws. However, we need legislative change, because the status quo is unacceptable. As I said, we cannot go on as we are. We welcome the input from a variety of organisations, including CARDAS, which accepts minimum pricing. We welcome the fact that Nick Clegg has come round to the concept of minimum pricing. Yet again, a UK political party is taking on board the Scottish Government's proposals. We are delighted that Scotland is seen as leading the way by Boris Johnson and Nick Clegg. We have an opportunity to rebalance Scotland's relationship with alcohol, which is out of kilter. I appreciate that the prospect of reducing alcohol consumption is anathema to some, but that is the ball game that we need to win to end the damage that alcohol misuse has done to our economy and our country. As a Parliament, we owe that to future generations. I move amendment S3M-2629.1, to leave out from "rejects" to end and insert: "welcomes the period of consultation, listening and debate that is happening in Scotland on how to rebalance the country's relationship with alcohol; welcomes the initiatives being taken at local level, including voluntary agreements not to sell alcohol to persons under 21; notes the ongoing work done by licensing boards and other partners to implement the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005; recognises the need to build on that legislation with further measures including the ending of irresponsible alcohol promotions, and acknowledges that given the major public health implications failure to take further action to tackle alcohol misuse is not an option."

I agree with Paul Martin—we have to make progress now. I, too, pay tribute to the Scottish judiciary. Paul Martin is right to say that the judiciary has to rise to the challenge: I am certain that it will. As Bill Aitken suggested earlier, we have been well served throughout the centuries. The whole purpose of the bill is to assist our judiciary to serve our communities better. We would not in any way seek to constrain, hector or lecture our judges. Many members, including Paul Martin, Stuart McMillan and Cathie Craigie, pointed out that the media spotlight has not fallen on this bill. Indeed, the press gallery is empty, and it has been almost constantly empty since the start of the debate. I was intrigued by a point that Nigel Don made: it is indeed surprising that it has taken us so long to get here. Cathy Jamieson was instrumental in raising the issues during the previous Administration—as, to be fair, were the Liberal Democrats. We are delighted to continue with that. I am one of those sad people who, either out of choice or because of course requirements, have read Thomas Paine, John Stuart Mill and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. These arguments have intrigued people through the centuries. We will be ensuring that the courts run better—Paul Martin was right to emphasise that point—but we will also be enshrining and preserving democracy. It is not simply rhetorical to say that the separation of powers is vital. That fundamental point has been made through the centuries. The bill is an important constitutional measure, not simply some adornment for Parliament to provide. Its aim is to assist, not to lecture, our sheriffs, who have served us well, as have all the judiciary, and it will take us further. Legitimate concerns have been raised in the debate. Bill Aitken was correct to say that we must  monitor the situation, as were other members of the Justice Committee, who raised worries about the judiciary's workload. That must be continually monitored. Cathie Craigie was right to say that, although we have the legislation, the memorandum and framework are still to come. I hope that those will be discussed not just between me and the Justice Committee but with other members who are not on the committee, in particular Richard Baker. We must also include the Scottish Court Service and the Lord President in those discussions. Like other members, I pay tribute to Cathy Jamieson for the important role that she has played in matters such as the provision of training for sheriffs. We are well served by our judiciary, but every job must recognise that we live in a fast-changing world and that, no matter how able or talented someone is as a solicitor or advocate, or how skilful they are on the bench, society changes and we must be ever vigilant of that. As constituency representatives, we will all be aware of problems that have arisen, for example in dealing with child witnesses. It is legitimate that the Lord President should be able to ensure that appropriate and adequate training is given to members of the judiciary. The Lord President and the judiciary were correct in arguing that it would be wrong for Parliament to seek to dictate to them what training should be provided. However, it is equally appropriate that Parliament should be able to demand that there will be training for those who are given that important job. They are entrusted with the safety of our communities, and they have to make important decisions regarding not just people's wealth and bank balances but their whole lives—for example, they decide whether marriages are annulled. Robert Brown will be aware, as I am, of the difficulties—which would tax the wisdom of Solomon—in deciding the relationships between parents and children. Those are fundamental matters, and we must ensure that our judiciary are properly and adequately prepared to make those decisions. We must strike the right balance and have not a judiciary that can be dictated to by Parliament or directed by Government, but a judiciary that is properly empowered. This is the first piece of our justice legislation, as Mr Butler is always keen to remind me. We believe that we have been and will continue to be well served by the common law of Scotland, but, where necessary, we will not hesitate to legislate in due course. I reiterate the importance of having a strong trident of government. Parliament today has the opportunity to pass a measure of constitutional significance. The separation of powers is a key principle of our system of governance, and it is  fundamental to our constitutional arrangements and the idea of fairness under the law. The bill will strengthen the relationship between the legislature, the Executive and the judicial arm of the trident, enshrining in law the independence of the judiciary and ensuring that it is supported by an efficient courts administration. I commend the bill to Parliament.

We come to the final stage in a reform process that began back in 2006. The work was originated not by this Government, but by my predecessor Cathy Jamieson and her colleagues in the previous Liberal-Labour Administration. I pay tribute to her for her work in commencing the process. We have managed to keep the bill as non-partisan as possible, and I pay tribute to members who have participated in ensuring that we deliver good governance not simply for our courts, but for our country. As we have seen throughout consideration of the bill, the topic is serious, even if it does not ignite the nation's passions. The bill is an important constitutional measure that provides a rare opportunity to refresh the relationship between the judicial, legislative and executive arms of government, which is fundamental to democracy. It is right that the bill had the benefit of two formal consultations and the Justice Committee's detailed and careful attention, as the committee's convener reminded me today. I thank the committee's members and staff for all their work. The bill's progress offers an excellent example of how the Government and a committee can work together to achieve a first-rate outcome. The bill also benefited from the collaboration of members of all parties, who were prepared to discuss matters and put their points of view. In some instances, members persuaded the Government; in others, they accepted the points that the Government made. I pay tribute to my team and secretariat, who worked seamlessly under different Governments to deliver the bill. I also thank the Lord President and his judicial colleagues for the constructive and helpful way in which they approached the bill. In particular, I thank the members of the judiciary and others who worked with my officials in the lead-up to the bill's introduction, to ensure that we brought forward a comprehensive and measured package of reforms. I also thank all the individuals and organisations who commented on the proposals and on the bill at its various stages. We welcome their participation and have benefited from their insight.  The Government is clear about the need for a strong, independent judiciary. The bill enshrines that independence in statute. It will give the Lord President additional responsibilities for the courts in Scotland and for the judiciary, together with a complementary leadership role in the strategic management of the administrative service on which he and his colleagues will rely. It will place the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland on a statutory footing, which is important, and it will introduce a framework for a structured judicial complaints system. During stage 2 and in discussions during the past weeks, I listened carefully to members of other parties who were concerned that the bill as introduced removed ministers' role in making decisions about opening or closing court buildings. For instance, Bill Aitken was concerned to ensure that there would be effective local consultation on changes to the location of courts, and Margaret Smith felt strongly that the location of courts was a matter in which communities and their elected representatives had a strong democratic interest. That concern was shared by Labour Party colleagues, as Richard Baker and other members said during the debate on the stage 3 amendments. I listened to those views and was persuaded by the arguments that were put forward. The bill was therefore amended today to provide that statutory instruments on sheriffdom boundaries and court locations should be promoted by ministers and should be capable of annulment by the Parliament. Ministers and the Parliament will therefore have an effective say over whether proposals that have a potentially significant impact on communities, such as court closures, should go ahead. I am grateful to colleagues in all parties for the constructive way in which they approached the discussions on the issue. It is important to reiterate that although there are issues on which we might disagree, some of which were considered today, our ability to focus in has served the Parliament, our communities and indeed the Scottish Court Service, which will be improved. With the changes that we made today, I firmly believe that the bill does the right thing in giving a judicially chaired body the front-line responsibility for running the courts, while safeguarding the legitimate interests of ministers and the Parliament. We had quite robust debate about the role of the Lord President and the accountability of the SCS. I welcomed the independent study that showed that the Lord President's increased workload would be manageable without his having to sacrifice his vital role on the bench. It was appropriate that the committee flagged up the issue and I am grateful to it for that. In addition to the robust accountability  of the SCS to Parliament through its chief executive as accountable officer, I welcomed the Lord President's assurance that he will accept the Parliament's invitation to him to attend, if the Parliament has serious concerns about the operation of the SCS. Mr Martin has pursued that matter with vigour and principle and I hope that we can satisfy him through the memorandum or concordat—historic or otherwise—that we will have in the democratic system into which we are entering. I understand that he has received assurances on the matter directly from the Lord President, which I welcome. The Lord President agreed that the matter should be set out for him and his successors in a framework document, which will define the relations between the SCS, ministers and the Parliament. That is the correct basis on which future relationships should rest. It is clear that the document will have to be discussed and knocked about. The Justice Committee will have the opportunity to ensure that we get it right. I am sure that we can achieve that, as we got the bill right through discussions between ministers, the judiciary and the committee. The bill provides a strong, coherent structure for a modern judiciary and the effective management of our court system. It offers a package of reforms that will strengthen Scotland's judiciary as an institution—I know that the judiciary welcomes the bill—and introduce a number of practical reforms to improve the way in which the system operates. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I welcome the consensus among members. These matters have often given rise to significant differences. For example, a campaign relating to the potential closure of Peebles sheriff court was led in past sessions of the Parliament by Christine Grahame. Pauline McNeill and Robert Brown are correct to say that such issues cause considerable controversy. I am grateful for the kind words from members. We have reached a solution that is appropriate and which will strike the correct balance. At the end of the day, the Lord President and the SCS have to do what is appropriate. Ultimately, though, the decision has to be capable of being challenged by those who are elected to represent their communities.  Amendment 4 agreed to.  [Amendments 5 and 6 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.]

I understand members' genuine concerns, but they are based on a misconception. The bill's provisions on the removal of members are enabling. They set out the circumstances in which the Lord President or, as the case might be, Scottish ministers might consider whether a member should be removed from office. They do not, and should not, prescribe the process to be undertaken. I understand and sympathise with Bill Aitken's concern that the process should be fair, and that it should accord with the principles of natural justice, as Robert Brown commented. However, amendment 23 is completely unnecessary. It is  impossible to conceive of a situation in which the Lord President or Scottish ministers, in contemplating a situation as serious as removing a member from the board, would do so without a proper investigation and discussion with the member concerned. Amendment 23 would add a rigidity that could have the effect of interfering with the efficient working of the board. If, for example, a member of the board were to disappear, fall into a coma or be so seriously ill that any approach would be entirely inappropriate, there would be no way to move forward. The board might then have to operate with one member short. That would not be a satisfactory result. Amendment 23 applies only to the removal of members of the Judicial Appointments Board, although the bill also provides for the removal of the chair of that board and of members of the Scottish Court Service. An express provision in schedule 1 would create doubt about whether members had a right to be heard before being removed. With that clarification given and the assurance that I hope to provide, I urge Bill Aitken to withdraw amendment 23. I recognise his sincerity and the genuine basis of his amendment, but he has fundamentally misconceived the situation.

I thank Pauline McNeill for the manner in which she has spoken to her amendment and for giving us prior notification of it. To some extent, she answered the questions that she raised. However, I put it on record that we as a Government recognise the important role that part-time sheriffs play. I have many friends who are part-time sheriffs, as, no doubt, does Pauline McNeill, so I do not underestimate their importance, and there is no suggestion that they are being denigrated in any way. The association's failure to have a meeting with the Scottish Court Service is regrettable, but I give members an undertaking that Eleanor Emberson will seek to meet it. I understand that there was simply a diary problem. There is certainly no suggestion that the association's position is not recognised or that part-time sheriffs are not to be treated with the dignity to which they are entitled because of the office that they hold. I assure Pauline McNeill and all members that the situation will be remedied and rectified. The position regarding justices of the peace is that they are in a different sector, to an extent—they operate in a different court—and it is important that they should be on the SCS board. The objective of the proposed membership is to ensure that the Scottish Court Service has the necessary balance of experience, expertise and independence to secure the effective administration of the courts. The amendment would add a part-time sheriff to the proposed membership, but I do not accept that that is necessary or appropriate.  Paragraph 2 of schedule 3 provides that the Scottish Court Service shall have 13 members, a narrow majority of seven of whom shall be judicial members. I have strong reservations about increasing the judicial majority in the service, as a balance is needed from strong independent voices, for the service's good governance. The constitution of the Scottish Court Service as proposed in the bill was considered carefully in conjunction with the judiciary and is right. It is important to add that members will be there not to represent interest groups, but to bring their experience to running the Court Service. Members will not represent the busiest court in Europe—we have that in Glasgow—or a sheriffdom, for  example. They will bring their skills and talents to the job. The Scottish Court Service's proposed membership includes two permanent sheriffs and a sheriff principal, who will bring significant judicial experience to the table. It is unclear what perspective a part-time sheriff could add, although I do not seek in any way to undermine the important contribution that part-time sheriffs make. Anyone who holds office as a part-time or full-time sheriff may of course be considered for appointment as a solicitor or advocate member of the Scottish Court Service. I urge Pauline McNeill to withdraw amendment 1.

Section 38 inserts in the Sheriff Courts (Scotland) Act 1971 new section 12E, which requires that an order be laid in Parliament by the First Minister before a sheriff principal or sheriff can be removed from office following a tribunal's report that he or she is unfit to hold office. [ Interruption. ]

New section 12E in the 1971 act provides for a 40-day rule to apply to such an instrument, rather than the 21-day rule that applies to other negative instruments. Amendment 2 is a purely technical amendment that makes it clear that the standard procedure for negative instruments is modified to properly reflect that, thereby removing any potential for ambiguity. I move amendment 2.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

Section 2 unifies the judiciary under the Lord President as head of the Scottish judiciary. It places a range of responsibilities on the Lord President, including responsibility for "the efficient disposal of business in the Scottish courts"; responsibility for representing the views of judicial office holders; responsibility for making arrangements for "the welfare, training and guidance of judicial office holders";  and responsibility for making arrangements for a conduct scheme for the judiciary. Section 2 defines the Scottish courts and section 39 defines the judicial office holders for those purposes. Section 2 also provides that the Scottish ministers may by order add to the list of courts over which the Lord President has responsibility, after first consulting him. Amendment 3 addresses the other side of the coin by giving the Scottish ministers the power to add to the list of judicial office holders in section 39. It seeks to ensure that when courts are added to the Lord President's remit, the members of those courts also fall under his stewardship. I move amendment 3.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

The bill as introduced gave the Lord President responsibility for promoting statutory instruments about the alteration of boundaries of sheriffdoms, sheriff court districts, places where sheriff courts are held and the establishment of justice of the peace courts. That had a certain neatness, as such matters relate to the Lord President's decisions about the deployment of the judiciary. However, during the bill's passage, I listened to members of various parties who felt that ministers should retain a role in decisions about where courts are located that are likely to be matters of some local political controversy. The point was made that communities are often concerned if, for example, a proposal is made to close or relocate a local court, and that MSPs want to be able to debate the case for closure or relocation with an elected representative. Members felt that such potentially contentious decisions should be the subject of a decision by ministers and Parliament. I found those arguments persuasive, so I have lodged amendments to provide that statutory instruments on sheriffdom boundaries and court locations should be promoted by ministers to Parliament and should be capable of annulment by Parliament.

I am always happy to listen to the committee and its convener. To be fair, such  matters were also raised by members who are not members of the committee—in particular, Ms McNeill. I pay tribute to Bill Aitken and to the other members who were correct to raise the issue. As a matter of practice, I would normally expect proposals for changes in court locations or sheriffdom boundaries to come from the Scottish Court Service and the Lord President, after consultation with the people who would be affected, as those are, in the first instance, operational matters for the SCS and the Lord President to reach a view on. Amendments 4 to 17 provide that ministers and Parliament could not, at their own hand, change sheriffdom boundaries or court locations without the consent of the Lord President and the SCS. That must be right, as such decisions affect the Lord President's responsibilities for deployment of the judiciary and the efficient disposal of business by the courts. The combined effect of amendments 4 to 17 is that ministers and Parliament will have an effective say over whether proposals that have a potentially significant impact on communities, such as court closure proposals, should go ahead, and that they will require to be consulted about any such proposals. I move amendment 4.

The position at present is that such an initiative could not be driven forward if the sheriffs principal and the Lord President were unable to deliver it. This is ultimately about respect for the separation of powers, which Robert Brown and Bill Aitken mentioned, but I will address some  of the issues that Paul Martin and others have raised about how we can exercise influence. Pauline McNeill raised legitimate points about how members interact with the judiciary and what level of accountability and response can be expected. Ministers will, as at present, be able to propose that the courts should operate in particular ways. If, for example, we saw merit in a roll-out of specialist domestic abuse courts, it would be for the Lord President and sheriffs principal to decide whether to implement the proposals, as it is at present. The current situation is neither enhanced nor impacted on negatively. The bill sets out a clearer duty on the judicially led Scottish Court Service to consider the proposals within a clearer planning framework. Under section 62, the SCS must submit a corporate plan to ministers. As part of considering that corporate plan, ministers will consider whether the SCS's plans are aligned with the Government's priorities and may seek change. That applies now and in the future. Ministers may, at any time, give guidance to which the SCS must have regard. The Lord President, as chair of the SCS and head of the judiciary, will have to consider the resource management and judicial deployment consequences of proposals from ministers. A better structure is therefore in place to ensure that ministers and the judiciary have an informed negotiation about how to implement changes in Scotland's court system. In response to the point that Ms Craigie raised, ministers can set directions. Currently, if the Lord President or the sheriffs principal felt that those were impractical or impossible, they would have to so advise. Amendment 19 would require the Lord President to provide ministers with any information for which they ask about the arrangements that he is making to secure the efficient disposal of business. I do not believe that that is right or necessary. It would interfere with the Lord President's independence. I outlined many ways of obtaining information in my letter of 17 September to Bill Aitken. In section 64, there is already a requirement on the SCS to provide information to ministers. The chief executive of the SCS can be called to appear before the Parliament, and the Lord President has said that he would accept an invitation to attend if there were significant issues. I intend to produce a framework document that will define the relationships between the Scottish Court Service, ministers and Parliament, which should also provide reassurance. It will deal with the provision of information, in particular in response to a request from members—an issue which Pauline McNeill correctly and understandably raised.  I acknowledge that members have a legitimate interest in being able to obtain information about the running of the courts and I hope that I have allayed fears that that will not be the case if the bill is passed. The Lord President has made it clear that he sees the bill as an important constitutional measure. That he will not be willing to play his part in the new arrangements is unconscionable. He will, of course, undertake to participate. I therefore urge Paul Martin and Cathie Craigie not to press the amendments. Given the different circumstances that may arise, it is difficult for any legislation at any stage to provide absolute assurances, but I think that our proposals provide a correct balance. The separation of powers will be ensured in respect of the Lord President, and he will be in control of the secretariat that is necessary to ensure the separation of powers, but the points that Paul Martin and Cathie Craigie correctly make about interaction with elected members are vital, not only for members but for their communities. We believe that that aspect will be properly focused on, dealt with and, perhaps for the first time, specified in a memorandum of understanding that will allow everybody to know who is accountable for what and what is to be expected by each party in these circumstances.

I sympathise with Bill Aitken's view that an individual who has successfully passed a recruitment round managed by the Judicial Appointments Board should know that they are likely to get a commission. I agree. Not only should they know that they are likely to get a commission, but they should be given a general indication of where they are on the list. That is what happens now, and it will continue to happen once the bill is enacted. However, amendments 20 and 21 seek to give a responsibility to the Judicial Appointments Board that would not be appropriate. The board's remit is to provide the First Minister with a list of candidates who have been recommended for judicial appointment, and the final decision then rests with Scottish ministers. Ministers retain statutory responsibility for judicial appointments, and it is therefore for ministers, not the board, to inform successful candidates that they have been selected for appointment. If appropriate, Her Majesty would then be invited to appoint them to judicial office. Amendment 22 cuts across the appointments process and attempts to address an issue that is,  and should remain, part of the confidential consideration that the Judicial Appointments Board gives to each candidate before recommending candidates for appointment. That recommendation is then approved by ministers. Amendment 21 deals with the order of appointments. I assure members that, where a ranked list of candidates is the appropriate vehicle, successful candidates are appointed in the order in which they appear on the list—unless, of course, there is a reason to depart from the order. As Robert Brown suggests, there could be a number of reasons for departing from the order. Bill Aitken's amendment addresses some of those reasons, but there are other situations that he has not covered. A list can have currency for some months. What if, for example, an accusation or complaint were to be made against an individual whose name was on the list? In such circumstances, it would be right and proper for ministers to await the outcome of any investigation before moving either to appoint the individual concerned or to seek to remove their name from the list entirely. To fail to do that would be negligent and could cause problems.  I know that there is a perception in some quarters that, for some reason, ministers might seek to engineer appointments to the detriment of the individual concerned. However, I assure members that that will not happen on my watch, and I do not believe that it will happen on any minister's watch. Nevertheless, in the unlikely event that, in the future, there were to be any cause for concern, it should be noted that the members of the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland are well aware of the rankings that they have made and are in a position to monitor the appointments as they are made in years to come. I am sure that, if the board members had any reason to suspect me, other ministers or anybody else of behaving in an unacceptable manner, they would soon make their views known. The bill, as drafted, allows for an appropriate level of flexibility in the appointment process. The circumstances that Bill Aitken and I have touched on are simply exceptional ones that could arise. It would be unhelpful to impose an artificial restraint such as is proposed for eventualities that we hope may never occur but which just might. I therefore invite Bill Aitken to withdraw amendment 20.

I thank Paul Martin and Cathie Craigie for their engagement with the Government not just on the issues to which amendments 18 and 19 relate, but on the bill as a whole. I accept the perfectly legitimate points that they raise and I will attempt to provide them with the assurances that they seek. The two amendments have a common purpose: to further secure accountability and to retain some measure of control over the running of the court system. However, they are unnecessary, as the bill already contains a number of measures that are designed to ensure the accountability of the Scottish Court Service. We also believe that the amendments are misconceived. In its own way, each of them runs the risk of undermining the very principle that the bill sets out to enshrine in law: judicial independence. Although I understand what Paul Martin is correctly trying to achieve, by making it clear in the bill that Parliament may invite the Lord President to attend, we have heard the Lord President's assurance that he will accept invitations from Parliament on matters that are properly of concern to it. Amendment 18 could do more harm than good. Parliament already has the power to invite the Lord President and, indeed, anyone else to give evidence. It would be wrong to suggest that that depends on statutory provision. Such a provision would cut across Parliament's inherent powers to regulate its own procedure, and it could undermine its standing orders. Rule 2.6 states: "The Parliament may ... invite any person ... to attend its proceedings for the purpose of giving evidence; or ... to produce documents".  Rule 12.4 provides the same for committees. Apart from its effect on standing orders, amendment 18 would call into question whether the Parliament may invite any person if there is not an express power so to do. It would also call into question whether a committee could invite the Lord President to attend. Cathie Craigie has understandably expressed concern about the changes that the bill introduces, but her proposals in amendment 19 would seriously undermine the principles of the separation of powers and judicial independence, which are fundamental themes in the bill. The amendment also undermines the coherence and strength of the arrangements for a judicially managed system that the bill puts in place. I firmly believe that the court system will be improved by establishing in the Lord President a single point of headship for the judiciary and the management of the system. We have set out in section 1 our commitment to the independence of the judiciary, which I think is welcomed throughout the Parliament. We have set out a structure that gives the judiciary responsibilities for running the system, supported by a judicially governed Scottish Court Service. Having established the institutional independence of the judiciary, it would be fundamentally inconsistent for us to give ministers power to issue binding guidance to the Lord President about how he should run the business of the courts. It is constitutionally wrong for a minister to tell judges how to run their courts. The Lord President would be in an untenable position. He would have responsibility for securing the efficient disposal of business, yet he would have to follow guidance from ministers. That is a recipe for confusion and uncertainty, and it could undermine the whole point of having a single person with overall responsibility and power of action. There is already a power in section 65 for ministers to issue guidance to the Scottish Court Service about the carrying out of its functions. Ministers have scope to influence activities, through the process of approving the service's corporate plan, and I believe that that strikes the right balance.

Yes. Our proposals are about tackling alcohol misuse. We are not anti-alcohol, and the core of our message has always been about sensible and responsible drinking.  We sought assurances that alcohol would be sold responsibly, and the Scottish Rugby Union has worked with the Scottish Government to ensure that that is the case. The trust put in Scottish rugby fans has been repaid by their good behaviour.

I am not going to prejudge the outcome of the consultation. I was grateful to the member for Edinburgh Central, who welcomed the success of Murrayfield and pointed out its substantial contribution to the economy. We should bear in mind the concern that previously existed among communities there, because of the abuse of alcohol—carry-outs were frequently consumed in Roseburn park, as opposed to alcohol being consumed safely and sensibly within the stadium. The difference between us is that whereas Mr McLetchie clearly has a fixed position, the Government is listening to the communities in Cupar, Armadale and Stenhousemuir who have benefited from a substantial reduction in antisocial behaviour brought about by the responsible actions that have been taken by the police, licensing boards and local communities.

I met representatives of the Glasgow Bar Association on 5 May this year to discuss its position on the summary justice reforms. The association was also represented when I met deans of local faculties on 26 March, and at earlier meetings with officials to develop the proposed reforms of summary criminal legal assistance. Officials regularly meet colleagues from the Law Society of Scotland, the Crown Office and the Scottish Legal Aid Board to monitor the impact of those reforms, and I will meet members of that group in December to discuss its initial thoughts.

The Glasgow Bar Association is a valued member of the legal family. It is fair to say that its views on legal aid, in particular, are not necessarily similar to those that have been expressed by representatives of the criminal law committee of the Law Society of Scotland, which are not as extreme, even if they express some trepidation. The Government acknowledges that the city of Glasgow faces particular pressures: Glasgow sheriff court is the busiest in Europe. Although the Glasgow Bar Association is a valued organisation, it must recognise that the summary justice reforms are about making Glasgow and Scotland as a whole safer. Although some difficulties have been experienced, the reforms represent the direction of travel to which the Government is committed, which was supported by the Parliament.

I, too, thank Nigel Don for raising the important issues of family law and the support that is offered to families in difficult times. A remarkable number of measured speeches have been made, and the debate has been excellent. Members recognise the importance of the issues, the complexity of the area and the tragedies that befall individuals. Thankfully, it appears that relatively few people are suffering as a result of the problems that have  been raised. That said, the pain and grief for such people and the consequences for them and their children can be significant. Equally, I am conscious that, although we have a system of laws that is supposed to represent justice, law is sometimes the enforcement of rules and justice is not served. The Government and the Parliament must seek to minimise the number of cases in which that happens and alter things where we can, but occasionally the law fails to deliver justice. However, as Robert Brown correctly said, hard cases make bad laws. What a sheriff or judge should do in some cases would almost defeat the wisdom of Solomon. Should they imprison somebody and put a child into care? Should they put a child into the care and residence of a parent to whom the child refuses to go? Such matters are difficult. Like other members, I have legal experience. From my experience of 20 years as a defence agent, I understand the difficulties that sheriffs face in difficult cases. We should not undermine the need for the law to be enforced so that it is not brought into disrepute, although tragedies will befall individual parents as a result. Equally, as the father of two boys, I understand the pain and sorrow that many individuals suffer. The Government is committed to supporting families through its funding for family support organisations and supporting research to ensure that the law is kept up to date. We are committed always to improving the law. There have been considerable changes since Robert Brown, Christine Grahame and I ceased practice. I have great sympathy for parents who wish to play an active role in their child's life but who, for whatever reason, cannot do so. Grandparents also lose out in many instances, when they have a great deal to contribute. I will always remember the tragedies that I have heard about from teachers who could not speak to a parent because of a direction from the other parent, with whom the child lived. The teachers lamented that, particularly when they had many kids in whom no parent took an interest. Those are genuinely tragic cases. In cases in which a court order has been breached, the sheriff can be asked to consider the circumstances and he can fine or imprison a person for breaking the order. However, the proverbial nuclear option may serve the interests of no one, least of all the interests of the child. The Minister for Community Safety has written to the president of the Sheriffs Association to seek a meeting on the issue. We will continue to monitor the matter and consider what we can do. On cross-border issues, members will appreciate that I cannot comment on the circumstances of individual cases, but I appreciate  that some disputes go on for many years and that manifest injustices can take place. We must try to address that. I encourage parents who experience problems in their relationship to seek help at an early stage. As Christine Grahame and others said, many organisations are available—not simply lawyers who are expert in family law—including Relate Scotland, Scottish Marriage Care, and Citizens Advice Scotland. It is much better if issues can be resolved without the law.

There are a growing number of specialists in child law. Also, we have facilities in Scotland such as curators ad litem, safeguarders and a variety of other measures. I would not wish to be responsible for the establishment of a legal empire for those who seek to specialise in this area. Great progress has been made on some issues and solicitors' experience of the issues is increasing. As I say, sheriffs can bring in a safeguarder—who need not be a lawyer—to preserve a child's interest. I am happy to undertake to consider the issues to see whether the system can be improved. It is a matter of balance. Simply providing better legal access for children might create a more litigious society, which would not necessarily deliver the justice that we seek. The issue is about how we deliver that justice.

I am sure that it is. I am more than happy to consult on the matter with the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Justice south of the border. People go back and forward. We have heard anecdotal evidence of the problems. It is manifestly wrong for people to seek to thwart a court order either north or south of the border by jumping over it. That should not happen. The jurisdictions on both sides of the border have a duty, so the Lord Advocate and I would be more than happy to have those discussions. I do not accept that the courts treat parents who are married differently from those who are not. When a decision is made, the interests of the child have always been and will always be paramount. In cases in which domestic abuse is a factor, the focus must be on protecting those who are most vulnerable. I fully accept that collaborative or mediation-based approaches may not be the most appropriate in those circumstances. Mary Mulligan  mentioned Scottish Women's Aid, which has made representations to members on the issue. The Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 introduced a new definition of "abuse", which we must take on board. Collaborative law has been mentioned. I have spoken with Cath Karlin, who is one of the major advocates of that approach in Scotland and one of the most experienced agents. The approach is new to me, as it is to other members, but we are happy to assist and work towards it. I met Cath Karlin and representatives of Family Mediation Grampian yesterday. Other concepts are used in measures in Australia and elsewhere. We must be open and fluid but recognise that some fundamentals must always remain and that the interests of the child must always be paramount. If the system can be bettered by the points that Mr Harper raised, whether by way of collaborative law or by working better with jurisdictions south of the border and elsewhere, that must be done. I assure Mr Don and other members that the Scottish Government is committed to supporting families through difficult times. We realise that some tragic and manifest injustices have occurred that do not serve our law well. We have to be ever vigilant. As I said, we are happy to take on board the matters that were raised on all sides of the chamber and to try to ensure that we resolve matters, particularly in instances where problems have arisen.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

I am happy to confirm that I have had an excellent meeting with COSLA, which was represented by Councillor Harry McGuigan, who is a member of Mr Martin's party and clearly agrees with the broad ethos and direction not only of the prisons commission but of the Government. I am glad to work with him. Mr Martin will also know that, as a result of this Government, Mr McGuigan now sits on the board of the SPS. I hope that he will thank us for that.

The member can rest assured that we remain committed to the principle that sentencing is a matter for the judiciary. We have said so before, we say it now and we will say it in the future.

I am surprised by the tenor of Ms McNeill's speech. I have visited the Wise Group, which had a great deal of support from the Labour Party in previous Administrations, and which does an excellent job helping ex-offenders and people who come out of prison. The organisation meets those who are in prison to try to ensure that they go straight into work when they are released. One of the main sources of work is the construction industry. Is Ms McNeill condemning the Wise Group?

As a nation, Scotland imprisons a particularly high proportion of our people by international standards. What is more, a third of all offenders coming into prison have alcohol problems, more than half have drugs problems and many have mental health problems. Imprisonment in Scotland has increased steadily over the past 10 years, and today's figures are at an all time high; yet, the paradox is that crime rates are falling. How can that be? We inherited an unfit prison estate. The Scottish Government is supporting huge investment in the prison estate with a commitment to build three new prisons and to provide an annual capital investment programme of £120 million. That is a record package of investment.

The prison at Addiewell is being built under a public-private partnership scheme that we inherited. The other prisons are being reviewed and will be financed in a variety of ways. We are pressing on with HMP Bishopbriggs, and with HMP Grampian to replace the unfit prisons in Peterhead and Aberdeen. The financing of those prisons will become clear in due course. Nevertheless, I can give a commitment to Lord Foulkes that HMP Grampian and HMP Bishopbriggs will be in the public sector, unlike the prison estate that the previous Administration oversaw. Building prisons is not the single answer to the challenge that we face. Prisons are costly to build and expensive to run, with each prisoner place costing the taxpayer approximately £40,000 a year. As the Government has said, there comes a time when we must look after our pensioners, not pander to prisoners. The Scottish Government came into office committed to delivering a modern and coherent penal policy that has at its core swift justice, payback, reparation and more effective management of offenders for whom prison is the right place.

Absolutely. Some aspects of that are operational matters for the police, but the issue has been raised with me by Lothian and Borders Police, which is more than happy to discuss it. Some issues fall within the remit of the SPS and others fall within the remit of the police. We must ensure that cell accommodation for convicted prisoners, remand prisoners and prisoners who are being detained pending an appearance at court is suitable and secure. It must serve the needs not just of our communities, but of those who have to work in it. I confirm that a response will be published before the end of the year. We want to consult on and discuss our plans and listen to what others have to say, and this debate on the report of the independent Scottish Prisons Commission gives us an opportunity to do just that. We want a policy that is born of discussion, consultation and, I hope, some consensus. For example, our discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities are already bearing fruit, as I have been able to agree with it joint key objectives for delivering a coherent penal policy. We have long held views about the current intolerable situation, in which prison numbers have continued to break all records almost daily to the point at which we now have more than 8,000 offenders in custody. However, we want to hear others' views. As a result, the Scottish Prisons Commission, chaired by Henry McLeish, was set up to take independent stock of the situation and to offer views on what Scotland's future criminal justice system might look like. The commission delivered. Within an extremely short timeframe, it produced a report that is receiving international recognition, and I am indebted to Henry McLeish and each and every member of his team. The report paints two very different scenarios. In the first, we have a broad and far-reaching spectrum with, at one end, prisons that are internationally recognised as models of excellence, housing only the serious and dangerous offenders who should be in jail and whom we need to jail to protect our communities. In such prisons, the staff have the time to work with offenders to address their behaviour and to reduce their risk to the public. At the other end of this spectrum—this is the vital part—there is a widely used and well-respected system of community penalties and payback. The other scenario that is painted in the report is entirely bleak and, as the commission has rightly  pointed out, in many respects shows where we are already heading. In that future, there will be more prisons that are just as overcrowded as those that we have today; offenders will still be caught in the reoffending cycle with no future but continued offending; and communities will be no safer and, indeed, will be much less optimistic. Moreover, we should not forget the schools and hospitals that will not be built because that money will have been spent on building more prisons and supporting the offenders locked up in them.

As Mr Brown well knows, we propose to establish a sentencing council so that we have guidelines for such matters. We have made it quite clear that sentencing is and has always been a matter for the judiciary. However, the statistics are quite clear. There are more than 8,000 people in prison, many of whom have mental health, alcohol or drug addiction problems. The Conservatives want to build more and more prisons until we are unable to build schools, houses and hospitals. We on this bench want to look after our pensioners through the cold winters, not pander to prisoners. We want to ensure that people pay back to their community the damage that they have done, not that they be given free bed and board and allowed to play pool. We do not underestimate the difficulties that we have inherited. Despite being in charge of this country for so many years and even with a diktat from London, the Conservatives failed to build an appropriate prison estate. As a result, we inherited a dire mess. A new prison costs about £100 million to build and, given that each prisoner costs the taxpayer about £40,000 a year, the cost of supporting a prison that is full the year round is therefore another £28 million. Those offenders should be paying back to the community, not being given free bed and board; they should contribute, not be a constant drain on the taxpayer. I am very surprised that a party that supports the so-called work ethic appears also to support people getting free bed and board and being allowed to play pool or sit around all day, instead of ensuring that they are outside, repairing the damage that they have done and making our communities better. The commission report offers two stark choices: we can stay as we are—I have outlined where that will get us—or we can face the challenge and choose the hard, but the only, way of tackling this problem. We cannot go on as we are. The policy that has been articulated particularly by the Tories, but also by some on the Labour benches, is to follow the example of the United States of  America. As a result of building prison after prison, the most powerful nation in the world now spends £49 billion on incarceration and locks up one in 100 people in the whole community, one in 50 men of working age, one in 16 young black men and something like one in 66 of their mothers. The current situation cannot continue: we must ensure that there are prisons for those who need to be detained because they represent a danger or have committed serious offences. Others should pay back and not be a continued drain on our society. I believe that an improved and flexible community penalties regime is the key, and that is what the Scottish Prisons Commission has said about payback. Six principles form the bedrock of a robust community penalties regime: immediacy, visibility, effectiveness, quality, flexibility and relevancy. It is reassuring that the commission's report shows that those principles are already being applied in many areas. We need to build on that work throughout the country to ensure that best practice is spread. The Scottish Prison Service tries to give offenders the life skills that they need to allow them to return to society better prepared, but it cannot do so if it continues to have to work with intolerable numbers and under intolerable pressures. What is the positive way to tackle reoffending? Reducing the number of people whom we imprison will free up valuable Scottish Prison Service resources so that those who have committed serious crimes, or those who present an unacceptably high risk to public safety, can be dealt with more efffectively. Something is fundamentally wrong if many of those who are detained in prison and who have to be in prison cannot do the hard work that the public expect of them because the Scottish Prison Service does not have enough resources. Some seem to think that it is wrong that prisoners should go out and do hard work, but the Government makes no apology for believing that those who have committed sins and crimes against our communities and who have been detained not only in the interests of public safety but because of the crimes that they have committed should be made to pay back for what they have done through hard work. The aim should also be to rehabilitate such people, but we make no apology for seeking to ensure that prisoners and those who serve community sentences repay our communities with the sweat of their brow.

I must make progress, as I am coming to the end of my time. We asked the Scottish Prisons Commission to consider the feasibility of implementing the measures in the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007 as a means of achieving our aim to end the current arbitrary system of automatic early release, which was introduced—let us not forget—by a Conservative Government in 1993. The commission concluded that, subject to certain modifications, the 2007 act can still provide the means to deliver a comprehensive system for managing offenders who have been sent to prison. We will seek to build and expand on that in due course. The commission recognised that intensive management, with the Scottish Prison Service and local authorities working together and those who are back in the population being monitored, helps to reduce risks. Therefore, we need to be innovative in how we deal with the vast majority of offenders who currently get short jail terms if we are to be able to deal properly with the most serious offenders. It is becoming increasingly evident that various organisations—in health, housing, education and employment—need to have much closer relationships to tackle the root causes of offending. Getting those relationships right is vital for Scotland. It is clear that some people will not be satisfied with all of the commission's report, but we ask people to consider it. We have inherited an appalling situation. The prison estate is unfit for the 21 st century, but we are taking action to address the problem. We have inherited a situation in which the numbers of people in prison are rising at a time when the crime rate is falling, which is a paradox. There is something wrong. We cannot build our way out—we cannot simply build more prisons. We are committed to building three new prisons, which we are doing; that puts to shame previous Administrations, which did not act with such alacrity and left us to take responsibility. We will do what we must do, and we give a challenge to members. If they are not prepared to support us on tough, meaningful community sentences—ensuring that people repay what they have done with the sweat of their brow and ending the free bed-and-board culture—they must tell us what they would cut. They must tell us which schools or hospitals they would not build or which other infrastructure projects they would not undertake, and why they would prefer to put the interests of prisoners before those of pensioners as we enter a cold winter and fuel poverty beckons for far too many pensioners.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth wrote to HM Treasury on 13 June this year on this matter. He asked for equality of treatment for Scottish police officers and firefighters in relation to meeting the costs of changes to pension commutation factors. He pointed out that Scotland should be provided with funding, as was the Home Office, to meet these costs without having to look for savings elsewhere. The Chief Secretary to the Treasury replied at the end of July refusing the request for equality of funding treatment.

It is regrettable that the Treasury has taken the attitude that it has. It is grossly unfair on our officers and we will continue to fight the case. The matter is complicated. It involves a variety of organisations and stakeholders, such as the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, police board conveners, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, and representatives from  organisations such as the Scottish Police Federation and the Fire Brigades Union. I can assure the member that discussions are going on at the present moment. This Government is committed to the three Rs—recruitment, retention and redeployment. We have embarked on the recruitment of 1,000 officers, and 150 were delivered before the end of the financial year. That is why we have not simply record recruitment to our police forces, but a record number of police officers. We will continue to support the attempts—especially in Strathclyde, but they are being replicated by chief constables elsewhere—to ensure that officers are appropriately redeployed from back-office facilities. I would be delighted to be advised by the Lord Advocate that our summary justice reforms—so maligned by some members in the chamber—are delivering substantial savings in police time. It is a complicated matter, but the Government is on the case. We stood up for our police officers over pay last year, and we will again ensure that the numbers of police and firefighters are maintained in our communities.

I acknowledge the attention that David Whitton has given to this issue on behalf of those who are involved, including his constituent. He has submitted previous questions and has engaged in correspondence on the matter. Mr Whitton will know from the inquiries he has already made that the association recently clarified its status by incorporating itself as a limited company and submitted a revised draft scheme in late June. I have now completed my consideration of the association's application and, as the process requires, I have passed my views to the Lord President. I will ensure that Mr Whitton continues to be kept informed as to progress and the outcome.

I cannot give a definite date, as it will depend on hearing back from the Lord President's office. I advise Mr Whitton—as I did in my initial answer—that we have submitted our position to the Lord President, who will have to consider matters. I am sure that he will do so expeditiously. I am advised that he is currently on holiday—doubtless taking a well-earned rest—but I am sure that he will deal with the matter promptly on his return.

The latest "Scottish Liquor Licensing Statistics" show that, in 2007, garages accounted for 184 licences, which is approximately 4 per cent of off-sales licences. The current licensing law places no restriction on filling stations applying for licences. However, Parliament's intention in the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 was clear: garages should not be allowed to sell alcohol unless they are the principal source of groceries in their areas. We are working hard with licensing boards and others to ensure the successful implementation of the act. I recognise that there has been some concern about boards' ability to deal with applications from garages as Parliament intended, and I have now made an order that will remove any lingering doubt on the matter. Garages are excluded premises under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which means that a licensing board can grant a garage a premises licence only if it serves a wider community need. The applicant must be able to demonstrate to the board that they are serving a wider community need by being the principal source of fuel or groceries in their area. It is for the licensing board to consider each case and decide whether to grant a premises licence.

Those are matters for individual licensing boards. Parliament's intention was to differentiate between the urban and rural environments. We are aware that, because of changes to post offices, libraries and other amenities, there are areas of Scotland where the garage performs a function that involves more than simply providing fuel. A licensing board may view the purpose of an individual outlet as being principally to serve food, including alcohol. I have to say, though, that I share the concerns of not only the member but many licensing boards. For example, the city of Edinburgh licensing board has refused applications for licences because there are numerous other such outlets in the area in which a licence was sought. Although we must tackle the scourge of drink driving, we must also ensure that in remote and rural areas of Scotland we provide the facility for licensing boards to use not only their discretion but their common sense.

I am not aware that those statistics are collated; if Mr Aitken has that information, I will be glad to consider it. In my experience that information is collected neither by the police nor by the procurator fiscal. The Government recognises that we have a problem with alcohol and its abuse in this country and that we have a problem with driving under the influence of alcohol. It is for those reasons that we are taking a variety of measures. We are aware, in our drive to tackle alcohol abuse, that the manner in which alcohol is displayed is important. Difficulties follow if there is irresponsible promotion and irresponsible pricing. There are good reasons why, in some areas, it would be irresponsible to have alcohol displayed where there are vehicles.

Police force custody management is entirely a matter for the police. I and other ministers meet regularly with police and stakeholders and discuss a range of issues.

I will be happy to raise the matter with the chief constable of Grampian Police when I next meet him. However, I reiterate that it is an operational matter for the police. We have a tripartite arrangement in policing, which involves police boards. It seems to me that, on this matter, the police board should be seeking to interact with the chief constable if it is felt that there are particular problems. Obviously, you can rest assured that it is the Government's intention that the amount of police time that is taken up by moving prisoners around should be minimised and that, therefore, we will support anything that can be done to ensure that our police are appropriately and adequately deployed.

I can only reiterate what I said to Mr Adam: the fact is that those are operational matters for the police. If the member asks for remand facilities to be built, we will ask him what part of the justice budget he wishes to be cut back, given the significant investment that the Government is making as a result of the fact that we inherited a prison estate that was not fit for purpose. We have, thankfully, taken the decision to commit to three new prisons. Having signed off Addiewell, we are now committing ourselves to a new prison in Bishopbriggs, which will, thankfully, be within the public sector—I am grateful for Mr Whitton's appreciation of that fact—and another prison in the north-east. We worry about police time being wasted in having to ferry people about but, as I said, we are talking principally about operational matters that are best dealt with by the chief constable or challenged by the police board if the situation is felt inappropriate.

We are committed to mobilising the resources of the justice system to deal with the perpetrators of domestic abuse quickly and to support their victims sensitively. On 23 June, the same day that we announced the expansion of the Glasgow domestic abuse court, we published a toolkit for local criminal justice boards and others across Scotland who are interested in developing innovative and effective responses to domestic abuse within the criminal justice system. It builds on best practice developed in Glasgow and experience elsewhere to give practitioners practical help on handling cases of domestic abuse. However, it also recognises that one model does not fit all situations and provides options equally applicable to our rural areas as to our cities.

Absolutely. As a Government, we recognise that domestic abuse is an all-Scotland problem—in not only urban but rural areas. Mr Allan is correct that there are additional issues with peripherality and a lack of population, and it is therefore appropriate to ensure that the identity of witnesses is not disclosed. We acknowledge that the needs of Glasgow are different from those of Lochmaddy, but I assure the member that we recognise that domestic abuse affects rural Scotland as much as it does urban Scotland. We have been delighted to expand the Glasgow court, and we are seeking to ensure that every area in Scotland is covered in tackling this dreadful problem.

This has been a wide-ranging and thoughtful debate, with some excellent contributions, in particular from Ian McKee, who brought home the fact that alcohol misuse raises health issues and is not simply a question of antisocial behaviour. Jackson Carlaw also made a thoughtful contribution. It did not necessarily support the Government line, but it indicated the complexity of the issue, and I welcome that.  At the outset, let me restate the Government's position, which was put by my colleague Shona Robison earlier. We are not anti-alcohol. As a Government and as a country, we are proud of our fine whiskies and brews and we recognise that the pub culture in Scotland is there to be enjoyed. Pubs have improved immeasurably over the years, and they are part of the social fabric of our communities, both large in urban areas and smaller in rural Scotland. We recognise the importance of alcohol and the fact that the problem is not alcohol itself but, sadly, how far too many Scots have abused it. Alcohol misuse is most certainly one of the major issues of our time. I do not think that the Government should have continually to restate the motion, but it is appropriate that we point out the problems. Mr Aitken may feel that we should have tough enforcement; we believe that we should have tough measures to address problems before they arise. Let me restate for Mr Aitken's benefit that 50 per cent of those who commit a murder or are murdered are under the influence of alcohol at the time. The true figure is probably greater than that as many assailants are not apprehended and bodies are not discovered until the alcohol is out of their system. More than 40 per cent of those in our prison system admit that they were under the influence of alcohol when they committed their offence. We do not need to bang people up for three days, three weeks or three months; we need to stop the availability of cheap alcohol. That will address many of the underlying problems. As well as ensuring that those who commit crimes are suitably punished, we must address the root problems. It is not simply a question of antisocial behaviour, as Ian McKee correctly pointed out. The problem will overrun our health service—indeed, it is already affecting it. Alcohol misuse is detrimental not simply on a Friday and Saturday night, when those who have suffered a heart attack or serious injury in a road traffic accident face accident and emergency departments that are awash with people who are drunk and incapable, but across the spectrum of the health service. That cannot go on without undermining the NHS that we cherish and which has delivered for our people for 60 years. It will not be able to function properly because it is drowning under the problems that are caused by the abuse of alcohol. As the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing notes in the foreword to the discussion document, alcohol misuse costs us more than £2 billion as a nation. It is affecting our ability to function as a viable economy in the modern world. As we face times of economic turbulence, we cannot have people who are unable to turn up for  their work on a regular basis because they have been abusing alcohol. From the perspective not simply of criminal justice but of health and the economy, we must tackle alcohol misuse. We must address several matters. Mary Scanlon was correct to say that we must be clear about the problem of alcohol and pregnancy. The chief medical officer's advice is that alcohol should be avoided by women who are pregnant or who are trying to conceive and the advice is the same throughout the UK. I say to Pauline McNeill that we propose to hold a youth summit, to which a commitment has been given. That will be part of the consultation process and will be held in early September.

I am grateful for that point. We will ensure that the message is consistent, but the guiding principle that we will follow must come from the CMO. As for reviewing the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, we must review it after it comes into force properly on 1 September 2009. To review it before then would be premature. However, we can monitor the situation, because measures are being introduced in the transitional stages. We have addressed alcohol not simply in today's debate; for example, it has taken up much of my day today. This morning, I met the parents of a young man who was under 18 and who was killed after drinking with his peer group. When stumbling home, he went on to railway tracks and tragically paid for his error with his life. He was a good young man who did not regularly abuse alcohol and he was not in trouble. Sadly, we can say that there but for the grace of God go many parents and many young lads. I also met Shetland's licensing board and Tavish Scott to discuss problems that are faced there. We recognise the importance in our communities, and particularly in our rural communities, of socialising and of the community hall. We will seek to work out the situation. That drives home to me the fact that we must achieve the right balance between preserving the village hall—whether it is in Yell, Unst or wherever—and stopping the tragic slaying of young men through the abuse of alcohol and the errors of their ways, which should not be wished on any young man or any parent. Let us be clear that we as a Government raised the issue and that some members do not like it. People say that the issue is the culture and that  education is needed. We do have to change Scotland's culture and tackle education, but we have said that since I was a boy and the situation is worse now than it was then. In the Sunday papers, Professor Devine made it clear that such matters are cyclical. We have gone through such a situation before—we can go back to the abuse of gin, which was known as mother's ruin. Governments before us have had to change taxation policy, fiscal policy and legislation, because we require to take steps to change the culture and deal with education. We accept that members might not welcome all our proposals, but I tell them that it is insufficient simply to say that we need a cultural change or education, because that has been said for generation after generation and the situation has become worse. We must address that. We are more than happy to ramp up the response to problems, but we must remember that we follow 18 years of Tory Government, 11 years of Labour Government down south and eight years of Labour-Liberal Executive rule north of the border. We seek to enforce the law strongly and strenuously and we will ensure proper resourcing. Before introducing new legislation, we will enforce the existing legislation. However, we must recognise that we must go above and beyond that. Particular problems relate to age. It is surprising that some people suggest an age of civic responsibility. Nobody suggests that we increase the age for sexual relationships or reduce the driving age—indeed, arguments to the contrary are made. Arguments have related to our soldiers who serve in Iraq. People go on about strict enforcement, which I support, and I have said on the record that I admire how the United States enforces laws against alcohol abuse. When 19-year-old men return from serving in the United States Marine Corps in Iraq—19 was the average age of a serviceman in the Vietnam war—they don't get no bottle of Bud in San Diego barracks, because the drinking age is 21. People cannot have it both ways. Market forces operate. I tried to get my son to drive when he was eligible to do so at 17. Could he drive my wife's car? No, because it had an 1800cc engine and market forces said that the driver of such a car had to be at least 21 and have a full licence. He has now obtained his licence, because I downgraded to a 1200cc car. Could he now go out at the age of 19 and buy a car with a 2.5 litre engine if he had the money, which he does not? The short answer is no, because market forces dictate otherwise. It is not simply a matter of Government regulation; there is an array of things that people can do only when they reach a certain age, such as 16 or 25. A person can get their driving licence at 17, but they cannot get a BMW  until they are 25—if they are lucky—and they had better not get any points on their licence, or they will be in trouble. Such problems exist. I want to be clear. Education and culture must change, but we have said that for generations. Now is the time for action. If members do not agree with each and every one of our proposals, that is fine, but they should tell us what they think should be done. It is no longer acceptable to do nothing.

I welcome Strathclyde joint police board's endorsement of Chief Constable Steve House's plans to increase the force establishment from 7,200 to 8,000 by 2011—an increase of 800 officers. I welcome Strathclyde joint police board's endorsement of the force's plans to recruit 864 officers this year. Across Scotland, that means that well over 1,500 officers will be recruited this financial year, which is the highest ever level of recruitment, and more than double the level we inherited from the previous Administration. I also welcome Strathclyde joint police board's announcement last week of an extra 600 dedicated community police officers recruited and deployed across the west of Scotland within one year. All that demonstrates that, despite inheriting the lowest recruitment levels since devolution, and record numbers of officers being eligible to retire, we are well on track to meet our commitment of 1,000 additional officers available in our communities.

First, I will clarify the points that my colleagues made from a sedentary position. Our record financial investment in local authorities as a result of the historic concordat has allowed Glasgow City Council to spend its money wisely and as it sees fit. We are glad that it has done it in that way. A lot of the matters relating to shift patterns are operational matters and are within the domain of the chief constable. They require to be discussed with representatives of all ranks, and in particular with representatives of the Scottish Police Federation. Ms Ferguson makes a valid point. We as a Government are committed to ensuring that we not only recruit an additional 1,000 new officers but seek to retain valuable experienced officers in our communities, which is what communities want. We are also committed to ensuring that we deploy officers appropriately and wisely. I am happy to do whatever is necessary to encourage and facilitate that. However, chief constables in Strathclyde and elsewhere are on the case. I am happy to work with them, but the issue that Ms Ferguson raises fundamentally is an operational matter.

It is sad that there has been no media presence during the debate, which has been excellent. The debate was opened by my colleague the Minister for Community Safety, and the tone and tenor that he set were followed in the main—notwithstanding Cathie Craigie's speech, which was, from the outset, rather begrudging and churlish. As Robert Brown said, we have heard a number of excellent speeches—not simply from members on the SNP benches, such as Christina McKelvie, Sandra White and Willie Coffey, but from others. Robert Brown was right to praise Hugh O'Donnell for the points that he made, and Bill Aitken gave a measured and temperate speech, perhaps somewhat belying the image that he is cultivating in some of our tabloid papers. His excellent remarks added to the debate. Bill Butler gave an excellent speech, with which I concur whole-heartedly. The Government makes no apology for reiterating that the overwhelming majority of our kids are good kids who are a credit  not simply to themselves but to their parents, their communities and Scotland. We should always remember that. However, a small minority of young people are difficult and dangerous. Some of them have a group of peers who hang around with them, and, as Bill Butler said, they can become a real nuisance to our communities. We must not forget or ignore those young people—we must challenge them. The Government makes no apology for stating that and continuing to ram home the message. I have said previously that Mr Martin has never knowingly praised a child in the chamber, but he—rather begrudgingly—also recognised that the majority of young people are a credit to themselves and their parents. I say to him that, if the Government has achieved nothing else, it has changed the tenor and tone of the debate on youth justice and child offending. Where are Hugh Henry and Johann Lamont when we need them to come along with some "hang 'em high" or "whip 'em" views? The fact that the debate has changed is fundamentally a good thing for Scotland. Bill Butler was correct to say that we cannot ignore bad behaviour. I say to Mr Martin that I accept that poverty is not an excuse for offending. It was not an excuse in past generations, when poverty was even more endemic than it currently is, and indeed when it was probably much harsher. The 1920s and other hungry and lean times spring to mind. Other countries that have far worse poverty do not have the level of offending or antisocial behaviour that we have. However, we cannot ignore the clear correlation between those who offend and those who come from areas of deprivation, or the correlation between those who have poor life chances and little hope or expectation of employment or gainful opportunities in society and those who get into crime. As Willie Coffey said, we must seek to tackle the three Ds of drink, drugs and deprivation. Contrary to what Mary Mulligan suggested, we were happy to support a great deal of the legislation that came from the previous Administration. We recognise that there is a role for ASBOs, and indeed for criminal antisocial behaviour orders, or CRASBOs. However, we live in a world of limited choices, and if we choose to put in £7 million to achieve 14 child ASBOs at a cost of £500,000 each, we do so at the expense of not being able to put more resources into youth football, youth rugby, the arts, including drama, and leisure. We must ensure that communities are not blighted. ASBOs have recently been used against several youngsters in Craigmillar in my constituency, and I support the authorities in doing that. However, we do not live in a world of infinite resources and we have to ensure that we get the  bang for our buck. An ASBO can cost £500,000, but perhaps a bit more street football would take some youngsters out of crime.

As I was saying, we were happy to support many of the measures that were introduced. It is the way in which those measures are used and where they are targeted that is the issue. That is why the tenor of the debate has changed, not the policy. Where we criticise the previous Administration—in particular, Labour members and their colleagues south of the border—is on its record on child poverty and early intervention. At the start of the millennium, we are the largest oil and gas producer in the European Union. Oil is $139 per barrel, so this country should be richer than ever; yet, under a Labour Government from 1997 to 2008, a fifth of children have been living in poverty. One in five Scottish children now lives in poverty—Labour members should hang their heads in shame. We recognise that, as Mr Butler correctly said, we must challenge bad behaviour. People must take responsibility for their behaviour. Society is fed up, and the Government is ramming home that message. It is not good enough for someone to say, "It wisnae me; it was the drink." Oh yes, it was them. It is not good enough for someone to say, "I don't have anything to do." They are free to make choices. We must challenge individuals about their behaviour. Equally, we must remember—although Tony Blair seemed to forget this—that responsibility is a two-way street. We must give respect and responsibility to our youngsters and ensure that all our communities—especially those that were marginalised, disenfranchised and impoverished by the previous Administration—are given opportunities.

I remind Ms McNeill of the outcomes of the concordat. I had an interesting and enjoyable meeting with Councillor Harry McGuigan, a Labour Party member from North Lanarkshire. We discussed matters and had a shared agenda. Whatever Ms McNeill may think, Labour councils and Labour councillors do not want to make Scotland a less safe or more lawless place; they seek to work with us to make our communities better, safer and stronger. Mr McGuigan is more than happy to continue to co-operate, as is Councillor Pat Watters. This is another instance of internal Labour Party grief that you should sort out yourselves. With regard to the points that were raised by Bill Aitken, we believe that the children's hearings system should be reviewed, and we have undertaken to do that. It has passed the test of time, but it is struggling to cope with the volume of cases because of changes in our society. We must, as Fergus Ewing and Robert Brown said, ensure that the system focuses on the cases that need to be dealt with, with others perhaps being addressed in different ways. We believe that the children's hearings system is secure but that it needs to be reviewed. On youth courts, we see Labour's obsession with laws. We supported youth courts in opposition and we support them in government but, as the old saying goes, there is more than one way to skin a cat. There are other ventures. Have Labour members been to West Lothian to see the system that operates there? Have they seen how the system that is based in Drylaw police station in Edinburgh is working out? We do not need the formal structure—the bricks and mortar of a court—and the expense that goes with it. By freeing up sheriffs' time and embedding a procurator fiscal in with the police, we can ensure that the same service is delivered. As a Government, we are about delivering outcomes, not about being seen to be doing something when we are not achieving anything. As I said at the outset, we are delighted to propose the strategy, and we have changed the tenor of the debate. It might not trip off Mr Martin's tongue, but we make no apology for saying that we believe that our kids are good kids. We will challenge the small minority who are out of control and ensure that they face punishment and make reparation to their communities for the harm that they have done. We are making Scotland safer and stronger. Whatever Labour members may think, this country is going forward and getting better.

Does the member accept that many parenting problems are addressed by moving towards parenting orders without formally issuing them? Parenting orders might not have been issued, but that does not mean that action has not been instigated through social work departments and other relevant authorities to ensure that appropriate steps are taken. Rather than judging the effectiveness of such orders by the number of them that have been issued, does he accept that we should be ascertaining whether there has been an improvement in the families concerned?

I am pleased to present to Parliament an update on the measures that the Government plans to bring forward to reform the way in which the legal profession conducts its business. The Scottish legal profession serves Scotland well and I was proud to be a member of it for 20 years. Our distinctive legal system forms one of the fundamental pillars of Scottish society and has helped to sustain our national identity for 300 years. Rightly, the Government will continue to support the strength and independence of the Scottish legal profession. I feel honoured and privileged to be in a position to help and to shape its future. Lawyers perform a vital role in society by helping people at times of crisis and when necessity arises. In an ever-changing world—one that is changing at a rapid pace—lawyers face greater challenges in protecting the vulnerable, upholding the criminal justice system and responding to economic growth. I firmly believe that we must give the Scottish legal profession the full credit that it deserves for the influence that it has had on other legal systems throughout the world; for its quality and reputation; and for the values and principles that continue to stand the profession in good stead—a reputation that it has had and still possesses. Now our major law firms compete internationally and want to think bigger and aim higher. For a small country, we have big ambitions—and rightly so. Alongside the exciting opportunities that introducing alternative business structures will bring, the profession faces many challenges. The big commercial firms face competition within the global market; the high street firms are finding it difficult to recruit and retain trainees; those who offer a broad range of legal services are in competition with those who specialise in high-value or high-volume work; and alternative providers and English firms are entering the market. Scottish solicitors are under increasing pressure to deliver a quality, competitive service. Scottish firms will continue to serve the communities in which they are based, both large and small, but some firms can compete internationally and globally. That is demonstrated by the success of our accounting and financial  services sector. There is no reason why legal services cannot do likewise. Our legal services must change to achieve that, and this Government is committed to helping them. The profession faces major technological changes in the next few years that will influence the business structures of the future. We may see access to the courts via videolinks, and the use of electronic pleading and customised online legal advice will increase. That will offer real benefits to the public, outweighing the challenge to the regulatory structure of the profession. A series of reforms is already under way in our criminal courts, and the review that is being undertaken by Lord Gill will herald fundamental changes in the civil courts. Together with the review of administrative justice that is being carried out by Lord Philip, those represent a co-ordinated review of the entire Scottish justice system. I am hugely encouraged that the profession has already begun to respond to the challenges that it faces. Following the Which? super-complaint last year, the Government's response to the Office of Fair Trading made it clear that change had to happen and was inevitable. The OFT's report argued that many of the current restrictions on business structures affecting the legal profession should be lifted. During the parliamentary debate in November, the Government made it clear that maintaining the status quo was not an option, and we asked the profession to take the lead in considering the way forward. I am delighted that the profession has risen to that challenge and I commend the leadership that the Law Society of Scotland and Faculty of Advocates have given to their respective members. The society and the faculty have consulted their members and produced policy papers outlining their vision for the future. The society's policy paper is a positive and forward-looking document and I am greatly encouraged by its commitment to reform. I completely agree that, rather than focusing on which business models are most appropriate, the way forward is to develop a robust system of regulation. I recently addressed the society's annual conference, which focused on the legal profession in the next five years. I am confident that when we look back in five years' time, the profession will have gone a long way towards meeting the challenges that it faces today. Likewise, the Faculty of Advocates has been focusing on the way forward. I very much welcome the fact that the faculty's strategic direction is broadly in line with what the Government said in responding to the OFT. The faculty set out a strong case for maintaining an independent referral bar but would remove restrictions such as  the mixed-doubles rule. I am fully aware that members expressed concerns during the debate in November that effective regulation was key to safeguarding consumers and the profession alike. This is not about Tesco law—a nomenclature that some have given it. It is about allowing the profession to grow and compete, while maintaining quality of service to the public and the core values of the profession that have served Scotland so well throughout the centuries. Access to justice will, similarly, remain a key focus. We have yet to iron out the detail of how we will tackle some of those thorny issues but we will continue to work together in the weeks and months ahead to devise solutions that are appropriate to the Scottish legal marketplace, Scotland as a nation and Scottish communities. I am delighted that, although there are differences of approach between the Law Society and the Faculty of Advocates, we have taken the first steps towards reform. The next step will be legislation. Although I cannot pre-empt any formal statement on the legislative programme, we will begin work to develop detailed proposals as soon as the parliamentary timetable allows. Although the profession may understandably be daunted by the challenges to come over the next few years—indeed, I acknowledge the concerns that many legal professionals have—reform will have huge benefits for it and the public that it serves in Scotland. There may be difficulties for some but, as we have said in previous debates, maintaining the status quo is not possible and was never an option. The profession must evolve as Scotland has evolved; we, as a Parliament and Government, have a duty to support it in that evolution. Change is necessary to allow the legal profession to continue to thrive and advance. We must ensure that it continues to serve us well and to offer a high level of service to the public. I give my personal commitment to supporting the profession now and in the future. This is not about Tesco law; it is about bringing the legal profession into the 21 st century to allow it to continue to serve our people as it has done down the centuries.

I can give Pauline McNeill that assurance. To an extent, we are building on what the previous Administration and Executive set in train. I cannot predict what the previous Administration would have done, but I tend to think that matters have been progressed according to what is best for the Scottish legal profession and Scottish society, rather than according to party-political dogma. That is as it should be. I am grateful for the spirit in which Pauline McNeill asked her questions. I give her the  assurance that change will be based on what is good for the Scottish legal profession, good for the Scottish consumer and good for Scotland as a community, on which I will expand. We will consider what is happening in England and Wales, but we are not prepared to await outcomes there. We think that change has to occur. There is possibly some advantage for Scotland if we can move quicker, turn faster and allow those of our firms that wish to compete on pan-UK, pan-European and global levels the opportunity to do so. We will therefore press ahead. We accepted that the OFT had made its decision. We were never going to act like King Canute—we recognised that change had to come. We accept Pauline McNeill's stricture that any changes must be good for our consumers, our lawyers and our society. We are proceeding on that basis. A balance must be struck between choice and regulation. It is clear that unrestricted choice can sometimes undermine the consumer's interests and rights. It is a matter of balancing where we must regulate and what we must do. We are extremely grateful for the progress that has been made by the Law Society of Scotland in particular and by the Faculty of Advocates. The legal profession must evolve. It is difficult to predict what the profession will be like in 10 years, as opposed to five years. We need a framework that will allow the Law Society to evolve, subject to changes in our society, in a way that ensures that the profession is an integral part of our society, that regulation is in place to protect the consumer and that choices are available to the consumer. The Government recognises the importance both of the consumer and of our communities. There might be instances when the rights of the consumer could undermine the importance of communities, and we must deal with them. Pauline McNeill understandably highlights the potential pitfalls. We wish to create a framework that will allow us to initiate change but which will let the profession move at a pace that will allow it to implement that change in due course. It is difficult to know what the world will be like for legal services in 10 or 15 years, given the nature of the internet and a whole variety of factors. That brings me back to the beginning: the status quo is not an option. We have to change in a manner that suits the Scottish legal profession and serves the interests of Scottish consumers and Scottish communities. We need a framework that will allow us to implement change over the coming years as things develop. As Pauline McNeill correctly indicated, we should keep an eye out for pitfalls on the horizon and seek to avoid them.

As I said to Pauline McNeill, we hope to proceed on a non-partisan and non-party-political basis. We are talking about what is good for the legal profession and for our communities. I was a member of the legal profession, as were some Labour members and some Conservative members—indeed, some members are still practising lawyers—and I want us to proceed together, which is the best basis for change. Bill Aitken is right that change is to be made on a voluntary basis. Given what the OFT said and the situation that our country faces, we as a Government made it clear that we thought that change was inevitable. We wanted the professions to reach that conclusion and we made it clear that we would allow them to proceed at a pace and in a manner that they thought was appropriate. Accordingly, the stricture that we laid down was that the status quo was not a tenable option. We said that there would have to be change, but that we were happy to have discussions within that framework. We will discuss with the profession where we go from here. As I said to Ms McNeill, I do not think that we can be too prescriptive at the moment. We have acknowledged that the status quo is not tenable. We have made it clear that Tesco law is not on the agenda, given the nature of Scottish demographics and society. However, we want to flesh out with the Faculty of Advocates and the legal profession as a whole a framework that will  allow them to begin to make the necessary changes. As Pauline McNeill said, we have to proceed with caution. Although there are advantages ahead, there are also dangerous pitfalls that we have to avoid. Therefore, we have to allow the legal profession to intimate its view of the alternative business structures, so that we as a Government can flesh out proposals to provide a framework that we hope the Parliament will support. It is not for the Government to be too prescriptive. It is for everyone—the legal professions in particular—to say where they want to go. It is for us to ensure that, within that range, we not only provide protection for the profession—as a lawyer, I know that there is always a danger of special pleading—but balance the interests of the profession with the interests of our communities. I say to Mr Aitken, who is convener of the Justice Committee, that we will be more than delighted to discuss those matters with the committee fully and frankly and to ensure that we take all sections of our society with us.

I thank Margaret Smith for her contribution and the tenor of it. We are more than happy to work with all parties in the chamber. She raises two valid points: one on the question of regulation; and the other on the guarantee fund. It is clear that there has to be regulation. However, we have to try to reach a balance. We will discuss with the legal profession and other professional bodies the best form of regulation if alternative business structures that involve more than one professional body operate. We in the Government are prepared to be fairly pragmatic about those matters and to discuss them with professional bodies to ensure that we do not have a superfluity of bodies and unnecessary regulation and to deal with regulation in the best way. We will have to discuss such issues with the Law Society and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland. Equally, chartered accountants will have to discuss those matters with lawyers. However, at the end of the day, we will get there. We must discuss the guarantee fund with professional bodies. That is the subject of debate and difficulties as it is, so members can rest assured that the status quo is untenable. I return to the point that Ms McNeill made: we must take account of the fact that the guarantee fund protects the consumer—that is something that we, too, must always do. Such matters are difficult and technical. They must be discussed not just with the Law Society and the faculty, but with other professional bodies. Once we put our minds together and recognise where we want to go, what we need to do and what we need to preserve, we will get there. On regulation and the guarantee fund, I return to what we said to the profession at the outset. We will ask the profession to work out the system, but if it cannot, we will not hesitate to legislate to enforce a solution. As the Law Society and the faculty have done, I hope that ICAS, the Law Society and other professional bodies can reach an agreement, but if they cannot, I have no doubt that we will sort something out in committee or on the floor of the chamber.

I assure Mr Wilson that we will consult as widely as possible. It is clear that the Consumers Association has an interest. A cause of angst to others is that a consumer representative is part of Lord Gill's review of the civil courts but, as I frequently point out, my predecessor initiated that review. As soon as I start naming bodies, I will by implication leave somebody out. However, I give the assurance that we will involve not simply those who have an interest in the legal profession and who are lawyers, but consumer representatives. As I have said, we are concerned not only about consumers, but about communities, so we will discuss the proposals with all parties and with local government—Cabinet members and I were emphasising the concordat's benefits this morning.

I have been to numerous meetings, including those with the Law Society, that Which? representatives have attended. Which? made the super-complaint, the OFT said what had to be done and the change will be made. As I have said, we are at the stage when the involvement of consumer and community organisations has growing relevance, because we are coming to specifics. Between November and now, we have dealt with whether change had to occur. As we said in November, the status quo is untenable and change must happen. The Law Society now supports what the consumer organisations asked for. We now require to sort out what that change means. That involves the tricky details, which I have no doubt that Mr Martin and others will pore over in the papers, in documents that are provided or at committee meetings at which I appear.

That is a possibility, but an alternative view is put forward by some in the legal profession who support alternative business structures. I do not know. There are difficulties that relate to small shops and legal and other professional bodies in small communities in Scotland, because of changing demographics and technology. It has been suggested in some communities that if a professional firm—a lawyer's firm or a surveyor's firm—is in danger of going to the wall, it could share back-office functions, amalgamate and do whatever is necessary, using whatever new structures are created, which might allow it to remain in business. Time will tell whether such things will happen, but there is an argument that some such firms could be maintained by taking the opportunity to share back-office functions and work together. That is why we have to say that there must be change to allow the big firms to progress. It will be up to individual legal firms whether they wish to co-operate with surveyors or accountants. The Law Society used to refuse to allow legal firms to operate with estate agencies, which precluded some sensible co-operation on back-office arrangements. Frankly, that stricture did neither legal firms nor estate agencies any public good.

It seems that Cathie Craigie is arguing the opposite to Mr Martin. He wanted me to consult Which? and she wants me to provide specifics. It has become clear that the Law Society and the faculty have accepted that there has to be—and will be—change. With regard to regulation, matters are extremely complex, and they will be worked out with the professions. We have the caveat—it was in place many months ago—that if they do not come to a conclusion that is acceptable to us and to other bodies, we will implement change. However, I hope that we can get all parties to come to the table and recognise that there are advantages not simply for the Faculty of Advocates and the Law Society, but for other parties such as ICAS and surveyors. The regulatory system, which Mr Aitken, I think, touched on, is a significant matter and we have to ensure that we get the balance right. For example, are there ways in which matters can be dealt with through joint arrangements? Those things have to be sorted out. We must acknowledge that there needs to be change, and we are grateful to the profession, including the faculty, for acknowledging that. We can now go forward and we will examine what comes out. As a Government, we would much prefer that the bodies involved work out what they think is suitable. If the outcome is acceptable to others, such as consumers and others who are lobbying us, it will be, in all likelihood, acceptable to us. If they cannot work that out, we reserve the right to legislate. However, they have got to this stage, and we should pay tribute to them for delivering and help them to drive forward.

I have to say that I have difficulty in understanding what the member perceives to be barriers. If he is thinking of membership by those who are not lawyers, we have one application pending but few others are arising. We are looking to create a legal system that is good for Scotland in the 21 st century. If there are barriers, we will seek to work within the system to change it.  I am more than happy to speak to Mr Lamont outside the chamber to try to clarify the matter. I have some difficulty in understanding his point, but we can discuss it elsewhere.

Absolutely. Tangential to what we are discussing, it has been made clear through the serious organised crime task force that I set up that aspects of our civil society are interfered with by those who are involved in serious and organised crime. Lawyers and accountants have a role in tackling that, and we must ensure that we have the regulations and the civil and criminal laws that we need to target such crime and take appropriate action when required.

Statistics on persons charged by the police are not collected centrally. Our data indicate that, in the past three years, two persons have been prosecuted in Scottish courts where the main offence related to the use of illegal snaring practices: one person in 2004-05 and one in 2005-06. We are taking action to strengthen wildlife crime enforcement. We have ensured the operations of the national wildlife crime unit in North Berwick with new funding and will discuss specific Scottish objectives with the unit. We are also providing more than £200,000 of new funding for wildlife crime enforcement projects through the partnership for action against wildlife crime.

There are two matters in Peter Peacock's questions: prevention and prosecution. On prosecution, we have set up the  specialist wildlife crime unit, which we are delighted to have done. Also, there is a great deal more specialism within the Crown Office, which helps to ensure that people who are brought to book are held to account for their actions. We must work with all parties that share an interest in prevention, in particular those who are involved in estates and game hunting. As Peter Peacock said, protection of wildlife is important to our people. We must ensure that, where snaring is used, it is used appropriately and within the law, but we must also ensure that people who have a legitimate reason for snaring are protected. Apart from a small minority, whom we must target, everyone seeks to be on the same side. The best we can do is co-operate, whether that means the Crown and the police co-operating on expertise, or the Government and bodies in the rural sector that have a shared interest in ensuring that the wildlife in Scotland is properly protected—not only for our citizens but for those who come from abroad to see it—co-operate.

I will be happy to advise Christine Grahame in writing. Money has been allocated and those matters are being addressed. We have one officer, whom we see frequently. This is not simply about policing—it is also about prosecution. I am more than happy to write to Christine Grahame to detail what action is under way, what action is due to commence and what the timelines are.

The Scottish Government provides substantial resources to a range of public bodies to enable them to enforce environmental legislation, including the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, local authorities and Scottish Natural Heritage. To support the fight against wildlife crime, we are also giving new funding of over £200,000 to the partnership for action against wildlife crime, and £50,000 to the national wildlife crime unit.

I am more than happy to undertake to do that. In my answer to Peter Peacock's question, I acknowledged that we require to prevent, as well as to prosecute, wildlife crime. We require to work with all those who have an interest in ensuring that our wildlife is protected. Sarah Boyack was correct to mention the SSPCA, but other bodies are involved, too. It is a question of acknowledging that we are all on the same side. There are specific roles and tasks for statutory bodies, the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. On behalf of the justice department, and, indeed, the entire Government, I am more than happy to undertake to work collectively with others—as the member would expect, given that we are dealing consensually with such matters in the chamber—to ensure that we do what is necessary to protect our wildlife and to prosecute if need be.

Our manifesto commitment was to recruit an additional 1,000 officers over the lifetime of this Parliament. That is what we said we would deliver and that is what we will deliver. We have always been clear that this is not simply about a head count but about building policing capacity in Scotland's communities through increased recruitment, improved opportunities for retention, and redeployment of officers to support operational policing. We are already seeing real progress towards that. Record levels of recruits are due to be trained at Tulliallan this year—twice the number who were trained in the last year of the previous Administration. The Strathclyde joint police board has approved Chief Constable Steve House's plans to increase its force establishment by 800 from 7,200 to 8,000 by 2011, putting more officers on the streets of Scotland's communities. Our summary justice reforms, which began to take effect in March this year, will bring real benefits to the police in terms of efficient use of officer time. We are working with chief constables, police board conveners and other stakeholders to ensure that Scotland's communities have a clear understanding of the levels of policing that they have a right to expect, how that is being delivered and how their views are being taken into account.

I remind Parliament that this Government inherited the lowest level of recruitment of police officers since devolution. We also faced the highest level of retirements because of demographics. However, thankfully, this Government is delivering an additional 1,000 officers through the three Rs—recruitment, retention and redeployment—which makes our communities safer and contrasts favourably with the Labour party's zero proposal to recruit nobody, which left us with the lowest level of recruitment since devolution. That is why Mr Martin should welcome not only the actions of this Government but the actions of his chief constable.

I may need to adopt the position of the previous Administration by reminding members and the general public that automatic early release was brought in under legislation that was introduced by the Tory Government. As on a variety of other matters that we have inherited, on prisons we can be thankful for the Government's commitments. We are committed to building three new prisons, including what will be called HMP Grampian, as we announced yesterday, whereas not one new prison was built in 18 years of Tory rule, despite Mr Aitken's desire to see such prisons being replicated the length and breadth of the country. The fact is that the McLeish commission is on the case and is examining unconditional automatic early release. When the commission's report is published at the beginning of July, Mr Aitken should welcome it as he did when he attended the reception that was held at Bute House last night for the members of the commission.

The implementation of "Galas and Events Affecting Public Roads—Guidance to Organisers" is a matter for the appropriate road authority to consider, in discussion with the police and the event organisers, while using its discretion on the level of any associated costs. The Scottish Government will launch a consultation later this month to assess the implementation of the new rules and processes for marches and parades, which were introduced by the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006.

The member is aware that the 2006 act was passed under the previous Administration, although we supported its ethos. Although in many instances it is for local authorities to decide such matters based on advice from the local police, all members of Parliament, whether they were in Government or in Opposition, intended that there should be an attempt to differentiate between galas and community events, which must be supported, and events that bring with them much paraphernalia and many problems. We can give no guarantee, because many of the matters to which Jamie McGrigor referred are in the domain of local authorities and the police, who must act and charge as they see fit, as per the legislation. However, we are considering how to improve the situation. We supported the 2006 act, because matters that are of great concern to communities in Scotland must be tackled, but we must ensure that we do not damage events that are of great benefit to communities.

As many have said, the debate has been wide-ranging. Some contributions have been  truncated because of the time restrictions and I believe that I speak for everyone when I say that that is a matter for regret. My colleague Fergus Ewing would have made many more points but he was constrained by the lack of time, which might also apply to me. We welcome the spirit in which all parties have come to the debate and the general welcome for "The Road to Recovery". We also accept that the drugs problem is not only affecting us now, but has done so for almost a generation. We have sought to deal with the issue by consensus, as did previous Administrations, which is as it should be. As members said, it is not a problem for western democracies alone. Probably every country in the global economy faces difficulties with the international drugs trade and the problems that go with it. We must also recognise that larger and wealthier countries that have more resources for criminal justice, such as the United States of America, have significantly greater problems. That is why we must take a people-centred approach at the same time as taking account of our communities, as Cathy Jamieson said. We need that flexibility. As several speakers said, as well as ensuring that we rigorously enforce penalties for supplying drugs, we must tackle demand.

We need have no worries about full co-operation. Scotland is very well served by the SCDEA, as Pauline McNeill and others mentioned. We work closely with the Serious Organised Crime Agency, which is responsible for monitoring, and we are close to HM Revenue and Customs and the serious and organised crime task force, much of which relates to the drugs trade, but which also seeks to address other areas of crime. The member can rest assured that all those bodies represent us, even those that are based in the UK. Whether it be HMRC, SOCA, the SCDEA or the Scottish police, we are all on the same side. I also assure the member that we are working with Europol because we recognise that we have to work and co-operate not only with our closest neighbour and jurisdiction south of the border, but with countries elsewhere, whether Columbia, Spain, or the Balkans. We are well served by those organisations. Whether the matter is reserved to the UK or is one for the Scottish police, there is common cause across the criminal justice agencies, as there should be in the chamber. That brings me to prisons. The Tories are right to raise the issue and I look forward to meeting  Annabel Goldie tomorrow, and Bill Aitken, if he accompanies her. Something is clearly wrong. It is not something that is being done deliberately, but there are problems. Annabel Goldie correctly said that we must learn from others, and if it is a lesson from the jurisdiction of the liberty bell—the irony of that—we will be happy to accept it. There are differences and difficulties in respect of how the prison system in the United States is structured and the separation that exists there between short-term prisoners—what we might call bail prisoners—and those on remand, and those who are in for long periods of time. There is also a difference in the United States between federal and state penitentiaries, but the ethos that is being put forward by the Conservatives is correct. Something is wrong and we must tackle the problem. We must assist and support the Scottish Prison Service to try to ensure that those who go to prison do not end up with an addiction, and that prisoners who are seeking to break the cycle of crime by addressing the issues that are causing it have that opportunity. I hope to work with the SPS and we will make every effort to ensure that it is represented at tomorrow's meeting so that it can comment on Pennsylvania, in addition to offering its views on how to tackle the problem. Members have raised issues about the SCDEA, which is obviously close to my heart as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. Members can rest assured that we have written to the UK authorities to ensure that the powers on recovering the proceeds of crime are strengthened and deepened. We have made it clear as a Government that those who are involved in a lifetime of offending should face a lifetime of recovery of their assets. We have asked those responsible south of the border to broaden the approach and to reduce the threshold because, if we are to target not only the Mr Bigs but the street dealers, which is essential if we are to drive home in our communities the message that people should not aspire to be drug dealers, we must take the assets of the person in the housing scheme as well as those of the person who resides in a lush housing estate off the backs of other people. We seek to learn from Ireland. Assistant Chief Constable John Malcolm was recently at a conference in Ireland and we will learn lessons, whether it is from the Garda Síochána or the Police Service of Northern Ireland. We should look at their methods of recovering the proceeds of crime. I assure Bill Aitken that I will keep both him and the Parliament advised of how we hope to drive the matter forward. The points that Richard Simpson raised about methadone are correct. We believe that it is a matter for clinicians and we will not give any strictures that people have to have a timetable or time limit. Margaret Smith also raised that issue.  The matter is very complicated. We are, as a nation, in a mess on methadone. Nobody ever set out to create a situation in which people are parked on methadone—with all the consequences of that for not only them, but their families and their communities—but that situation has arisen. We must try to get people off methadone, but it is not a matter of seeking to reduce the number of those people overnight. We must work individually with them and take the best possible advice, which we will seek to do. On indicators or targets, we are giving Parliament a clear indication that we believe that indicators are necessary. That is the whole ethos of the new relationships that the Government is forming through the concordat. Tackling drugs must be dealt with consensually not only across the chamber and in other political forums, but with all the agencies that are involved.

Health services, social work and the police all have a role. We must work with each of those agencies to find out what the best indicators are to ensure, as Margo MacDonald said, that public funds are accounted for and that we make the best use of them. That is why the Minister for Community Safety has asked Audit Scotland to examine the expenditure. We cannot throw money at the issue; we must ensure that the money that we put into tackling the scourge of drugs is used effectively. We are setting out on this new strategy and we welcome the consensus. It would have taken the wisdom of Solomon to guarantee that the strategy is a surefire solution. Some things that we do might not necessarily work as effectively as we would intend and we will have to learn lessons from that, but we will have more success with other actions. When new matters arise, such as the issue raised by the Tories about tackling the drug problem in prisons, members can rest assured that we will tackle them. We take on board the points made by many members—in particular Cathy Jamieson and Duncan McNeil—that problems exist not only for individual adults but for their children who are affected. We owe it to them to build on the consensus, to tackle the drugs problem and to make this a better country.

Tackling the deep-seated culture of violence that blights too many housing estates across Scotland will take time, but we are making good progress. Our on-going anti-violence campaign continues to focus police efforts on weapon carrying and alcohol misuse, and the initiative that I recently announced to tackle gang violence will work intensively with over 500 young men across Scotland. That is supported by our £7 million investment so far through the cashback scheme, which will provide young people from those communities with more positive opportunities and will complement the good work that is being delivered locally to make our communities safer and stronger.

John Wilson may take that as read. Our police will enforce the law. Violent behaviour is unacceptable, whether it is perpetrated in Scotland or in other jurisdictions, and we have to ensure that it is punished. We also have to build on the measures that my predecessor quite correctly commenced: we have to tackle the roots of the culture of alcohol and violence. That culture has to be broken.

Full details of the proposed prison development programme and sources of funding are available in the Scottish Government's infrastructure investment plan 2008. The Scottish Prison Service is taking forward plans to open three new prisons. HM Prison Bishopbriggs and HMP Grampian will be funded from the SPS capital budget. HMP Addiewell will be funded from the SPS resource budget.

I will put on record that the Government took the decision to stop HM Prison Bishopbriggs—which Mr Henry referred to as Low Moss—going down the privatisation road that was favoured by Mr Henry and his colleagues. Had we signed off the prison as a private institution, Scotland would have become the country with the largest percentage of prisoners in private prisons in the world, which would have been shameful.  We had to sign off HMP Addiewell because of the contract that the previous Administration had signed. As with so many other projects, a prison that could have been built for between £100 million and £200 million by standard procurement methods will, as Professor Pollock, Professor Coyle and others have testified, cost the Scottish taxpayer in excess of £1 billion. That money, which could have been used to tackle heroin addiction, will be used to lock up 700 people. Once again, the previous Administration has privatised a public asset, mortgaged our children's future and left our communities and taxpayers to pay the price. The shameful aspect of the matter is that it did so not only with prisons but with schools, hospitals and other fundamental public services.

There has been only one application for rights to conduct litigation and rights of audience made under section 25 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. That application is still in the process of being considered.

Those matters are moving apace. For example, arrangements are being made for Scottish Government officials to meet the ACA. The fact is that the subordinate legislation that introduced the procedures under the 1990 act was passed only on 1 March 2007. Under that legislation, the Lord President is required to consider any such scheme in its entirety and Scottish ministers are required not only to consider such schemes in consultation with the director general of fair trading, because of their various consequences, but to consult the Lord President. I do not have any knowledge of the nature of the relationship between the Lord President's Office and ACA representatives. However, I believe that we have a timescale that will allow us to bring the matter to a conclusion relatively quickly one way or the other. As I said, my officials have dates—later this month, I understand—for meeting the ACA. I do not preclude meeting representatives of that organisation if no conclusion is reached, but we should initially allow the procedure that is set out in the legislation to take its course.

I have no idea about any meeting with a drinks manufacturer that might or might not have taken place. Mr Whitton obviously has better knowledge of my diary than I have, which is something that I will have to consider. I am gobsmacked by his claim. The procedure in question was introduced through subordinate legislation that was passed on 1 March 2007. Mr Whitton might have been too busy concentrating on my diary to notice that the previous Scottish Executive was in power at that time. It set down clear criteria: the Lord President has to consider the schemes and Scottish ministers have to consult a variety of individuals, including the director general of fair trading. As I said in response to Margo MacDonald, I do not  preclude meeting the ACA. However, we should initially follow the procedure that Mr Whitton's predecessors brought in and ensure that there is due process. If we are going to use the method, we need to get it right and include all parties. I also remind Mr Whitton of a date in my diary that he does not seem to know about: the meeting later this month between my officials and the ACA. Instead of concentrating on meetings that have not taken place, the member should perhaps concentrate on those that will happen.

The Scottish Government has for many years encouraged and supported community safety partnerships to develop an evidence-based problem-solving approach. We continue to support local partnerships in several ways, which include funding two posts at the Scottish Police College at Tulliallan to train police and local authority staff in analysis and problem solving. The Government's national community safety co-ordinator also provides on request consultancy support to partnerships on issues such as problem solving.

I am happy to consider that suggestion. We in Scotland recognise that we need to do what is appropriate for our communities, which is often not what is done in other jurisdictions. Equally, we recognise that what is done in Scotland must vary according to area—the needs of Gairloch are vastly different from those of the city of Glasgow, for example. We are well served by our police, by our other emergency services and by others who are involved in making Scotland safer and stronger. It is important that we as a Government and as a community say thank you for that. If we need to go beyond what we have done to pay tribute to them, I am more than happy to consider that.

I welcome members' contributions and the tenor of the debate, which is perhaps understandable, given that the genesis of the bill was under the previous Executive. It was treated as non-partisan by the Scottish National Party and others, and that approach has continued through the change in Administration following the election in 2007. Individual members have raised legitimate points on a variety of matters, including judicial independence, the Scottish Court Service, the Scottish Land Court, the Judicial Appointments Board and mandatory training. I will attempt to deal with as many as possible. I am grateful that, like me, Bill Aitken and Pauline McNeill put on record the fact that we are well served by our judiciary and have been throughout the centuries. I have always made it clear that, as a nationalist party, we are grateful that the judiciary was one basis on which Scottish national identity was maintained over 300 years. However, irrespective of where one stands on the constitution, it is accepted that the judiciary has served our communities well. It will continue to serve us well, and the bill seeks to build on that excellent service. We are seeking today to enshrine in law the common-law principles that were mentioned by Pauline McNeill. The independence of the judiciary is fundamental to any democracy. I have been noted for condemning American foreign policy lately, but the US constitution serves as a model for many. Certain aspects—its treatment of gender, slavery and race—show that it was written in the ethos of its time, but the idea of the separation of powers, which was enunciated initially by the likes of Thomas Paine and contributed to by many of the founding fathers of Scottish descent, has served both the United States of America and other democracies. There has to be an executive arm, a legislative arm and an independent judiciary. That is what the bill will enshrine.  There have been good wishes and support for the general ethos and principles of the bill, but I acknowledge that there are legitimate concerns. I can put one concern to bed at the outset. Pauline McNeill mentioned the accountability and compellability of the chief executive. Section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998 enables the Parliament to require any person to attend its proceedings for the purpose of giving evidence. We can be clear that accountable officers would attend a committee. I am sure that they would never consider not attending but, if there were difficulties, they could be required to attend. One concern has been on the resourcing of the Scottish Court Service and whether it should remain under the auspices of ministers or, as is proposed in the bill, it should be dealt with under the aegis of the Lord President as part of an independent judiciary. Both Pauline McNeill and James Kelly commented on the issues. The Scottish Court Service is conducting a consultation on district courts, and no decision has yet been made on courts either in Rutherglen or elsewhere. Furthermore, even with the changes that are proposed in the bill, any court closure would require parliamentary consent to an order promoted by the Lord President. Parliamentarians would have the opportunity to oppose such an order. The decision would be made by a body standing in a different arm of the tripartite relationship in our democracy, but the Parliament could deal with the matter. There appear to be two particular matters to address. First, there is opposition in principle to the transfer of the Scottish Court Service to the independent judiciary—that appears to be Mr Martin's position. Secondly, there is the question of resourcing, which has been raised by the committee convener Mr Aitken, Ms Smith and Mr Lamont. We are carrying out a review of resourcing. There is a draft of Mr Osler's remit, which is to reach an independent view on the extent to which new functions that the bill proposes for the judiciary will require additional time commitments. We are more than happy to share the outline of that with the committee to ensure that justice is seen to be done as well as done.

There is a lot of merit and logic in that. My view has always been that it is best to discuss a remit with the person to whom one is ultimately giving it, because they will have  their own views, but I am happy to make Bill Aitken's point clear to Mr Osler. If we can satisfy the objection on resources, it comes down to the point of principle. Our view is that the transfer of the Scottish Court Service is appropriate. If we are to have a tripartite system with an independent judiciary, logic dictates that those who serve and work under it should be under its remit and responsibility. There are aspects in which the system will have to interact—Ms McNeill made points about that—and it must always be allowed to develop. There will be matters on which parliamentarians—whether on the Justice Committee, individually or through any office that they hold—will wish to interact with it. However, if we can satisfy the legitimate concerns regarding resourcing, it is best that the independent judiciary for which we strive should have control over the court service for which it has responsibility. Logic dictates that it should be so. If we do not provide for that, there will be a fundamental illogicality and we will, to some extent, undermine the ethos of what we are trying to deliver, which is an independent judiciary to serve us well. There is equally the question of training. Members have raised matters that cause a great deal of concern. First, I must reiterate and point out that all members have accepted that our judiciary has served us well without a requirement for mandatory training. However, the system and other matters have moved on. There has been a significant change in attitudes. There are younger members of the judiciary and there has been a change in terms of women and ethnic minorities. We must reflect those facts. As with the principle of where the Scottish Court Service should stand, we must realise that it would be illogical for us to say that we are creating an independent judiciary because we recognise that it is fundamentally important in a democracy but that we, as one arm of the trident of that democracy, reserve the right to tell it what it can do. Secondly, when the Lord President gave evidence at the Justice Committee, he accepted the need for training. He went as far as possible in saying that, although it would not be mandatory, it would be expected. He will have significant powers in that regard. Already, under the Judicial Studies Committee, sheriffs are undertaking a variety of types of training, not simply to ensure that they are up to date with and apprised of all the new laws that Mr Butler and others apparently wish we were spewing out as they were spewed out in the previous parliamentary session, when they all complained that so many bills were coming through that they could not keep pace. The training not only ensures that sheriffs understand the law and are able to implement it to  the benefit of our communities but takes in other matters, such as understanding child psychology or understanding evidence and how witnesses behave. All those matters are accepted and recognised. We welcome the debate. We have taken on board points that have been made and will reflect on others. If members have raised issues that I have not addressed today, I will be happy to touch on them. However, I reiterate that it is important to declare the judiciary's independence. To refuse to transfer the Scottish Court Service to its control would undermine that independence and would be illogical. Equally, to impose mandatory training on it would undermine the logic of creating an independent judiciary because it has served us well. We are enshrining their independence to ensure it, and the judiciary will continue to serve our communities well for centuries to come.

I begin by acknowledging the considerable work of the Justice Committee, and of the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee, in preparing the stage 1 report on the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill. I also thank the Lord President, his judicial colleagues and the individuals and organisations who gave oral and written evidence. I do not underestimate the work involved in preparing such evidence, and I am sure that all members will wish to acknowledge that contribution. I am also grateful to the members of the judiciary and others who worked with my officials in the lead-up to the bill's introduction, to ensure that it offered a comprehensive and measured package of reform. The Justice Committee's stage 1 report is considered and balanced. I am grateful to the committee for its detailed and careful attention to the issues, for the constructive tone of the report and for the committee's agreement to the general principles of the bill. I wrote to Bill Aitken on 8 May to place on record my response to the report. I shall not repeat all that I said in that letter, but I should like to say something about the main issues. First, however, I will set out the context of the bill. The bill is an important constitutional measure. It is timely and significant that this Parliament is considering the relationship between the judiciary and the legislative and executive arms of Scottish government. I firmly believe that the reforms in the bill will strengthen those relationships and bring about improvements for all who come into contact with our courts. I am sure that we can all agree that a strong, independent judiciary, with the capacity and flexibility to meet the challenges and expectations of modern Scotland, is something that we want. Our justice system is built on traditional values of integrity and fairness, and it has stood the tests of time. However, society has changed. Parliamentary scrutiny has increased, and so have public expectations. We need a modern justice system that has the capacity and flexibility to respond to those changes, while retaining the strong values on which its reputation has been built. The present Government and the previous Administration consulted extensively on the  proposed reforms. Work was started by the previous Administration, with a consultation paper in February 2006. A white paper followed a year later. Twelve months on, we have built on that preparatory work. We worked with the judiciary and key interests and benefited enormously from their involvement as we developed the detailed proposals. The package of reforms that is before members will strengthen the judiciary as an institution and introduce practical reforms to improve the way in which the system operates. The committee heard at first hand from many senior members of the judiciary, including the Lord President. I am keen to learn from the committee's report and I have said that I will lodge amendments at stage 2 to address the comments on whether the section on judicial independence is drawn too narrowly; on the appointment as temporary judges of Scots lawyers who have held high judicial office in Europe; and on the scrutiny of guidance for the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland. However, the debate is about the general principles of the bill, which, in the main, have received broad support. I welcome the committee's support for a scheme to deal with complaints about judicial conduct. To avoid any interference with judicial independence, the scheme will be under the control of the Lord President. I believe that the scheme will strengthen public confidence in the judiciary. There was only majority support in the committee for the proposal to have an independent reviewer form part of the scheme but, if that element were removed, I fear that we would lose public confidence. People who deal with authority figures need to be able to turn to someone independent. I am also pleased that the committee supports our view that the balance of membership of the Judicial Appointments Board is right. I welcome the committee's conclusion that there is no reason to change the rule that the Lord President is not a compellable witness before the Parliament. The Lord President said in evidence that he would be willing to attend and assist Parliament when invited, which is an encouraging example of the co-operation that will make the proposed arrangements work.

It has already been made clear that the chief executive will be the accountable officer. They will be accountable and,  in the main, they would come to Parliament to answer the appropriate questions. The committee has a concern about the administrative burden that the proposals may place on the judiciary. As a consequence, the committee members were not unanimous in their support for the new governance arrangements for the Scottish Court Service. The new arrangements will involve the service becoming a non-ministerial department within the Scottish Administration, managed by a governing body that will be chaired by the Lord President. We need the formality of an order under section 104 of the Scotland Act 1998 to achieve that status for the service, and the groundwork for that is in hand. I understand the concerns that the additional responsibilities that will be conferred on the Lord President as head of the judiciary and as chair of the Scottish Court Service may overburden an already onerous office. However, care has been taken to ensure that the office of Lord President will not be overburdened. The Lord President will be able to delegate most of his new responsibilities, some of which, at least in part, he already carries out on a non-statutory basis. The sheriffs principal will continue to have the major task of running the sheriff courts and, in the new governance structure, the Lord President will be supported by the chief executive and the resources of the Scottish Court Service, including an enhanced private office. It is fair to say that the Lord President, who welcomed the proposals, does not share the committee's concern about the scale of the administrative burden on him. He made it clear to the committee that he believes that his engagement in the governance of the Scottish Court Service is manageable and is a necessary part of his being head of the judiciary. I respect his judgment on that. I remind members that the creation of a judicially led court service was proposed specifically by the Lord President and his senior colleagues in response to the first consultation paper. They argued persuasively that, if they were to accept greater responsibilities for running the system, they should have control over the administrative support in carrying out those responsibilities. That is difficult to argue against. It is right in principle to constitute the Scottish Court Service in the way proposed in the bill; the judiciary should have a leading role in the governance of the administrative service that it relies on to support its ability to dispense justice. It is right in particular that the Lord President, whom the bill charges with responsibility for the efficient disposal of business throughout Scotland's courts, should have a leadership role in the strategic management of the administrative service on which he relies for his ability to discharge that  responsibility. The current situation, in which the judiciary relies on ministers for its administrative support, is a constitutional muddle with the potential for tension and future conflict. For those reasons, I believe that the proposals in the bill are right. However, I recognise the committee's concerns and I am able to tell members that I have commissioned Douglas Osler to carry out an independent assessment of the impact on judicial time of the additional administrative responsibilities. Mr Osler's report on the Scottish Court Service, which is referred to by the committee in the stage 1 report, considered aspects of judicial administration, and he is therefore well qualified to carry out such an assessment. He has been asked to report in time for stage 2. I also want to touch on judicial training. Among his new responsibilities, the Lord President will be given overall responsibility for the training of the judiciary. The committee recommended that training of the judiciary should be mandatory. People see mandatory judicial training as the answer to a particular problem or issue—such issues will always arise. I can understand that, and I sympathise with those who feel that their case could have been dealt with differently by the court. However, I am clear that judicial training must lie in the hands of the judiciary. That the training of judges is managed by judges is an important element of judicial independence. It is important that the Lord President should be free from legislative constraints to devise a training regime that takes account of the interests of all litigants. The Lord President said that he wishes it left to him to put in place appropriate arrangements, which could include arrangements that verged on compulsion—that sounds to me pretty close to being mandatory. There is nothing to suggest that sheriffs and judges are not prepared to undertake training. Scotland is already well served by a progressive Judicial Studies Committee, which will be available to advise the Lord President in his new statutory responsibilities. The bill provides a strong, coherent structure for a modern judiciary and the effective management of Scotland's court system. We have an opportunity to modernise the third element of Scotland's government. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill.

I understand the concerns that the member and others have raised, and I am grateful to them for doing so. I want everyone to understand and support our reasons for moving forward before we do so. The provision of forensic science services is the responsibility of the Scottish Police Services Authority, but the Scottish Government's approval is required for major capital investment. I have approved the SPSA's proposal for a much-needed new forensic laboratory in Dundee. Let there be no doubt that that will transform the quality of forensic science available to the Scottish police service. I have asked the SPSA to look again at the proposed integration of the Aberdeen and Dundee laboratories; to look at the implications of that for the provision of forensic services to Grampian Police and Northern Constabulary; to engage in fresh consultation with interested parties; and to let me have further advice. I want there to be the fullest opportunity for everyone to contribute their views and to understand the arguments for and against. In the meantime, no decision will be taken to close the Aberdeen forensic laboratory.

I am aware of complaints and disquiet about the way in which the consultation has been carried out. I expect the consultation to be full, open, transparent and meaningful. As regards other documentation, unless information is commercially confidential, it should be available so that everyone can see that appropriate decisions are being made by what is, after all, a publicly funded body.

It seems to me that the offer of full, frank and new consultation is perhaps much more to be welcomed than an offer to go back over old ground. I can see no reason why some responses should not be available. We should be looking at matters afresh, to ensure that everyone who has a contribution to make, and everyone who has a clear involvement and locus, has an opportunity to be heard. I am aware of the disquiet expressed by Mr Macdonald, Mr Adam and others. I am anxious that we should consider matters afresh. Members have received an undertaking from the Government that—as I said at the outset—the consultation will be full, frank and transparent, involving all appropriate parties. It would be better to move forwards than to spend our time looking backwards.

As I confirmed on 22 November 2007, there are no plans to expand Scotland's open prison estate. However, the open estate remains an important part of the Scottish Government's penal policy.

The member raises a variety of points, many of which I agree with. I reiterate that we have no plans to expand the current open prison estate. However, following an internal review by the Scottish Prison Service, there is now a substantial capacity in the estate that no doubt will be considered in due course. Moreover, the McLeish commission is examining whether the SPS and the open estate are operating appropriately. However, as the member correctly points out, the Government believes that the open estate forms a valuable part of how we rehabilitate people into the community. As all the evidence clearly suggests, if we simply release a person without making any attempt to rehabilitate or to reintegrate them, they are very likely to be back to see us again very soon. That serves neither us nor our communities well. That said, we agree with Mr Pringle and the Liberal Democrats about community sentencing. Prison should be for serious or dangerous offenders. Instead of funding free bed and board for those who commit less serious offences, we should ensure that they repay with the sweat of their brow the damage that they have done to their communities.

The member's position is very wise. Back in November, I told Mr Aitken's colleague Mr Fraser that we had no plans to expand the open estate. Nothing has changed since then. The fact is that the prison estate's capacity has not yet been fully utilised. We are trying to work  out why that should be, but it appears that, following the tragedy of the Robert Foye case, some of the criteria have quite correctly been changed. That is understandable. After all, the Government made it quite clear that the SPS had to review the situation; it has done so and is now implementing many changes to ensure, for example, that there are proper risk assessments. The service is also on the case with regard to reintroducing dedicated governors to our two open estate prisons—an issue in which, I have to say, it was rather remiss.

Dignified treatment of women prisoners is essential. As we said recently in the chamber, the Government finds the handcuffing of pregnant women unacceptable. In addition, the Scottish Prison Service has put in place a variety of specific policies to ensure the proper treatment of female offenders.

I welcome Dr Simpson's comments and am aware of his long-standing interest in and actions on this issue. Indeed, I hope to build on that work. I do not think that there is any difference between the attitude of and comments expressed by Mr Ewart as chief executive of the SPS and the Deputy First Minister's comments. The SPS has made it clear that it does not accept such actions and does not wish to see them occur. In many cases, such incidents have happened as a result of instructions given by Reliance.  However, there are exceptional circumstances. Of the prisoners in Cornton Vale, 50 per cent have self-harmed, 98 per cent have a drug or alcohol addiction, 70 per cent present with mental health issues and 60 per cent report various instances of abuse. Sadly, there are occasions on which it is necessary to prevent prisoners from harming themselves. I have been told by Mr Ewart and others of cases in which a prisoner has threatened to harm their child. Such cases are few and far between, but there are exceptional circumstances in which it would be negligent not to ensure the safety of the prisoner and their unborn child. Indeed, as Richard Simpson knows from his past experience as a practitioner, there are circumstances in which it is also necessary to protect medical staff from people who may present a danger not just to themselves but to others.

That is a valid point. Some steps have been taken, including the setting up of the 218 centre, but it is clear that many of the standard community service schemes are geared towards young men, who make up the majority of the people who commit crime and fill up our courts. We must ensure that suitable disposals are available for women who offend. As I said in reply to Dr Simpson, many female prisoners have underlying mental health or substance abuse issues, and they may require treatment more than they require punishment. However, we must remember that many female prisoners have committed offences that must be punished. We must ensure that the appropriate disposal, whether that is a treatment order or a punishment order, is available to the sheriff or judge so that they can make the correct decision, thereby helping to rehabilitate the offender and make our communities safer. We will make offenders better citizens if we allow them to repay the damage that they have caused.

We held a very successful firearms summit yesterday, at which a range of key  interests was represented. It was clear that an overhaul of firearms legislation is long overdue. I regret that the Home Secretary did not attend the summit, even though she was invited to do so. I will write to update her on the summit's findings. However, legislation alone will not solve the problem. Over the summer, we will work collectively on an information campaign to highlight the dangers of firearms in our communities.

As regards the primary subject of the question, the summit made it clear that the current legislation, which is dealt with on a pan-United Kingdom basis, is no longer fit for purpose. Evidence from serving police officers of significant rank and from the judiciary showed that, in many instances, the law is, frankly, incomprehensible and requires to be overhauled. We will make that clear to the Home Secretary. As the member correctly identified, it is clear that there is a significant link between the use of more serious weapons and serious crime. That said, I do not seek to downplay how dangerous air weapons are, given the number of tragedies that have been caused by them. The parents of Andrew Morton were present at yesterday's summit. Those of us at the summit were briefed by police officers on the link between guns and serious crime. Dealing with the issue is largely down to sophisticated police intelligence, and to the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and our police forces working in co-operation with forces south of the border and—given that weapons come in from a variety of sources—on the European continent. The issue is being tackled. In the campaign over the summer, we will work on a cross-party basis across a variety of agencies. The campaign will remind people of  their responsibilities and obligations, and of the dangers of firearms and what might happen to them if they abuse them.

Pauline McNeill raises a valid point. If memory serves me right, she raised that point at the summit, and I recall that the Government gave an undertaking to work out the information to which she referred. Obviously, some changes have been introduced only recently. However, I think it was agreed at the summit that the number of outlets selling air-guns is not substantial and that the justice department should be capable of doing a phone-round. I reiterate my undertaking to carry that out, and we will seek to share the information across the parties. We will also seek to draw that information to the attention of the Home Secretary. The member is correct that the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 has made changes. However, the Government believes that the changes do not go far enough. I remind Pauline McNeill of the views of senior police officers and members of the judiciary that the current firearms legislation that has been built up since 1968 was often introduced in reaction to great concern about events that took place at Hungerford and Dunblane, for example, which is understandable. However, firearms law is not as good as it should be, and it is no longer appropriate for the 21 st century. I ask Pauline McNeill to consider joining me in reiterating to the Home Secretary that, for that reason alone, we require a consolidated act that is appropriate. If that is a pan-UK act, the Government is more than happy to say: so be it.

I last met the chief constable of Strathclyde Police on 25 April at the Scottish Police College, where we attended the passing out parade for the first 52 additional police officers funded by this Government. That is proof, if proof were needed, that this Government, in partnership with local authorities, is delivering on its commitment to recruit 1,000 additional police officers during this session of the Parliament.

Absolutely. I cannot comment on the specific matters to which the member refers, but every such incident, whether a murder or a stabbing, is unacceptable and a tragedy. I reiterate that we are committed to recruiting 1,000 new officers; even more than that will be available and visible on our streets as a result of retention and redeployment. We must build, on a non-partisan basis, on the violence reduction strategy that was initiated by my predecessor, Cathy Jamieson. We must intervene early and we must change the culture of alcohol abuse. There is no simple solution to the problem that we face. It is a problem not only in the city of Glasgow, but the length and breadth of Scotland. For example, I observed on a website that a tragedy occurred up in a more rural part of Highland Scotland. We must deal with such matters. If there were a simple solution, it would have been found by previous Governments. However, I confirm that this Government will build on the correct attitude that was taken by Cathy Jamieson in seeking to intervene early, address the booze-and-blade culture that we have in Scotland and provide tough enforcement. Our courts and—as the Lord Advocate made clear to me—the Crown view that culture as unacceptable. They have a zero tolerance approach to it and are being tough  in the implementation of the legislation. We must have a variety of approaches, and I welcome the member's commitment. As a society, we must resolve this issue.

HM Prison Inverness provides a range of measures that respond to prisoners' assessed needs and promote and support more constructive lifestyles on release. Such measures challenge offending behaviour and develop employability skills and social responsibility.

The problems that are faced by Inverness prison are faced throughout the prison estate. We have an excellent prison service in Scotland, which deals with difficult and often dangerous people in circumstances that are often exceedingly challenging. Until we can get control of prison numbers, and allow the prison service to focus on its requirement to protect our citizens from the danger of prisoners escaping and ensure that prisoners seek to be rehabilitated, there is a limit to what can be done. I reiterate that the staff and governor of HM Prison Inverness are doing extremely well in difficult times. They are working with organisations in the public sector and beyond to ensure that there is a route out of prison for those who are caught up in it.

I was delighted to host a reception at Edinburgh castle at the beginning of last week to say thanks to the many people from throughout the country who have, through their dedication and commitment, ensured that the new deal for witnesses, the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004, is now fully in place. At the reception, I also took the opportunity to express my gratitude to the Lord Advocate, to my predecessor Cathy Jamieson and to Parliament for their efforts in putting right the wrongs against vulnerable witnesses. April 1 was an important day for the modernisation of our justice system, because it marked the completion of the implementation of the 2004 act. I want to mark that moment by reminding members why we all, irrespective of party lines, wanted the legislation to go on the statute book in the first place. I will then update colleagues on the significant achievements that have been made so far in the justice system in putting the act into effect. Finally, I will highlight what I see as the future challenges that will face all those who work with and have a duty to support witnesses. The origins of the 2004 act lie in the widely accepted view that the justice system was failing witnesses. Sadly, there were plenty instances of children and of particularly vulnerable adults breaking down in open court in the face of lengthy and uncompromising cross-examination in full view of the accused. As a result, cases fell, justice was not being done and witnesses were being left seriously traumatised and damaged by the experience. In response to the widespread call for change, the then Scottish Executive launched a wide-ranging review of how vulnerable and intimidated witnesses were being treated in the justice system and how they could be helped to give their best evidence. The publication in 1999 of "Towards a Just Conclusion: Vulnerable and Intimidated Witnesses in Scottish Criminal and Civil Cases", followed by the response to the resulting consultation in 2002, "Vital Voices: Helping Vulnerable Witnesses Give  Evidence", formed the basis of the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced in 2003. We supported the bill's progress through Parliament and welcomed its successful passage in the spring of 2004. It remains, for us, a key building block in our programme of continued modernisation of our justice system. We stand by the previous Administration's commitment to make the system more accessible to witnesses who might otherwise be denied a voice. The act was phased in over three years at the same time as other significant modernising laws, including reforms of the High Court and the summary justice system. The justice system is to be commended for the huge effort that it has made to accommodate so many vital changes in such a relatively short time. The 2004 act provides a comprehensive procedural framework for a more humane approach to witnesses generally. It puts them at the heart of the justice system, strengthens it and makes it fairer, as is entirely in keeping with the Government's strategic objective of creating a safer and stronger Scotland. By codifying and widening the provision of special measures in court, we are enabling all children and adult vulnerable witnesses to give their evidence in ways that best suit their individual needs. That means that all child witnesses under 16, adults who suffer from mental disorder and those who are in fear and distress at giving evidence and where there is a significant risk that the quality of their evidence might be diminished as a result, can access special measures that best meet their needs. The act's coverage is comprehensive: it covers witnesses in all High Court and sheriff court criminal proceedings, in children's hearings court proceedings and in all civil proceedings in the Court of Session and sheriff courts, including fatal accident inquiries. In each of those settings, special measures such as screens, supporters, live television links from within and outwith the courts, giving evidence-in-chief by prior statement and giving evidence to a commissioner, are available to vulnerable witnesses whom the court agrees need them. Of course, no act is worth the paper that it is written on unless it is put into practical effect. I know that charges have been levelled at the Scottish Government and others who are responsible for implementing the act that there is insufficient commitment from us in making the law work, and that we are apathetic about giving it effect. The evidence that I have seen of the tremendous effort by all the agencies involved-public, private and voluntary—shows that there is no lack of commitment to improving the welfare of vulnerable witnesses by making the act work. As an example of that effort, I want to highlight the work that has been undertaken by the Crown  Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and the Scottish Court Service. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has a significant and pivotal role to play in implementation of the legislation. It deals with the vast majority of witnesses in criminal trials and therefore uses the act's provisions the most. The main aim of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is to avoid the need for children and vulnerable adult witnesses to give evidence in criminal proceedings where possible. I agree with that aim. The phased implementation of the act has enabled policies to be reviewed and updated in relation to child and vulnerable adult witnesses, so that witnesses who are cited to give evidence now do so only when it is essential and appropriate. When they are required to give evidence, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service seeks to ensure that entitled witnesses are able to benefit from the act's provisions. To that end, extensive guidance has been developed for prosecution staff to assist practical implementation. The guidance is accompanied by a comprehensive training programme. I am pleased to report to members that prosecutors have placed applications before the courts for the full range of special measures that are provided by the act. That has led to new approaches—such as taking evidence by commission and giving evidence by prior statement—being utilised successfully in court. For example, I am aware that evidence by commission was used for a young child witness in a murder trial in 2007. The evidence of the child was recorded in advance of the trial, and the recording was produced as evidence at the subsequent trial. That allowed the arrangements for and timing of taking the child's evidence to be focused on the child, as opposed to the child's being called to court as one of a number of witnesses on a particular trial day. The accused in the case was convicted. Learning from such experiences, the Crown Office continues to keep practices, policies and procedures under constant review to ensure continued improvement of the services that are provided to witnesses in the justice system. The Scottish Court Service has also been instrumental in widening access for vulnerable witnesses to the special measures that have been made available by the act. By the end of May 2008, 54 of the 58 dedicated court locations will have courtrooms that are capable of handling evidence by live television link. At locations without fixed cameras and screens, mobile TV equipment can be installed as required. Where, due to shortage of space, no dedicated rooms are available for providing the witness link from within the court premises, a TV  link can be made to another court, or to what are called remote sites. I am pleased to confirm that there are now six dedicated remote sites, with a seventh about to start in Kilmarnock. Sites are operational in Aberdeen, Hamilton, Inverness and Falkirk, and it is planned that Edinburgh and Glasgow will come on stream in the next few months. The sites provide specially equipped facilities that, in effect, are part of the court although they are not located in any court building. Vulnerable witnesses, especially child witnesses, can give their evidence without the stress of coming to court. They can be linked through live TV to any court in the country. In addition to those dedicated sites, the Scottish Court Service is working with a range of agencies to establish ad hoc sites across the country, with a view to having five to six in each sheriffdom to supplement the dedicated sites. I have no doubt that many witnesses will benefit from that excellent provision. Implementation of the act has also been assisted by the production, by the Scottish Government's victims and witnesses unit, of an extensive range of guidance for practitioners, together with information material—including innovative use of DVD and CD-ROM technology—for witnesses themselves or, where appropriate, their carers. The development of the material, which has been widely praised, has been an excellent example of collaborative working between the Scottish Government and all those who work with witnesses. Much has also been done to promote and raise awareness of the act through roadshows and training events involving judges and sheriffs, fiscals, solicitors, social workers, police officers, medics and volunteers. So—that is where we have got to. For me it demonstrates the tremendous progress that has been made across the justice system to fulfil our commitment to vulnerable witnesses and to implement the 2004 act. However, the commendable effort does not stop here. I now want to ensure that the new provisions, and the policies and procedures that go with them, are applied at a consistently high standard throughout the country. I have agreed to the setting up of the multi-agency witnesses issues group to ensure that that happens. The group will find meaningful ways of promoting cultural and behavioural change among practitioners to ensure that all vulnerable witnesses are treated with dignity and respect, and that they all receive the support to which they are entitled. We also need to be smarter at tracking the impact of the act. I am keen to ensure that all those who have a responsibility for implementing  the legislation continually improve the evidence base to show that the measures are reaching the people whom they are meant to help. I know that recent reports about how the justice system has handled cases involving vulnerable people have raised questions about the ability to identify and support their needs, but I am confident that effective application of the 2004 act can contribute significantly to improving the quality of service that is delivered to vulnerable people if and when they need to give evidence in court. However, the act will work properly only if all those who work with children and vulnerable people are, for the purposes of ensuring that they get the right support when giving evidence, skilled in identifying their diverse needs. I assure members that the Scottish Government, in close collaboration with our partners, will continue to work hard to ensure that the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 plays its full part in ensuring that witnesses remain at the very heart of the justice system. We are on a journey: we accept that there are real challenges ahead and that we can expect some turbulence, but if we continue with our spirit to resolve difficulties and maintain our vision for vulnerable witnesses, we will be successful.

Ms McNeill is right that protection of witnesses is fundamental. For too  long, witnesses were viewed as, at best, an encumbrance and, at times, a nuisance. They were viewed as being there simply to do what they were required to do. They were not always treated with the dignity and respect to which they are entitled, irrespective of whether their evidence was given as that of the victim, of a person doing their citizenly duty or of someone who has been cited. That attitudinal change had to be dealt with, so the member is quite correct to praise my predecessor for driving the matter forward. Clearly, the issue is not simply about changing the system, given that we are dealing not simply with systemic failures but with individual failures. Therefore, we need to change the culture and attitudes not only within the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service but among the general public. As can be seen in some recent tragic cases, it seems to be accepted that the issue is often not so much systemic failure as a failure of attitudes. We need to change those: that is what we are doing. The position of the Crown is a matter for the Lord Advocate, although I am in regular discussions with her. Much of the information and data that we require to be satisfied about that issue are within the domain of the Crown Office rather than the Government, but Pauline McNeill can rest assured that we are seeking undertakings that appropriate monitoring will be carried out. We will look at other such matters and the member can rest assured that I will raise the valid point that she has made. On broadening out the use of special measures to ensure the safety and protection of witnesses, some of those issues are matters for the police. Obviously, it is accepted that people who do their citizenly duty are entitled to the full protection of the law. I am more than happy to undertake to discuss the matter both with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and with the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, which deals with many aspects of the witness protection programme. Those who do what is necessary to uphold the law and who do their duty as good citizens by giving evidence must be treated with respect and dignity. Ms McNeill makes the valid point that if there are any threats to or intimidation of witnesses, we have to ensure that the appropriate procedures exist to support them, whether by beefing up what is dealt with by the police or broadening the interpretation of the 2004 act. We are more than happy to consider that. We need to keep such matters under continuous review because witnesses are vital. Irrespective of who they are or how they get there, we have to ensure that we protect them.

Mr Aitken makes a valid point—it is important that we review the legislation. I undertook to speak to the Lord Advocate to ensure that the Crown Office was doing its bit. We, as a Government, are monitoring things and we intend to provide our findings to individual members and to the Justice Committee so that matters can be scrutinised and reviewed. Mr Aitken is correct that it is about not simply what the Crown Office, the Scottish Court Service or others in the domain of the Government are doing, but about how solicitors are interpreting the act and how the judiciary is working with it. If my memory serves me well, I believe that we are due to arrange a meeting with all those involved—the buzzword is "stakeholders"—to discuss what is happening. I am more than happy to share that discussion with the convener and members of the Justice Committee. We all have to learn. It is not just about the Crown Office and the Government; we are all involved. We have to review the legislation regularly to ensure that we are getting it right. Part of that is about changing attitudes and part of it is about reflecting changes that occur in society. Such changes occur regularly and we therefore have to monitor how the act is working out to ensure that it delivers what we voted for four years ago.

Mr Pringle raises a variety of points. I cannot comment on the particulars of the case to which he and Pauline McNeill have referred, but it is clear that the act aims to deal with situations that involve people who are perceived to be vulnerable, whether through age, mental incapacity or whatever. Those who seek to interfere with the due process of law by intimidating witnesses or anything like that must be dealt with, because they are attempting to pervert the course of justice. As I said in response to Pauline McNeill, we will not hesitate to broaden the view, if that is necessary. Mr Pringle can rest assured that this Government will take a dim view of anyone seeking to interfere at any stage with anyone doing their citizenly duty of giving evidence in a court of law. A lot of the broader matters come down to common sense. We have to ensure that the system is implemented. I have long known of individuals' declining special measures that a procurator fiscal has offered them and then, at a later stage, seeking to access those measures. My experience has always been that the door was never closed, and that the fiscal or sheriff would go out of their way to do their best. In certain circumstances, however, procedural difficulties arise and it is very difficult for them to do something—for example, a video link cannot be created at the last moment, as a technician cannot be found at such short notice. The system that we have was created without the appropriate regard for the rights and dignity of the vulnerable individuals that the act is concerned with. Sometimes, we must leave matters to the  common sense of the procurator fiscal and the judiciary. Occasionally, of course, common sense flies out of the window, but that happens as much with politicians as it does with procurators fiscal or the judiciary. We have to learn from such instances. The intention of the act is that the door should never be closed. My understanding, based on discussions with the Crown Office, the courts and so on, is that people understand that some vulnerable witnesses have a predilection for making late changes, and that that must be factored in. I assure Mr Pringle that the act makes it clear that there is not a cut-off date as such and that we hope to drill home the message—perhaps at the meetings that Mr Aitken suggested we hold—that people should recognise the difficulties that vulnerable individuals face, whatever their age or capacity, and that we must go out of our way to ensure that the way in which we treat them at every stage allows them the dignity that the act seeks to enshrine.

The use of an intermediary is not a statutory special measure in Scotland. The response to a recent consultation on the matter is the subject of a detailed analysis, which we will publish at a later date and discuss with members. At present, under common law, the court has the discretion to allow a specialist to be present to aid communication between the witness and the court. In the case of an adult with learning difficulties,  that might be an appropriate adult; in the case of a foreign national or someone who speaks a language other than English, the court might bring in an interpreter, based on a judgment call about whether their level of English comprehension required it. As I said to Mr Pringle, some of these issues come down to common sense. There are times—in regard to a child or in regard to a vulnerable adult—when an intermediary is appropriate, irrespective of the seriousness of the case. There are serious cases when that would be appropriate and there are other cases in which, frankly, it would probably not be necessary: if a child who is quite mature has seen a gentleman go into a shop, steal a bottle of wine and disappear, and they are being asked only to identify that individual, they might view it as quite insulting to have someone there to hold their hand. We must ensure that the law is in place and that we have the necessary additional facilities to deal with particular individuals and with particular difficulties, such as the nature of the accused, but in some instances we should trust the common sense of the judges, the sheriffs, the court clerks and the procurators fiscal.

I am not in a position to give the member an immediate answer, but I am happy to write to him with that information. A significant amount has been delivered. There are 50 or 54 sheriff courts and the applications have been processed. We must also remember that with some of these things it is not so much a matter of fixed or capital costs, because they are already paid for in the courts or other public buildings. For example, the technology is already used for other links, because we are considering how to create links to enable evidence to be given from prisons or elsewhere. As usual, Mr Martin asks about resources. We are happy to write to him with the specifics, but the issue is about more than just resources. Regarding the tragedy involving Miss A, which  was announced by Norman Dunning of ENABLE Scotland, it is not so much the law that is at fault or a matter of the money that is spent as changing attitudes. The real, fundamental change that the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 introduces is not in relation to fixed accommodation or fixed links; it is about treating people with dignity and respect. We will, nonetheless, provide information about the finances.

As Mr Harvie knows—Mike Pringle and Pauline McNeill touched on this—vulnerable witnesses are to be dealt with differently from those who seek to interfere with the duty of witnesses to give evidence. We live in a world in which there is a growing problem with serious crime. The Government has acknowledged that by setting up a serious organised crime task force. We have to recognise and deal with the danger that the tentacles and links that are part of serious organised crime pose, not simply to our society, but to individuals. I am happy to indicate that we will examine that, not just in relation to how we deal with the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004, but in how we tackle serious organised crime. I realise that the problem also hits at a lower level. It is quite easy, in most cases, to give evidence if one lives in a nice leafy area of Edinburgh, as I do, but if a person lives in some peripheral housing scheme in the city of Edinburgh or elsewhere it can be very intimidating if those against whom they are giving evidence are close by. That is something on which we have to do more and better work. It is not so much a matter for the 2004 act, but I am happy to consider the ways in which it might interface with that. It is certainly the Government's, the police's and procurators fiscal's task to come down hard on anybody who seeks to pervert the course of justice and to ensure that we do everything to protect witnesses from those people. That is under way. Cathy Jamieson introduced that legislation too. We have powers to ensure that, operating through the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, we have witness protection programmes and can move people, if we wish, not simply outwith the jurisdiction of Scotland to other  jurisdictions in the UK, but outwith the UK. It is simply a matter of cost and, indeed, whether they want to go that far.

On the latter point, that is the desire of the Government and the 2004 act, but things occasionally go agley. On the Foy situation, Ms Craigie will know that I gave a statement on it and publicly apologised for the failings that affected the victim and her family. I met the victim and her parents, who were highly impressive; the victim is an incredible young woman, and I reiterated my apology to her. Ms Craigie can rest assured that the Government is on the case when we have to address matters in which there have been failings; whether they are within our department, the SPS or elsewhere, we will seek to tackle them. No jurisdiction or system can ever be foolproof, but we must ensure that we have the laws to ensure that we get things right. We must try to ensure that everybody acts according to proper procedures and uses their common sense, and that we monitor and learn—that was raised by Mr Aitken—to ensure that the number of tragic incidents is limited. However, I can reassure Ms Craigie, as the constituency representative of the victim of Robert Foy, and her parents, only that we sought to make it clear to her and them how sorry we were and that the door is open to them if they wish to come back on that or any other matter.

We understand that, since 2005, there have been 506 applications on behalf of witnesses to give evidence by TV link. Since April 2005, there have been 149 applications to enable witnesses to give evidence via a live TV link from a remote site. That represents 30 per cent of the applications for TV links.

Victim Support Scotland is a standalone organisation that the Government is happy to contribute to substantially. I meet VSS representatives regularly. I hosted a reception for VSS at our recent party conference and I went to meet VSS staff at their office to learn from them, face to face, about various problems. We must recognise that victims come in a variety of ages and with different problems. That is why we have provided support in a variety of ways. For example, with regard to those with a mental health problem, we were the largest financial contributor to a DVD produced by ENABLE Scotland and Lanarkshire ACE, entitled "What Happens Next?", which is designed to help people with learning disabilities and mental health problems navigate the justice system. When we deal with youngsters, we do so in a variety of ways. Victims of a sexual offence will have different views or attitudes. All that we can give is the assurance that we seek to ensure that resources are adequate. The letter to Mr Martin will also be sent to Mr O'Donnell, to provide what assistance we can. We will keep on everybody's tail, so to speak, to ensure that they do what they can. We in Scotland did not set out to treat witnesses in a hostile or undignified way; it was just one of those things that occurred far too often—it had just aye been. Just because something has aye been does not mean that it aye must be. We did not treat witnesses with the dignity and respect to which they were entitled and we must change that. That means changing attitudes, which involves providing resources—members are correct to raise that—and legislating, but what is ultimately required is that people put the legislation into practice.

The member raises a valid point. Vulnerable witnesses are distinct from witnesses who give evidence in the normal course of events but face harassment or an attempt to pervert the course of justice. I pronounced on the issue in opposition and I maintain a watchful eye on it. Going to court can be scary for many individuals. A person who is adopting a child, for example, may see people whom they are not used to bumping into hanging around corridors in courts. That can be intimidatory. The Government believes that the best solution is a visible police presence, which can mean such a presence in courts as well as on the streets. The Scottish Court Service and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service deal with such matters, but a valid point is that people who go to court are entitled to be treated with dignity and respect in proceedings and that they should not be routinely harassed or feel intimidated. Some duties are for private security operators, but there should always be some police vigilance in our courts. That is not simply for the safety of witnesses, but because—sadly—assaults on the judiciary and on Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service staff have occurred. That is entirely unacceptable and we must protect them adequately.

I do not intrinsically oppose that suggestion, but it is more for the  Parliamentary Bureau and business managers than for me. In principle, I am more than happy and see no difficulty with the proposal, which is a matter of sharing the available information.

That is a valid point. We have had discussions on that matter with the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates. To some extent, such matters are best dealt with by the judiciary. We are on a learning curve. Miss Cunningham makes a valid point. The tendering of a plea in mitigation should not be used as an opportunity to besmirch or defame an individual. People should not go down that route if there is no basis for doing so, and people who are presiding over the matter should take measures to curtail such action.

That information is coming out. One reason why there has been low usage of such means is that people have pled guilty before giving evidence. We will happily discuss the matter with the Crown Office on the member's behalf. Such information is more readily in the Crown's domain than that of the justice department, but it is clear that the purpose of the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 was to get convictions by allowing victims the dignity to which they are entitled. I undertake to make investigations and get back to the member on the matter.

Scottish Government officials frequently meet the sheriff principal of Glasgow and Strathkelvin to discuss a range of matters.

I am happy to discuss the issue with not only the sheriff principal of Glasgow and Strathkelvin, but sheriffs elsewhere. After all, this is a problem the length and breadth of Scotland and not only in one urban area. The last time that Mr Whitton raised the issue—and he has been right to do so—I said that under the law of Scotland the child's interests have been and remain paramount. Clearly, significant difficulties have occurred and, in certain cases, fathers who are separated from their children have in particular faced great hardship. There is no simple solution to such issues, although the provision of contact centres and the proper enforcement of contact orders form an appropriate course of action. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I assure the member that sheriffs are aware of those problems. Indeed, as someone who practised for 20 years in this area of law, I know that such issues have caused and continue to cause difficulties. The member is right that we have to do more and do it better, but I assure him that the child's interests will remain paramount.

Offences of that nature are very serious, often involving organised criminals who have no hesitation about using violence. Although the matter is one of operational policing, the Government has a part to play. That is why we recently announced a three-year funding package of £778,000 for the Scottish Business Crime Centre. The centre provides practical advice to the business and commercial sectors on how to prevent and deter business crime, and it is  responsible for the Scottish financial crime group, which monitors offences against cash and valuables in transit workers through the British Security Industry Association. It therefore seems to be neither efficient nor sensible for the Scottish Government to gather the same information.

Absolutely. No one in any occupation should have to view violence against them as part of their job. That applies to those who work in the transit of cash industry and equally to police officers, who should not be viewed as punch-bags for whoever seeks to take out their ill humour on them. I am more than happy to consider any meetings, but I confirm that the Government is acting, and we believe that the best way of doing that is to deliver a visible police presence in our communities to deter criminals and to reassure good citizens. That is why we are delivering our commitment to 1,000 additional officers in our communities. Equally, we acknowledge the problem of serious organised crime that this country faces, which is why we have set up a serious organised crime task force to tackle those who are involved in the peddling of drugs and other matters such as armed robbery.

We welcome the debate. Indeed, I have learned something new, which I will comment on later. Some matters were to be expected and some were, perhaps, not. The debate ties in with where the committee is, which is on a journey on which it will continue to review matters. I made it clear at the outset that we will be happy to co-operate with that. The Government is also on a journey towards delivering what we think is necessary. It is about allowing our communities to understand the level of policing  that they have a right to expect; building capacity to ensure that we deliver an additional 1,000 police officers into our communities, which we are doing; building capacity nationally, through the SPSA and greater collaboration between forces in our small country; working in partnership with others within and without the criminal justice system; and fundamentally building on those matters that will help to make Scotland safer and stronger. Four clear themes have run through the debate. The first of those is the general acceptance by members of all parties—enunciated by the Justice Committee's convener in his explanation of how the world has moved on from "Dixon of Dock Green"—that the world has changed and that a review is needed. The world has changed substantially in 40 years and, accordingly, the nature of policing must reflect that. The police are there to reflect our communities, which is why it is appropriate that the Government will undertake to carry out a review and will seek to work with the committee on that. Issues have come up around police resources and numbers, and those are matters to which we are committed. As I have said, the Government will deliver 1,000 additional officers into our communities. There is also the issue of the definition of community policing, which is at the heart of the debate. That might mean that resources have to go into providing direct internet access to information. There is merit in being able to access a great deal of information on the internet. We have to work out what is meant by community policing. After all, our council tax payers fund it, and our communities need police protection. The question of police governance and whether it is in the nature of the SCDEA or the tripartite arrangement has been touched upon, and I do not doubt that it will be gone into in greater detail during the coming weeks and months. Bill Aitken talked about the accountability of local police boards. New guidance was issued to police boards last summer that clarified the roles within the tripartite relationship. That framework will provide an ideal vehicle for achieving accountability by, for the first time, giving police boards the tools to hold chief constables to account. The Government is committed to the tripartite relationship between the justice department and cabinet secretary, the police boards and, of course, chief constables, who have operational autonomy. Pauline McNeill, Paul Martin and Bill Butler raised the tensions between the SPSA and police authorities. We understand that there are moves  to improve the situation. It is perfectly clear that the SPSA is responsible for providing a range of support services to the police forces on a national basis, and it has made an excellent start. I will come on to the issues raised by Bill Butler, but ICT is being rolled out. The SPSA is responsible for maintaining not providing services to the SCDEA. It does not deal with SCDEA operational matters; the director general of the SCDEA has complete autonomy. I met the previous director general, and I have met Gordon Meldrum, the current director general. He made no suggestion of any interference from the SPSA. The situation should go on as it is and we should build on what we inherited from the previous Administration. I remind members that we inherited the lowest level of recruitment since devolution, but changes are under way. Despite the disparaging comments that we have heard from some members, we have recruited 150 police in this financial year. Grampian Police has announced plans to increase its force by more than 130 to 1,600 by 2011.

No, I do not accept that. We have delivered £1 million in increased funding. If the member believes that Grampian police force is underfunded, then the fault lies with the previous Liberal Democrat-Labour Executive. We have added £1 million to the system created by the previous Minister for Justice in 2004. We are delivering record sums of increased funding. That is the position, whether Mr Rumbles likes it or not. ICT roles have been transferred from police authorities to the SPSA and that is going well. All police ICT staff and functions transferred on 1 April, as I discovered when I was in Glasgow earlier this week. Service-level agreements are being sorted out and entered into. As Mike Pringle pointed out, one still has to be signed off between Strathclyde and the SPSA. Whatever Mr Martin says, I have great faith in the SPSA and its board, which, as I recall, included Councillor Rooney. Paul Martin might wish to discuss matters with him. It is clear that the fox that was thought to have been set loose was well and truly shot when this Government delivered its commitment to 1,000 additional police officers in our communities.

Not at the moment.  That negated the opportunity that the Opposition thought it had to skewer the Government. The Government is delivering on its promise over police officers. We are building upon the appalling situation that we inherited, and we are adding to recruitment. Clearly, that causes some discomfort. Mr Martin might say that the Labour position was not relevant, but it was. If Labour had won the election in May last year, we would not be getting any new police officers because there was no commitment to recruiting them. We have increased the numbers by 1,000, and we are on the case. We accept the need for community wardens, but such matters are primarily and best dealt with by local authorities. However, we can tackle bad behaviour not simply by employing community wardens but by other means, such as by tackling gang violence. When I visited Mr Martin's Springburn constituency earlier this week—Mr Martin was not there—I found that the efforts of the police in Glasgow have resulted in a significant reduction in youth offending. Mr Martin is well known for never knowingly praising a child in this country, but it was quite clear that those youngsters were in fact being turned round. The police deserve credit for that. One new thing that I learned in today's debate is that new Labour's privateers continue to operate. We heard that quite clearly from Mr Whitton, who seems to want to privatise even more of our police force. I must say that I was surprised that Pauline McNeill raised a matter about the Central Scotland Police pilot scheme, as I think that many of the suggestions should be rolled out once they have been tested. Indeed, the pilot using custody officers is going remarkably well, as I saw for myself in Alloa. Perhaps we need to work out whether, instead of rolling out the Central Scotland pilot, Mr Whitton would rather privatise such services. He wishes to privatise huge swathes of our police services. Surprisingly, he is even further to the right than the Conservative party. New Labour may continue to want to privatise police services, but we will not do that. We recognise the benefits of civilianisation and we will support chief constables in achieving that. Such operations will remain within the ambit of police boards and chief constables; they will not be privatised or given to a private sector company, regardless of whether Mr Whitton was previously on its payroll.

I understand the member's point about the SCDEA. One principle is that our police should be accountable, which is why chief constables are accountable to police boards. If we cut the SCDEA loose from the SPSA, to whom would it be accountable, apart from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice? Does she suggest that it should be accountable in that way?

Does the member accept that there is a considerable difference between civilianisation and privatisation, and that the Government is prepared to consider civilianisation where it is appropriate, although we disagree with privatisation?

Yes it is.

The member's points relate to a funding formula that was agreed back in 2004, when his party was part of the Administration. That formula took into account the factors to which he refers. Notwithstanding that, does he recognise that this Government has given an extra £1 million a year, thus ensuring that by 2011 there will be a record level of officers in Grampian? If he wishes to increase funding to Grampian, which police force's funding does he wish to cut?

I remind the member that this Government inherited the lowest level of police recruitment. Had the election result been different, is it not the case that we would have faced the lowest level of recruitment and no commitment by the Labour Party to the recruitment of any additional police officers? Through the three Rs—recruitment, retention and redeployment—the Government is delivering 1,000 additional officers to our communities.

I welcome the Justice Committee's report and endorse the convener's thanks and tributes to all those who were involved in whatever role. I thank the convener, and welcome the opportunity to debate an issue of such importance. I welcome the committee's continuing work on community policing and I look forward to supporting it on this most critical and important of issues. I am also grateful for the convener's speech, which has helped to focus matters. I give him an undertaking that if something is not addressed in my speech, I will be more than  happy to engage with him and the committee in future weeks and months. I thank all the police in Scotland, as their role is absolutely critical in serving our communities, and it is only with the help of the police that we can make Scotland safer and stronger. It is an often difficult and sometimes dangerous job and we are blessed in Scotland with an excellent police service. As a Government we are taking a new approach to government and there are new relationships among national Government, local government, delivery partners and citizens. Effectiveness, openness and accountability are the key to those new relationships. At a national level, we take the strategic decisions about what outcomes we are seeking to deliver, but decisions about how outcomes are delivered are often best taken locally. Indeed, the committee's convener mentioned the difference between policing in Wester Ross and elsewhere. We have a clear, overarching purpose of government: sustainable economic growth. Safer and stronger—one of the five key strategic objectives—is helping local communities to flourish and to become stronger, safer places to live, offering improved opportunities and a better quality of life for all our citizens. But what about our Government's vision for policing in Scotland? At the heart of our vision for the Scottish police service is to ensure that communities have a clear understanding of the levels of policing that they have a right to expect, how it is being delivered and how their views are taken into account, which was mentioned by the convener in his speech and by the committee in its report. That means building capacity at the local level. We are clear about that in our manifesto commitment to make 1,000 additional officers available in communities and we are not only delivering on that, but going substantially beyond by also looking at recruitment, retention and redeployment. We, as a Government, are committed not only to recruitment, but to the retention of valued, experienced officers and the redeployment of officers that is happening—chief constables are acting with great alacrity and considerable success at the present moment. Our vision also means building capacity nationally through the Scottish Police Services Authority and greater collaboration between forces in what is, after all, a small country. It means working in partnership with the criminal justice system and other delivery partners. We do not want only to tackle crime, we want to prevent it, and we recognise the police's key leadership role within the wider community engagement agenda. Our vision also means nurturing what makes policing in Scotland special—our people, and how  they operate—and it means letting constables use their discretion in tackling crime on the ground.

That is a matter that both Mr Rumbles and the convener of Grampian joint police board have raised. It is clear that we are delivering in relation to a formula that we inherited. What matters most is that we have the record numbers of police officers that have been championed by Chief Constable McKerracher. The Government is delivering, the member is receiving, and his communities are benefiting not only from the recruitment of ever more police officers, but from their delivery on the ground. The Justice Committee's inquiry into the effective use of police resources complements the Government's work. In response to the committee's report, and to ensure delivery of the Government's vision, I intend to ask our independent professional adviser on policing, Paddy Tomkins, to conduct a short-life review to ensure that the more specialist and high-profile police operations do not lead to the removal of front-line police officers from visible policing in our communities and to ensure that all parts of Scotland get the best possible service when something unusual or complex happens. We will invest £94 million during the current session of Parliament, not only to fund directly 1,000 additional officers but to improve retention and redeployment. We want more police officers to become part of the fabric of communities, using their local knowledge to build strong relationships with families and businesses in their local area. That is not about numbers or head count. It is about capacity.

Given that we inherited the lowest level of recruitment since devolution, the member will be glad to know that we managed to deliver 150 additional officers by the end of the previous financial year. The Government is on the case and is delivering despite the difficulties that we inherited—not just the lowest ever level of recruitment but the fact that 2,300 officers are due  to retire. That is why it is not simply a question of recruitment and why we are committed to retention and redeployment.

Not at the moment. I need to make some progress. We are investigating how we can retain officers' skills and experience. It is important that support services are delivered as efficiently as possible throughout Scotland. That is why the Scottish Police Services Authority was established with cross-party support. In a small country, we should not do things eight times if we need only do them once. The SPSA exists to support forces by freeing up officers to do what they do best—delivering front-line policing to our communities. The authority has existed for less than a year but it has already started to deliver improvements in the quality and efficiency of police support services, releasing resources that can be ploughed back into front-line policing. We have no plans to change the number of police forces in Scotland, but we will continue to consider the scope for the SPSA to take on additional support services when it is more efficient and effective for services to be provided nationally.

A lot of copy is being generated by one particular newspaper. I met the SPSA this week and it does an excellent job. I also meet ACPOS and will be going to the Police Federation shortly. There is general recognition that matters are working out in the best interests not simply of policing in Scotland, but of our communities. It is not only support services that are important. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, which is supported by the SPSA but is operationally independent, plays an important role in dealing with the challenge of serious organised crime. We set up the serious organised crime task force to ensure that we get the maximum collective impact on organised crime from the efforts of our police forces and other law enforcement agencies. On counter-terrorism, the Glasgow airport incident demonstrated that even the largest force in Scotland needs to collaborate. That is backed up by ACPOS's work on the forces' capacity and capability to deliver on national and strategic  objectives. Partnership working is more important than ever—it makes more clearly the link to the wider community engagement agenda in which the police have a key leadership role. Only by working in partnership can we achieve success in some of our key challenging areas, such as drugs, alcohol, violence, gangs and antisocial behaviour. Ideally, we want to prevent people from becoming embroiled in the criminal justice system by ensuring that the police are in our communities, that they use their experience and discretion in considering how to respond and that they act as role models. Policing in Scotland is special. It is essential that we continue to attract, retain and reward the right people with the right skills. We have shown our commitment to the Scottish police service by our acceptance of last year's arbitration of the pay award without quibble or question. It is essential to recognise that at the heart of successful policing is the constable, using his or her discretion, judgment and local knowledge to do what is right in the circumstances in their area. Our whole approach to policing and to government reflects just that. We are building capacity at the local level to reduce crime and fear of crime. We are supporting that nationally not only to ensure consistency and the freeing up of police officers, but to ensure that we have the capability to respond nationally where we need to. In addition, we are working to ensure that Scotland's police recruit the best and that it is exciting and rewarding to work in Scottish police services. I welcome the work of the Justice Committee and the opportunity to debate this important area. I look forward to the Justice Committee's inquiry into community policing and to working with the committee on that.

I welcome the spirit in which the debate has taken place and the concordat that the parties reached beforehand on the amendment, which we are happy to support. Discussions are on-going not just in the chamber but, as Mr Martin and other members mentioned, between the Government here and the Government down in London. The attempt to achieve a solution to a shared problem is to be supported. The chamber has taken a uniform view on some general issues. Members from all parties have  welcomed the appointment of Lord Cullen. We are fortunate to have such an esteemed member of the judiciary take charge of the review. I wish I could claim some credit for the idea but, as is so often the case in matters relating to the law of Scotland, it emanated from the Lord Advocate. The Government is grateful for her suggestion and is pleased that Lord Cullen has accepted the appointment. His appointment shows the importance that we place on the issue. Lord Cullen will bring not just his great stature but a great deal of judicial wisdom and common sense to the matter, as he has to other issues with which he has dealt. The Solicitor General and others mentioned that the act that we are reviewing is from 1976. That is not particularly old in jurisprudential terms—Mr Aitken referred to the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, and Mr Matheson and others mentioned legislation with an even longer history. However, it is appropriate that we review the 1976 act, because our society has changed. The Solicitor General and many other speakers testified to the fact that the system has served us reasonably well. Clearly, there have been some failures and people have not obtained from the system all that they hoped, expected or were entitled to expect from it. There is nothing fundamentally wrong with the system in Scotland, but we must look at how we can improve it. I am sure that that will be Lord Cullen's approach. I assure members that my officials will give Lord Cullen a note of the points that have been made today and will ensure that he is aware of the tenor of the debate. I am sure that he will consider with interest some of the specific issues that have been raised. One such issue is the status of sheriffs' recommendations. Because Lord Cullen will address the matter, it is inappropriate for me to be other than circumspect or to do more than outline the current position. As Nigel Don and others indicated, sheriffs make recommendations in about a third of all FAIs. Justice officials maintain a database of recommendations that are made by sheriffs at the conclusion of FAIs. The database includes the name and contact details of the person or body to which the sheriff addressed the recommendations, which permits interested parties to contact that person or body to inquire into how or whether they intend to comply with the recommendations. I am sure that that procedure can be improved, and no doubt Lord Cullen will reflect on the matter. On the question of representation, interaction will be required with the legal aid system and its interface with members of the public and bereaved families, as Christine Grahame pointed out. Of course, there has been significant progress on that  issue; for example, the Crown has published a brochure on the matter and meetings now take place with the relevant fiscal to address problems. Michael McMahon highlighted the issue of road traffic deaths. However, as with military deaths, such matters are reserved to Westminster. As Karen Gillon pointed out, I have already made clear to the chamber my views on the various difficulties with the Scotland Act 1998, but the fact is that I can no more deal with certain aspects of road traffic incidents than I can reduce the current drink-driving limit. That interface must be dealt with. Members have asked whether non-military deaths abroad should be considered in Scotland, and my experience as a defence agent suggests that they should not. If someone dies in suspicious circumstances abroad, the case is much better dealt with by the jurisdiction in which it happened. In my sojourn as a defence agent, I once dealt with a murder that happened outside Scotland—murder is one of the few offences that, if it happens outside Scotland, can still be tried in this country—and I do not think that the interests of justice were best served by such a move. Indeed, it became clear from the evidence that it might have been better for the authorities in the country where the incident took place to have proceeded with the case. If a foreign tourist falls victim to an incident in this country, there are good reasons why we seek to address it here instead of remitting the case back to their home country. For example, we can deal with the preservation of evidence and the availability of witnesses, which can otherwise become hugely complicated. I understand people's concerns, but the general rule of thumb is that non-military deaths abroad are best dealt with by the jurisdiction in which the incident took place and with which we have reciprocal arrangements. I want to take some time to address the important issue of military deaths. Like all members, we feel that there should be flexibility in addressing the needs of the bereaved. Although I accept the points that members such as Keith Brown have raised, I make it clear that we do not seek to stand on ceremony in relation to enforcement in such matters. We might be talking about the death of a young soldier or airman whose domicile became Scotland only because he had been based at RAF Kinloss or RM Condor marine base for some time. If that soldier's family lived in east London, for example, they might wish the hearing to take place closer to their home. I will leave that matter for discussions with the UK Government and to Lord Cullen for comment, but I believe that there should be some flexibility to give such families choice. The wife and family of a young serving soldier who died might have moved  to be nearer her parents. As members have made clear, we need to look after the interests of the people who have suffered such loss. I will give specific legal details in response to the issues raised by Karen Gillon in a moment. First, I should say that, although I wish I could treat the Scotland Act 1998 with as much disdain as people sometimes think I treat it with, the fact is that issues involving defence and international affairs, under which categories military funerals clearly fall, are reserved to Westminster. There should be changes to the reserved status of defence and international affairs—

The short answer is that we cannot act until we have the flexibility provided by changes to the Scotland Act 1998. We are a creature of that statute and are constrained by its provisions. Members might have reservations about changing that legislation but, as I know from a civil context, we need to address practical issues such as how the Crown Office interacts with Government institutions elsewhere. For some time, we have been pursuing a solution to the problem of how investigations and inquiries into the deaths on active service overseas of Scotland-based personnel can be dealt with, such that we can remove the additional distress that having to travel south of the border for inquest hearings causes bereaved families. The issue has been under consideration with the UK Government since last year, and I have written to the Secretary of State for Defence, Des Browne, this week to emphasise the urgency that we attach to it and to reiterate our desire to find a solution. That letter was copied to the Lord Chancellor Jack Straw and other Whitehall ministers with an interest in the issue. As I have said, the chief complication is that the issue of inquiries into military deaths is reserved. The existing Scottish legislation only allows the holding of fatal accident inquiries into deaths that take place within Scotland or on the continental shelf. The existing legislation on coroners permits inquests to be held only within England. Inquests into the deaths of Scotland-based service personnel are triggered because bodies are repatriated by the Ministry of Defence to Royal Air Force airfields in the south of England for operational reasons, and there is no legislative basis for transferring responsibility for investigations to Scotland.  Therefore, there are difficult legal and policy issues that have to be resolved and which will take time to work through. The necessary legislative steps would require to be taken both at Westminster and in the Scottish Parliament, but only after a section 30 order under the Scotland Act 1998 had been made to permit this Parliament to deal with a matter that is currently reserved. Without a section 30 order, we cannot do so. We have consistently argued for the section 30 route to be followed to address the issue, and the lack of progress at the Whitehall end is the subject of the letter that I sent to the Secretary of State for Defence. Members might have seen Des Browne's reply to my letter, in which he raises two issues. First, FAIs cannot be held into deaths that occur outside Scotland. However, as I have said, there is no appetite to investigate all Scottish deaths abroad—military deaths are the only cause of concern, but the Scottish Parliament cannot legislate for those alone because that would cut across the defence reservation. That is why we need a section 30 order and why the Scottish Parliament cannot legislate on the matter by itself. The second issue relates to the fact that inquests into military deaths abroad are mandatory. The Ministry of Justice is concerned that if inquiries into the deaths of Scotland-based service personnel were held in Scotland, they would not be mandatory. Des Browne says that he cannot contemplate changes until there is a commitment to mandatory investigations. The issue of whether inquiries should be mandatory or discretionary can be discussed further with Whitehall ministers and if a section 30 order is made, it will be for the Scottish Parliament to decide whether such inquiries are to be mandatory or discretionary.

We have indicated our general support for the idea—that is why we support Margaret Smith's amendment. I would be delighted if we could deal with the issue ourselves but, for that to happen, we would have to be able to deal with defence and international affairs, which are reserved matters. If we had that ability, we could announce the withdrawal of our people from Iraq because we would be able to act without recourse to Westminster. However, we cannot bring our troops home from Iraq—or reduce the drink-driving limit—because such matters are reserved.

If Des Browne agrees to the making of a section 30 order, we can begin to make progress; without a section 30 order, it would be ultra vires for us to proceed—the Parliament simply could not take such action. That is the position. As long as defence and international affairs are reserved matters, the Parliament could decide that it wished to bring our troops home from Iraq, but it could not legislate to that effect because to do so would be outwith our competence and our powers. If a section 30 order is not made we will not be able to proceed, and although we have requested an order, one has not been forthcoming. We have written back to Des Browne, and I am open to meeting him or Jack Straw—or their officials—because I recognise that there is a desire not only in my party and the Government but throughout the chamber to take action. That is why we support the amendment. I welcome Des Browne's letter, but I cannot agree with him that the matter is for Scottish ministers alone. To be fair to him, I accept that it is not a matter for him alone, either. There must be agreement. However, a section 30 order must be the initial trigger to allow us to have the legislative competence to bring about change. Further meetings involving officials will take place soon to iron out the problems. Of course, we will have to consider the significant practical difficulties that are involved in carrying out fatal accident inquiries, or variations of them, if the death occurs abroad—particularly the difficulties that relate to the compellability of witnesses and the obtaining of evidence. I know that the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General have legitimate concerns about those difficulties, and it would undoubtedly take time for appropriate processes to be introduced. There will also be considerable resource implications if investigations into military deaths abroad are to be investigated here—Mr Martin and other members mentioned that. However, the coroners service in England has long experience of such investigations and of dealing with such complications, and I am confident that the issues can be addressed in Scotland. [ Interruption. ]

Ministers are acutely aware of the sensitivity of the subject and will continue to press the UK Government in order to find a solution that will ease the position of bereaved families. Movement and legislation north and south of the border will be needed. However, I give members the undertaking that if the Government, as a body politic, is given a section 30 order, it will not seek to impede matters or interfere in any way. The Government and the Parliament cannot act without that order. Des Browne's openness in spirit and his suggestions must be matched by a contribution from him. Given what has been said in the debate and members' willingness to act, I hope that the consensus that has been reached by all the major parties in the chamber will be replicated between the Government here and that south of the border.

I thank my predecessor Ms Jamieson for correctly identifying that Scotland faces a booze-and-blade culture. We are seeking to build on what has been done to tackle that problem. The Government is taking further action to tackle alcohol-related crime and antisocial behaviour through our support for the national violence reduction unit's work on targeted and sustained enforcement, our promotion of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, and our support for the cashback for communities scheme, which will offer positive opportunities for young people in every local authority area in Scotland. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has established a sub-group to consider the provision of care in police custody. The work of that sub-group will include work with other agencies to identify the most appropriate and effective alternatives to detaining drunk and incapable persons for their own safety. The Government is also seeking to introduce a polluter-pays approach to ensure that the licensed trade contributes to the costs of dealing with the consequences of alcohol misuse.

That is primarily a matter for local decision makers. We want local partners to make decisions on what is best for their  communities. I stand by the position that I took. I visited Albyn house and was impressed by what it provides, and I am keen to see such provision rolled out, particularly in my home city of Edinburgh. The alcohol industry should consider making voluntary contributions to tackle the problem. It profits from the bar and it is to some extent responsible for the consequences of drunkenness. However, whether it chooses to do so is a matter for it, at present. I can only reiterate that the Government believes that it is essential that those contributions should not simply be voluntary. Licensing boards should be able to seek to ensure that those who profit from the sale of alcohol over the till or across the bar meet some of the costs of the consequences of its abuse. We believe that that will be available next year. It will be up to Aberdeen City Council to take the appropriate action.

Absolutely. As the First Minister mentioned today, we clearly need to ensure that we strike the right balance. There is a problem in Scotland with very cheap alcohol—often very high-strength alcohol, such as strong ciders and strong lagers. We need to ensure that we use the fiscal measures that are available. Other countries, such as Australia, have measures by which brewers are incentivised to try to ensure better consequences for society. In Scotland, we need to ensure that we get things right by tackling the cheap ciders and high-strength lagers that fuel the problem. Equally, we need to recognise that our fine malt whiskies—and, indeed, many of our beers, which are low percentage alcohol by volume—are protected and assisted. The problem in Scotland is not the drink but how we drink it. I believe that Alasdair Morgan is correct that fiscal measures have a role to play. They work in Australia: I am sure that, if Scotland had fiscal autonomy, we could make them work here.

The Minister for Communities and Sport and I met the chief constable of Strathclyde Police on 19 March to discuss how his force and partners are addressing the problem of domestic violence.

Far from robbing from disadvantaged communities, the purpose of the £400,000 that we have given to the Crown Office's civil recovery unit is to help it to strengthen its operations to ensure that we maximise the recovery of such assets from perpetrators of crime and drug dealers. I would have thought that that would be welcomed. That small amount of money has been invested to ensure that even more than the £11.8 million, or whatever has been recouped to date, is taken in the future. We believe that that investment will add to the amount. This may or may not be of concern to Mr Henry, but I point out that some of the discussions that I have had with Stephen House have been about submissions by him and other officers saying that they want a level of incentivisation. The Government has not precluded that. If Stephen House and others can persuade us that the idea has merit, we will happily consider it. Mr Henry may think that the suggestion is morally abhorrent or wrong, but we believe that if it results in more money being taken from people whom we need to take down so that we have more money to put into the communities that have been disadvantaged and devastated, that can only be a good thing.

I cannot comment on any matter that is under investigation. However, I have written to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. The clear position is that the United States of America has admitted to wrongdoing at various bases. Scotland has not been included in the investigations that were sought by the United Kingdom Government. It appears to us to be appropriate that David Miliband seek assurances from the United States that Scottish airports were not used for rendition flights and that, if they were, he should extract from the Americans an apology and an assurance  that those airports will not henceforth be used for that. We have written to the British Government about that and we expect to receive answers. If those answers appear, I will make them available to the Scottish public, to Jamie Hepburn and, of course, to the chief constable of Strathclyde Police, if events of such significance have occurred in his patch.

Absolutely—I give Elaine Smith that assurance. Antisocial behaviour and violence in Scotland are multifaceted problems that we must seek to address in a multitude of ways and through a multitude of agencies. That is why I am more than happy to support Strathclyde Police's actions, particularly through its violence reduction unit, and the campaign by the Airdrie & Coatbridge Advertiser that Elaine Smith mentioned. As part of my visit, I will visit Airdrie United Football Club, which has a project to try to divert from crime young men and children who appear to be spiralling out of control in school. I will also visit a school in which a community officer is embedded. That shows that the Government is prepared to work with newspapers, the local authority—in relation to education provision—and the local police. We have a common cause, which is to address an underlying problem. That problem must be tackled and we will work with whomever and whatever necessary to address it.

Work to refurbish and extend Alloa sheriff court has commenced on site and is due to be complete by August 2008.

Absolutely. It is accepted that the project has been slower to start on site than was originally anticipated. That was due to a number of legal title issues in relation to the procurement of the adjacent district court building. The Scottish Court Service and we as a Government are delighted that Clackmannanshire Council is assisting us in seeking to ensure that the adjacent building can be brought on board so that the court can be expanded and so that we can address the requirements of the sheriff court, which current and past sheriffs have pronounced to be entirely unacceptable not only to those who sit on the shrieval benches but to court staff, procurators fiscal and the citizens who go there to do their duty as jurors or witnesses. It is a cause for regret that progress has been delayed. Matters are on-going and some business has to be dealt with at Stirling court because of pressures. The outcome will be a much better court, which is suitable for all. All sheriff and jury trials will be able to be held there if necessary. The fiscal's office will be located next door and the citizens advice bureau will remain as a tenant of the Scottish Court Service at its current address. I am more than happy to give the undertaking that the member seeks, which I am sure the Scottish Court Service would give anyway. It is a case of joining up work with the citizens advice bureau and the procurator fiscal to serve the interests of justice in Alloa and Clackmannanshire better.

As a Government we are committed to listening to young people and involving them in all policy developments that affect them. For example, young people have been involved in designing the cashback brand for the redistribution of proceeds of crime money and the Scottish Youth Parliament's justice convener sits on our antisocial behaviour review external project board, which will also be seeking young people's views on the way forward.

I am not aware of the particular matter to which Jeremy Purvis refers, but I am more than happy to consider it. He makes good points. Although young men might be guilty of a substantial amount of the crime that is perpetrated in our communities, we have to remember that they also tend to form the majority of victims. I have met members of the Scottish Youth Parliament and its justice convener and I have undertaken to meet them again. Earlier this week, I met the Scottish Young Lawyers Association. Young people have to be listened to and treated with respect if we are to promote good behaviour. I am more than happy to undertake to consider such matters. It is the responsibility of this Government to work with our young people and allow them to be all that they can be. It is the responsibility of the Parliament to remember that the overwhelming majority of our young people are good kids who are a credit to themselves, their families and their communities. We have a responsibility to promote good behaviour as much as to punish bad behaviour.

I meet Lothian and Borders Police officers on a regular basis to discuss matters of importance to policing, whether through talking to individual officers serving in this building or having regular meetings with the chief constable.

I know from experience in my constituency that Lothian and Borders Police is involved in work in conjunction with the City of Edinburgh Council—rather than Scottish Borders Council or Midlothian Council—on the short-sided and five-a-side games that are rolled out regularly in Craigmillar and Niddrie. Through the cashback for communities scheme, we have ensured that more than £2 million has been injected into the Scottish Football Association, with more money coming in from HBOS and the Coalfields Regeneration Trust, so there is a pot of some £4 million that the SFA will roll out for football for girls, teams from secondary 1, S2 and S3 and short-sided football. The matter might best be addressed through the SFA. I am happy to pass on the contact to the member. We have also ensured that some £3 million has gone to YouthLink Scotland, so that money can be accessed by groups in local authority areas. The £3 million will be spent throughout the country, but money is designated for particular local authorities. I am sure that through YouthLink Scotland, the SFA and Lothian and Borders Police we can ensure the outcome that I think the member seeks, which is the provision of outlets for our youngsters. We are all aware that in Scotland the devil finds work for idle hands and it is clear that when good people work with youngsters there can be a significant reduction in the crime rate.

As is often the case with debates in the chamber, more heat than light has been generated this morning. As Mr Aitken said in his opening speech, there is a sense of déjà vu, therefore I make no apology for reiterating that there has been a great deal of cant and hypocrisy in the debate, particularly from the Labour-Tory alliance that has congealed around the issue. However, cogent points have been made. In particular, Margaret Smith made it clear—and it  was echoed by John Wilson and others—that 40 per cent of HDC applications are rejected, which shows that clear criteria must be considered. In addition, breaches occur in less than 1 per cent of cases. Mr Wilson was correct—irrespective of the sedentary criticism from Mr McLetchie—about the opportunity to appeal to the Parole Board in cases where there is a breach. Indeed, I think that the majority of appeals are successful. Returning to the hypocrisy of the Tories, we had 18 years of Tory rule with not one new prison. The Tories caused some of the consequences that the Government is now having to address. There has also been cant and hypocrisy from Labour. Ms McNeill seemed to object to extending the scheme to long-term prisoners. Bill Butler fulminated about it. Cathie Craigie oozed false sincerity about it. Mr Martin appeared bullish about it. Let us consider the facts. We are dealing with subordinate legislation today because the previous Administration—a majority Labour Administration—included within the parent act provisions for HDC—

The parent act expressly included provision for HDC to be extended to long-term prisoners. It might be that there was simply an oversight, and Mr Butler did not have the opportunity to—

I will not take an intervention at the moment; I am in the middle of making a point. Perhaps Mr Butler was unable to persuade the then Minister for Justice of the benefit of a sunset clause—if he had been able to do so, we would not be in this situation now. Perhaps the initial error was that a sunset clause was forsaken. The position is that the previous Administration allowed the scheme to be extended to long-term prisoners by subordinate legislation. If we take Ms McNeill's point of view, perhaps it was entirely a mistake. Perhaps the draftsmen somehow created an eligibility for long-term prisoners that could be triggered by subordinate legislation—but that was clearly not what Labour meant. I view the assertions that have been made as cant and hypocrisy. The previous Administration, under Labour, knew that there might be a requirement or a desire to extend the HDC scheme to long-term prisoners, so it provided for that in the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Act 2005. Ministers did not introduce a sunset clause—they did not forsake the provision, because they knew that they might want to use it. Labour's position is utter cant and hypocrisy.  The mention of delay with Bishopbriggs prison is equally so. Thankfully, it appears that the current—although who knows for how long?—Labour leader in the Parliament welcomes the Government's commitment to Bishopbriggs prison being built in the public sector. Why has there been a delay? Because the previous Administration, under the so-called Labour Party—the party of syndicalism and trade unions—went head to head in a two-year competition to decide whether or not the SPS could build the prison. That delayed matters for two years, at a cost of £2 million—with which we could have built a wall and started construction. Fortunately, this new Administration has repudiated the further privatisation of our prison services—privatisation that was instigated by the Labour Government. We have ensured that the prison service will indeed be a prison service and not a service that is operated for private profit. As I have said, our prison service faces difficulties. Fortunately, members from all parties acknowledge the excellent job that is being done by the SPS, our prison governors and our prison staff. They have to be able to deal with serious and violent criminals, and they have to be able to deal with not only drugs but mobile phones coming into prisons. If they have to take the flotsam and jetsam, they will be unable to concentrate on the people they need to concentrate on. They cannot do both, and those who would force them to do so would undermine and jeopardise the job that they do. That is why we need flexibility. Mr Martin thinks that 50 people on HDC is an irrelevant amount. When dealing with the numbers that Mr McKinlay has to deal with in HM Prison Barlinnie in Mr Martin's constituency, 50 is a substantial number. That is why we will vote against the motion. There has been cant and hypocrisy from the Labour-Tory coalition that got us into this mess in the first place. However, in its wisdom, the Labour Party fortunately gave us the opportunity to deliver measures by way of subordinate legislation. It clearly had the foresight to see that a future Government, Executive or Scottish National Party Administration might wish to implement the measures. I thank the Labour Party for its foresight and wisdom in ensuring that measures for long-term prisoners can be dealt with by means of subordinate legislation.

Clearly, I disagree with Mr Aitken, and I ask Parliament not to support the motion to annul the order. Mr Aitken asked "how on Earth we got into this position". Part of the answer is that, during 18 long years of Tory rule in this country, not one new prison was built by the Conservatives. Their cant and hypocrisy about the importance of prisons is undermined by their abject failure to take action. They are culpable in part for the crumbling estate that we face.

Not at the moment. The order forms part of a package of measures that we hope to put in place to ease the on-going inherited problem of overcrowding in our prisons. We are using the flexibility to extend the home detention curfew scheme that was built into the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Act 2005 by the previous Administration. We need prisons to lock up dangerous criminals, and we have to allow the SPS to work with those criminals to rehabilitate them for a return to society. However, the SPS is dealing with record  numbers. Yesterday, the prison population was 8,001, with 379 of those on HDC. That makes it harder for the SPS to do the job that it needs to do with serious offenders. We are tackling the problem. Unlike the Tories, we have announced three new prisons since we took office—in less than a year, when they had 18 years in government. We have also announced a major penal policy review, led by Henry McLeish, to come up with new and effective ideas for reducing reoffending through better managing the transition and reintegration of prisoners back into the community. That is vital to breaking the cycle of reoffending that causes many of the problems that we face in Scotland. The order commencing section 3AA(1)(b) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 came into force on 21 March 2008. As of that date, the Scottish ministers have had the power to release long-term prisoners on home detention curfew licences. The Home Detention Curfew Licence (Prescribed Standard Conditions) (Scotland) (No 2) Order 2008 sets out the standard conditions that are to be imposed on both long-term and short-term prisoners when they are released. It replaces an earlier order that dealt with conditions for short-term prisoners only. Appropriate conditions must be set as a condition of release, but if Parliament annuls the order, no standard conditions will be imposed automatically on all long-term prisoners. That surely cannot be what Mr Aitken intends. Conditions will need to be set in each case, but that will not prevent the release of long-term prisoners on HDC. Offenders who are considered for HDC must have been recommended for release on parole at the halfway stage of their sentence by the Parole Board. They will be due to be released on licence—they are to get out anyway and are simply awaiting authorisation as the approval works its way through the system. The scheme allows them to be released on HDC pending their being released on licence for which they have been approved. If they breach the HDC, they will jeopardise not just release on HDC but their parole. My purpose in asking Parliament to approve the order and to reject the motion to annul it is to give transparency to the process by affording Parliament the same opportunity to agree prescribed standard conditions for long-term prisoners as it had in 2006, when it agreed prescribed standard conditions for short-term prisoners. I assure members that prisoners who are serving long-term sentences cannot be released on home detention curfew unless the Parole Board has already recommended their release at the first parole qualifying date, and they also subsequently  meet the current assessment criteria for HDC. I say to Mr Aitken for the avoidance of doubt that convicted sex offenders will be precluded from applying, so references to Mr Foye are therefore utterly shameful and entirely erroneous. Because of the way in which the parole process and the notification of the Parole Board's decision operate, the maximum time a prisoner could spend on HDC would be about 10 weeks. In reality, we estimate that the period spent on HDC is likely to be nearer six weeks. Just as with release on parole, the specified licence conditions require the prisoner to be subject to local authority social work supervision during the period of HDC. Those supervision arrangements will continue during the subsequent parole period. In addition, HDC licence conditions will take into account any conditions that the Parole Board has recommended for the parole period and can include any conditions that ministers consider to be appropriate. All prisoners released on HDC will be electronically tagged and subject to a curfew condition requiring them to remain at a specified place for about 12 hours per day. The Scottish ministers also have powers to revoke an HDC licence and to recall prisoners to custody if they fail to comply with any licence conditions. Modelling indicates that such measures will free up capacity of about 50 places in the prison system. As I have said before, those 50 places are very much needed as a result of years of neglect. Management of the problem includes our being flexible and using the tools that are available to us, such as HDCs, rather than hectoring the governor of Barlinnie to take just anybody who is sent to him irrespective of the consequences. We have to protect the public and allow the SPS to do its job. What we propose today gets that balance right. My offer to review the HDC scheme stands. The review would go further than the sunset clause that is requested by Labour members, which would impact only on the continuing operation of standard conditions. I therefore ask Parliament to reject the motion to annul the Home Detention Curfew Licence (Prescribed Standard Conditions) (Scotland) (No 2) Order 2008.

I begin by talking about someone who is much more important than Robert Foye: his victim. I cannot begin to imagine the suffering that has been inflicted on her and her family. Her fortitude and resilience throughout the whole tragic process have been truly amazing, and I pay tribute to her determination in seeking to rebuild her life. I apologise unreservedly to her for the shortcomings in our prison system that have allowed that individual to put her through such pain. I will meet this brave young woman and her family soon to give her that apology in person and to pass on with it the admiration and good wishes of all members. As members know, Robert Foye was arrested on 25 August 2007 in the Cumbernauld area, having absconded from Castle Huntly on 18 August. On 23 January this year, he pled guilty to the charge of rape while unlawfully at large. His final sentence for that matter is still pending. We must not lose sight of the full responsibility that he alone bears for that crime. On 24 January this year, I announced to Parliament that the Scottish Prison Service would carry out an urgent internal review of the circumstances surrounding the Robert Foye case and that I would write to Henry McLeish, chair of the Scottish Prisons Commission, emphasising the importance to the Government of the commission's consideration of the use of the open estate as part of its wide-ranging work on the future of prisons in Scotland. I have already made it clear that we have no plans to expand the current open estate, whether at Castle Huntly or Noranside. It is worth noting, too, that there is a welcome downward trend in the numbers of prisoner absconds. In 1996-97, there were 98 absconds from a much smaller prison population; in the past year, there have been 66. However, as the First Minister has said, every abscond is one too many. As members will be aware, the SPS report was published last week. The work of the McLeish commission is on-going, and it is expected to report this summer. The SPS report contained  seven recommendations, and the SPS has established a group to ensure that they are all implemented. It is possible and, indeed, likely that the McLeish commission may make further recommendations. I anticipate that those, too, will be implemented as quickly as possible to ensure that the open estate works as effectively as it can and must. I have asked for two steps to be taken to build public confidence in addition to the implementation of the seven immediate recommendations. First, I have instructed the SPS to establish individual governors at Castle Huntly and Noranside prisons in view of the substantially increased numbers of prisoners now held in those facilities. Secondly, and more important, there will be a clear presumption against returning a prisoner to the open estate if they have previously absconded. That will send the clear message to all those trusted with a place in the open estate that if they abscond from open conditions, they can assume that they will not return to open conditions again without a compelling reason. It is widely accepted that to return a prisoner to society straight from a closed prison does not help to reduce reoffending. Long-term prisoners require a staged return to re-establish relationships with children and families, and to help them prepare for integration with society and improve their employment prospects. I understand the concern that can arise when a prisoner who has absconded previously is returned to open conditions. However, we have to retain the possibility of returning some such offenders to the open estate if we feel that public safety could be enhanced by so doing. Moreover, a blanket ban would be subject to legal challenge. Public safety must always be paramount. That is why the presumption will be against return unless good reason is shown. As an additional safeguard, I have insisted that approval for the return to the open estate of a prisoner who has previously absconded will now be required to be given at SPS headquarters and at a senior level. I expect such approvals to be few and, most important, justifiable. Action is being taken already on absconders, and further action will be taken, if required, in the light of the deliberations of the McLeish commission. The open estate will continue to remain a vital part of our penal system. That is accepted by all parties and is necessary to help break the cycle of reoffending that scars Scotland. The systems in the open estate have been in place for several years and it is right to review them, as we are doing. As the First Minister said last week:  "I think all of us want to see the open estate working at its best." We also want our communities to be kept safe from harm and from dangerous individuals. Previous Labour, Conservative and coalition Administrations in Scotland have seen the open estate as an integral part of managing the prison population. The open estate also gives the Parole Board for Scotland more insight, making decisions on an individual's fitness to be released on licence much easier and more accurate. We would be remiss if we lost sight of that. In his letter of 30 October 2007 to the governor of the SPS open estate, Bill Aitken said: "I have been at pains to underline that I am not opposed to Open Prisons per se. I have stressed this and indeed a number of newspaper articles have represented this view." In response to a parliamentary question from Alex Neil on the purpose of open prisons, my predecessor Cathy Jamieson—the former Minister for Justice—said: "Society benefits first from these long-term prisoners being carefully prepared, in stages, for release."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 5 December 2005; S2W-21073.]  We are well served by our prison service. Prison staff are tasked with making difficult decisions and judgments about difficult and often dangerous individuals in the interests of wider society and public safety. Prison staff do not take lightly the responsibilities that we place on them to make those decisions. We must learn from mistakes and try as best we can to prevent such incidents from happening again. It is impossible to eliminate risk, but prison staff must make judgments every day about how prisoners will behave, and we need to remember that they do so well in the vast majority of circumstances. As Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons, Andrew McLellan, said when publishing his follow-up inspection of the SPS open estate in February 2007: "The Open Estate has a crucial role to play in the preparation of prisoners for release. It should make it possible for prisoners to develop their sense of personal responsibility and be reintegrated into society when they have served their sentences. Thus public safety should be improved. That is why I am pleased to see evidence of real improvement across the Open Estate in Scotland." Nobody underestimates the gravity of the situation, the seriousness of the offence that Robert Foye committed or the hurt and upset that that offence has caused many. We must do everything in our power to ensure that the processes that we use to assess people for transfer to open prisons and to manage them while they are there are as robust and accurate as possible.  The open estate's value has been recognised by previous Administrations of all political hues, by prison inspectors—as I mentioned—and by independent experts. We have taken action. We are implementing the recommendations that are in the SPS report and we have gone further: I have asked Henry McLeish to report separately on open prisons, and we are reviewing the entire penal policy. The Government is committed to achieving the right balance between public safety and confidence and the need to assess prisoners properly and prepare them for release. I do not believe that any of us has the luxury of a simple choice between one option or the other—not if we are serious about delivering and sustaining a safer society for all of us and our communities.

I will deal with Ms McNeill's questions in reverse order. The point about the Parole Board for Scotland is worthy of consideration, and it appears to me that we can happily factor it into our consideration. I think that Ms McNeill has already spoken to the McLeish commission. The issue that she has  raised is important and should be reflected on, and I undertake to ensure that Henry McLeish and his fellow commissioners consider it when they review the use of the open estate. All parties recognise that the open estate is necessary—that recognition has been with us not only under one or two Administrations, but for several generations. Penal experts also accept that the open estate is necessary, but it is clear that matters require to be reviewed, and I give Ms McNeill the undertaking that they will be. The checks that will be made in the future and the criteria that will be used are referred to in the seven recommendations that are contained in the SPS report. Many of the issues in question are procedural and bureaucratic. Action is being taken and proposals are being implemented. It has been made clear that there will be a presumption against returning to the open estate people who have absconded once, and that cases will have to be considered at SPS headquarters. I reiterate that a belt-and-braces approach is being taken. The matter is being put to the McLeish commission, and the SPS's recommendations will be reviewed by that commission. If it believes that there are issues relating to the Parole Board for Scotland or the actions—or, indeed, the inaction—of the SPS, it will pick up on those issues and make recommendations, on which, I assure members, the Government will act.

Notwithstanding the barb against Mr McLeish, I will pass on to the victim those good wishes and the esteem in which she is held by all members of the Parliament. The Scottish Prison Service is dealing with matters with alacrity. As Mr Aitken will be aware, the SPS implemented immediately four of the seven recommendations—recommendations 1, 5, 6 and 7. Other aspects of recommendations 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 will be implemented within up to three months. One aspect of recommendation 2 involves external parties, so it remains rather more problematic. However, it is clear that the recommendations are being dealt with and that action is being taken. The purpose of the McLeish commission is to review the role of the prison estate. As Mr Aitken recognises, there is a role for the open prison estate. In my view, that role is to seek to reintegrate into society those who have been incarcerated for some period of time. That current theory behind the open prison estate is accepted across a broad range of opinion. However, I will listen with an open mind to what Mr McLeish may pick up from others. We will listen to people on that issue and take action. I give Mr Aitken the assurance that action is being taken to deal with matters speedily and that the role of the open estate will be reviewed. Clearly, Mr McLeish's remit is predicated on the fact that we have problems within our penal system, in that far too many people seem to be in prison for relatively trivial matters. To avoid  clogging up the system, we need to ensure that prison is for those who have committed serious offences and who are a danger to our communities. Clearly, judgment calls require to be made at some stage about when those who have been convicted of serious offences or are considered a danger to our communities but are due to be released—a circumstance that we cannot change—should be considered appropriate for reintegration into society. Doubtless, some prisoners will never be considered eligible for the open estate; others will be considered eligible even though they have committed serious and heinous crimes. That is the nature of a society that recognises that people can be reintegrated. One of the roles of prison, as well as seeking to punish, is to rehabilitate. However, I assure Mr Aitken, notwithstanding his disparagement of Mr McLeish, that we will look forward with interest to the commission's conclusions. Mr Aitken can rest assured that we will act upon those.

I assure Mike Pringle that the SPS is not seeking to use the open estate as a repository for prisoners because of the current overcrowding problems that we face, and that steps are being taken to ensure that the necessary judgment calls are made. Recommendations 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 relate to how the SPS will ensure that all judgments are made on the best available evidence. Evidence can never be foolproof and, tragically, would not have sufficed in the case of Robert Foye, with all the difficulties that resulted.  The tariff for serious offences takes into account the fact that all serious offenders have a propensity to reoffend, on the basis that if someone has crossed the proverbial Rubicon it is likely that they will be prepared to do so again. Although Mr Foye probably had a propensity for reoffending, his case was assessed on the basis that he had no previous history of sexual offending. Not all the evidence on sex offenders is scientific, but it is not normal for people to start committing such dreadful, heinous acts at the age of 28, or however old Mr Foye was when he committed his offence. There is no getting away from the fact that the judgment was wrong. It is great to have the wisdom of hindsight, but the SPS has taken action to ensure that such judgment calls—which can only ever be judgment calls, whether they are made by the SPS, by the Parole Board for Scotland or by a judge or sheriff when imposing the sentence that is thought to be best in the circumstances—are based on the best available information. Politicians make judgment calls and sometimes get them wrong. Prison services make judgment calls and, tragically, sometimes get them wrong.

It is for the McLeish commission to decide how best to consider the matter, but I assume that it will take evidence not just on what happens in the Scottish prison estate but on what happens in prison estates elsewhere. That is the direction that the commission has taken on penal policy to date, and I have faith in its ability to address the matter. It is important that we should go back to basics and first principles to work out what we mean by the prison estate, who should be there and what the eligibility criteria should be. We should build on the current circumstances and change them if need be, enhancing and, in some instances, abandoning them, if appropriate. The Government is establishing a presumption against giving  people who breach the considerable trust that has been placed in them a second opportunity to go to the open prison estate. Such prisoners have been convicted of committing offences and the decision to trust them has not been taken lightly. If that trust is breached, they should forfeit some of the rights that they accrued during their period of rehabilitation for good behaviour. As well as establishing the presumption that I have described, we have indicated that the decision to transfer a prisoner to the open estate will now be made not by the governor of a secure prison, but at a senior level in the Scottish Prison Service. A variety of criteria will be taken into account, to ensure that there is uniformity and that all available information—not simply what is known to the prison governor—is viewed. It is not possible for us to go beyond that without getting into difficulties with the European convention on human rights or becoming involved in other court actions, but the presumption that prisoners who breach trust will not be returned to the open estate will stand. We will have the security of knowing that such prisoners will be trusted again only in the most extraordinary circumstances. After such prisoners have broken the trust that they have been given, they will have to show good reason why it is in the public interest that they should be given a second opportunity. Such instances might arise and, if appropriate, it seems to me that the opportunity should be offered, as a blanket refusal is not legally tenable. This Government has introduced a presumption against return to the open estate, which is a change to how the prison estate has operated not simply under previous Governments since devolution, but under an 18-year Tory Government.

No, because we already have an external review in the form of the McLeish commission. Ms McNeill contributed to the commission's inquiries and I have no doubt that if Mr Martin has anything to contribute, Henry McLeish and his colleagues will be prepared to listen to him.  We have made a statement about the case today, we have made the report public and we will see what the McLeish commission finds. If Mr Martin wishes to draw to my attention particular issues, not only am I happy to ensure that Henry McLeish listens to him, but I am more than happy to meet him myself.

A variety of checks and balances exist in the prison system, including Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons, who has reported on the open estate, as I mentioned. He has not been asked to report on the Foye case, but I have no doubt that he will make further comment on the open estate in due course. Although the inspections system was not instigated by this Government, it serves Scotland well and we support and welcome it. Mr Wilson is right to say that we have to ensure that a robust assessment system is in place because it is a matter of fact that that dreadful incident happened, and we must learn lessons from it to minimise the likelihood of such an incident happening again. The McLeish commission offers independent scrutiny and analysis and the Government has undertaken to act on its findings. Mr Wilson was also right to say that external factors have to be considered. Recommendation 2 deals with that point. It says that the SPS will have to interact with community-based justice and social work authorities to ensure that relevant information is available. Those external factors are as important as the behaviour of the individual in prison, and we have to ensure that there is joined-up working between the Scottish Prison Service and criminal justice and social work agencies outside the prison walls.

Notwithstanding her comments, I presume that Cathie Craigie welcomes our decision to have a presumption against giving someone who has absconded a second opportunity to do so—[ Interruption. ] If Mrs Craigie will listen, she will learn that that is a significant change to the policy that we inherited and which was in situ when this tragic incident took place. We have sought to act on the matter. Instead of having a witch-hunt, we need to find out what went wrong and to ensure that we learn lessons from it. The fact is that something went wrong, but we will better serve the interests not only of the victim but of public safety—which is of paramount consideration—if we act on the lessons that we can learn instead of throwing blame around and casting aspersions. The decision whether someone who has absconded once from the open estate should be given a second opportunity will be made not by me but by the assistant director of prisons at the SPS, who, given his very significant position, will be able to examine a range of information. That is how the matter should be dealt with.

I am not able to interact with people who might wish to raise actions under the ECHR—even when we as the Government are  gobsmacked by certain events and find ourselves having to pick up the tab because of the actions or inaction of previous Administrations. The fact is that people go back and forth between the secure estate and the open estate. We inherited that situation and it will continue. I have no doubt that if, in implementing its recommendations, the SPS finds it inappropriate for a particular prisoner to be in the open estate, they will be transferred. Indeed, I would expect nothing less. Equally, if people breach other significant rules—not just those relating to absconds—in a way that constitutes a breach of trust, they, too, should be transferred. From what the SPS and I have said, the member should feel assured that we are not going through the motions with these investigations. Instead, we want to ensure that our communities are as safe as possible. If it becomes clear that an error of judgment has been made about someone who is in the open estate—and if that error is notified—we expect that person to be transferred back to the secure estate in exactly the same way that they would be transferred were they, for example, found to be in possession of drugs, mobile phones or whatever else.

Absolutely. The symbolism—indeed, the fact—of our introducing a presumption against returning to the open estate prisoners who have absconded once should send the message that we are going to err on the side of caution. That is certainly the approach taken in the review. I thank Andrew Welsh for his well-made point that, despite the disrepute that it has been brought into because of this dreadful case, the open prison system remains important and vital and commands support from all parties in the chamber.

We are committed to improving the way the justice system responds to rape and other sexual offences in Scotland—through law, through practice and through challenging public attitudes. We will introduce legislation to reform the law in light of the Scottish Law Commission's report. We have asked the Scottish Law Commission to examine the law of evidence and in particular the Moorov doctrine. By 2009, the Crown Office will have implemented the 50 recommendations in the report on the investigation and prosecution of sexual offences. Last week I announced funding for Rape Crisis Scotland to undertake a publicity campaign to challenge attitudes and preconceptions regarding rape.

The Government will move as expeditiously as possible with regard to legislation; that was the commitment that we gave at the outset. We accept that inappropriate comments have been unhelpful. There are laws to ensure that victims giving evidence are protected from questions. Clearly, language used in the courts and elsewhere can be inappropriate. We need to change the law. Changes have already been made, and we pay credit to past Administrations and to the Lord Advocate for her role in ensuring that changes have been made when necessary. We will not hesitate to make further changes when necessary.  However, individuals in Scotland—particularly males—have to challenge their own attitudes, consider their own language and accept some responsibility. Legislative change there must be; but cultural and attitudinal change there must also be.

The debate has been consensual, despite Mr Aitken's comments on the constitution. Like other members, I pay tribute to Dave Thompson for securing the debate, in which we have had the opportunity to participate and make clear our views—which seem to be uniform—on the drink-driving problems that we face. Members have welcomed the proposal to reduce the drink-driving limit. I also pay tribute to Dave Thompson's tireless campaigning on the matter. He has sought to ensure that he brings together an array of issues, and he pointed out, correctly, that the position that he has articulated has also been articulated by organisations such as the British Medical Association, ACPOS and the Scottish Police Federation. Because of that, as I said, we owe him a great deal of gratitude. As Mr Thompson, Alison McInnes and Claire Baker mentioned, the legislation that deals with drink-driving is significantly out of date. It is many years since I ceased practising, but I recall section 6 cases relating to those who had been caught driving under the influence of alcohol. Since then, things have moved on in a variety of ways—the state of roads, the speed of vehicles and an array of other matters—and the issue must be addressed. The problem of migrant workers drink-driving, for which there is no clear and simple reason, is something that I have faced in my constituency. We are liaising with the police north and south of the border on the reasons for that. As Claire Baker mentioned, the issue could doubtless be one of enforcement. Anecdotally, however, I have been told that the problem relates to the alcohol limit for drivers—the limit in Poland is lower, and some Poles who come here seem to think that the higher limit here is the green light for go. That is no excuse for them consuming enough alcohol to put them above the 80mg limit. There is anecdotal evidence—in some cases, but not all—that those people think that, because the limit is higher here, they can indulge themselves. That is certainly not the case.  The problem arises not simply among migrant workers, who contribute a great deal to our economy, but among our own people—in particular, those who exceed the limit through ignorance. That is no defence, as the law has always said. There is also a recalcitrant minority who seem to think that the law does not apply to them and who endanger not only themselves but, tragically, others. In response to Bill Aitken, I say that the Government would prefer matters to be dealt with on a pan-UK basis. That is why we have been in communication from an early juncture with both the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Transport. We want them to move. However, if they do not do so and if it is felt that Scotland has to move—which is the position of the British Medical Association, ACPOS and others, as Dave Thompson correctly pointed out—it would be negligent for us not to do so. I have discussed the proposal with chief constables in Scotland. They would prefer matters to be dealt with on a pan-UK basis, but they see no impediment to having different limits north and south of the border if that is the only way of addressing the issue. I hope that that does not come about, but if it does it will at least address road safety in Scotland. The campaign is part of a wider Government agenda regarding Scotland's relationship with alcohol. The Government has made it clear that we cannot go on as we are. It is not simply about danger on the roads; it is about the effect on our health service, the impact on our criminal justice system and people's inability to maintain their involvement in the labour market—they phone up on Monday with the excuse that they have a stomach bug although everybody, including their employer, knows that they have been on the batter all weekend. The cost of alcohol abuse is damaging us in Scotland and we must tackle it. As others have said, there is a significant problem in the fact that the 80mg limit was set back in the 1960s, before some members were even born. To put that in perspective, the limit was introduced in the year in which Celtic became the first UK team to win the European cup. That shows just how much time has passed. Scotland and the rest of the UK are very different now from how they were when the limit was set. Our laws have evolved and adapted over the past 40 years to reflect the changes in society on a multitude of matters, and it appears to us that the current drink-driving limit is a conspicuous exception to that. Some new laws have had to be passed as a result of changes in society, to deal with the internet and mobile communications. Equally, some existing laws have had to be reviewed and some are undergoing review. It therefore appears to be an apposite time to reconsider how we should address drink-driving.  Scottish Government research that was published today found that, although there has been a reduction in the level of drink-driving, 5 per cent of people who were surveyed thought that they had driven while over the limit in the past 12 months. The research recommends a reduction in the drink-driving limit to a less ambiguous level, as there is still confusion about how drinks and units of alcohol relate to the legal limits. Some of the confusion is not simply down to individuals. Glasses of wine may now contain substantial volumes, which people often do not expect to be served. Beer that is sold in public houses and elsewhere often has a higher alcohol by volume percentage than it did in the past, and consuming two pints of one brand rather than another can put someone over the limit. In addition, cars are faster and roads are busier than they were in the past, and those factors make drink-driving significantly more dangerous now. That is why, in 2005, an estimated 30 people in Scotland were killed and 170 were seriously injured in alcohol-related road accidents. Sadly, around one in nine road deaths in Scotland occurs in an alcohol-related incident. Research indicates clearly that the numbers are coming down, but too many people are still dying or being seriously hurt on our roads. Lowering the drink-driving limit would reduce the number of deaths and injuries, and it would reduce confusion and ambiguity about what the limit is. Lowering the limit would not just bring us up to date chronologically; it would bring us into line with most of the rest of Europe. During the past 10 years, several European countries, including France, Germany, Spain and Denmark, have reduced their drink-driving limit to 50mg. Research has shown that the countries with the most success in tackling drink-driving are those that have reduced the limit to below 80mg. Figures produced by the Department for Transport estimate that such a measure could prevent 50 deaths and 250 serious injuries. Several members mentioned that. The list of organisations that support the idea is substantial, as Dave Thompson pointed out. That is why I have written to the Secretary of State for Transport, calling on the UK Government to lower the drink-driving limit to 50mg. I have also called for the introduction of police powers to randomly breath-test drivers at the roadside. Research indicates that a hard core is causing the problem in the main, although others are also involved. The risk of being caught is a deterrent and random breath-tests are a significant aspect of that. A pilot has been suggested, but the Government would prefer the UK to implement the measures throughout the United Kingdom. The issue is rightly within the UK's domain at present. The  weekend's tragedy in Gloucestershire should be a salutary lesson that action must be taken. If the problem cannot be addressed, it is our view that the UK Government should work with us to allow the people of Scotland to make the necessary changes, to make Scotland safer and stronger, to reduce drink-driving and, as a consequence, to save lives.   Meeting closed at 17:32.

I remind the chamber what I said at the outset and of the condition of our prison system—a system that we inherited and that is in a mess not simply as a result of the previous Administration, but as a result of what that Administration took over when the Tories went out on their ear back in 1997. We inherited a mess of rising prison numbers such that we now have record following upon record and a crumbling prison estate—because action was not taken to ensure that the appropriate required places were available.

In a minute. Thankfully, this Government decided to commit to three new prisons, the first of which will come on track in January. Until then, we have a significant difficulty. It is simply not good enough to suggest that the governor of Barlinnie should seek to find additional space under a cupboard or in a locker. That is not how we run our prisons. It was negligence such as that that got us into the situation in which the taxpayer in Scotland is paying millions of pounds to people who were convicted of crimes and sentenced to prison—because the Tories and Labour failed to address the problems of the European convention on human rights that they were warned about. As a consequence, this Government is having to shell out to pay damages, as well as to ensure that we have a proper prison estate.

There has been a great deal of cant and hypocrisy from the Labour-Tory coalition. They united at the Justice Committee and they are uniting again now. Before I come to the falsehoods, I will run through some of that cant and hypocrisy. First, I will deal with the cant and hypocrisy from Labour.

I am dealing with Mr Butler's point. Let us deal with the sunset clause. As my colleague whispered in my ear, despite the fact that it was in government for eight years, a sunset clause never arose under the Labour Administration; never once did that Administration introduce such a clause. Then—though they forget it—there is the arithmetic. There were 29 days in February this year because it is a leap year. On 22 of those days we had record prison numbers. The only reason it was 22 out of 29 is that there are no admissions to prisons during the weekend. I ask members to look at the figures and realise that time is of the essence. Mr Martin seemed to think that there is no problem. It was made quite clear that it would take two months to get a sunset clause into an SSI and introduce it—two months, when there were 22 rises in February alone. There is gross hypocrisy. If Mr Martin wants to know the date when the home detention order will come into force, it is 21 March. We have neither latitude nor time. Labour was prepared to allow the Scottish Prison Service to shell out millions to criminals. We are taking action to ensure that our prison staff  are protected and, most important, that we do not run into further difficulties that compound the agony for us as a Government and, in particular, for the taxpayer in having to pay out.

I will now deal with the cant and hypocrisy from the Tories. The Tories go on about building prisons. They were in charge from 1979 to 1997. Who in Scotland can forget the years under the iron heel of Margaret Thatcher? Lo and behold—

I am happy to acknowledge Mr Butler's superior knowledge on the matter.

Yes, well, what they did do—

I am happy to defer to Mr Butler's superior knowledge of sea fish regulations. I have no doubt that he has been concentrating on them, because he has not been keeping his eye on the ball on other matters. I advise Ms MacDonald that we would have to withdraw at least one regulation, which would mean going back before going forward. That would take approximately two months, and we do not have that time. I will deal with the cant and hypocrisy of the Tories, who are crying out for prisons to be built. When they were in power between 1979 and 1997, not three prisons did they build, not two prisons did they build, not one prison did they build. They built zero prisons. They cannot get enough of prison building, but when they had the opportunity for 18 years, they built not one. I read about Miss Goldie fulminating about the outrage that people who are convicted and sentenced to four years of imprisonment could be released after 18 months with the possibility of tagging. I point out to her now, as I pointed out in a previous speech, that Jonathan Aitken esquire was sentenced to 18 months but served only seven months, including many months in an open prison—the kind that is so castigated by members on the Tory benches. He was then, through a heinous soft option, released to home detention with curfew and tagging. If Miss Goldie or Bill Aitken do the mathematics, they will realise that reducing 18 months to seven months is like reducing fours years to 18 months. [ Interruption. ]

The cant and hypocrisy from the Tories and Labour is substantial, but there  have also been factual inexactitudes. Mr Lamont sought not only to provide misinformation about Scotland but to provide misinformation about England and Wales. Far be it from me to defend the Ministry of Justice there, but I remind him that statutory exclusions in the English scheme deal with sex offenders and violent offenders. Indeed, 85 per cent of curfews are successfully completed south of the border. The SNP recognises the problem it has inherited and it presents the action that it is taking in building prisons, but we need to provide more than simply warm words—and, indeed, more than the hectoring and lecturing that we hear from Bill Aitken. We need to provide solutions. That is why we are moving the motion. A shameful coalition of Labour and the Tories is seeking to play politics with our prisons. They are jeopardising the good order in our prisons and undermining the excellent work that our staff do. That is shameful. I urge members to support my motion at decision time.

I am grateful to Mr McLetchie for giving that explanation to Parliament. I welcome the opportunity to come before the Parliament to argue for a straightforward, commonsense measure. The draft Home Detention Curfew Licence (Amendment of Specified Days) (Scotland) Order 2008 does not change the criteria for access to home detention curfew. High-risk offenders will still be excluded, and everyone will still have to serve a quarter of their sentence first. The draft order does not change how HDC operates or how prisoners are assessed to determine their suitability for the scheme. All that I propose is to use the flexibility provided for in the previous Administration's legislation to enable low-risk, short-term prisoners to be out on home detention curfew for slightly longer—for the last six months, rather than the last four and a half months, of their sentence. Given those facts, I was surprised by the Justice Committee's rejection last week of the draft order in its present form. However, I am confident that the Parliament as a whole will take a broader view and support such a modest and reasonable measure. [ Interruption. ] I will not take interventions at the moment—there were plenty of opportunities to discuss matters at the Justice Committee. In considering the draft order and SSI 2008/36, I want fellow members to bear in mind the fact that during the prisons debate only three weeks ago—on 21 February—I reported that the prison population had reached an all-time high, that it had been 8,026 on the Friday before and that it was 8,045 on that day. Today, the prison population is 8,067. The Justice Committee sought to insert a sunset clause in the draft order, but members did not appear to object to the extension of HDC in principle. The clear implication is that the Government needed only a short-term solution to a short-term problem, which would be solved when Addiewell prison opens. If only that were true. We are talking about a significant problem. The trends that have led us to the position that we are in are inherited—they have been building up throughout the country for many years. The continuing increase in the prison population and the need to refurbish or rebuild other parts of the prison estate to ensure that that they meet health and safety standards and standards that are considered acceptable today has put the prison service in Scotland under intolerable strain. The Government recognises that we live in Caledonia, not utopia. That is why we have committed ourselves to three new prisons.  HM Prison Addiewell will, of course, buy the Scottish Prison Service some relief, but it is not the total solution. On current trends, even when that prison comes on stream, the SPS will still operate well over prison design capacity. I am not here to argue for a quick fix; I am here to argue for one element of our integrated strategy on the better management of offenders in Scotland. As part of that strategy, I made a commitment to the Justice Committee. I said that when Addiewell opens, I will review the whole operation of the HDC scheme. The committee rejected that offer, which was made on the parliamentary record. I regret that rejection. We are well aware that Scotland has the third highest imprisonment rate in Europe—approximately 141 people per 100,000 of the population are imprisoned—but there is nothing to confirm that Scots are genetically more prone to criminality than other people. At a time of reducing offending patterns, it is perverse that an increasing number of people are incarcerated. Our prisons cannot be repositories for those who suffer from underlying mental health problems or drink or drug addictions. We need to reverse the trend that exists. The Government is taking steps that will begin to address the problem over the long term. There are members who support alternatives to custody. We must begin to take that agenda forward and ensure that alternatives are not seen as a soft option—they should be seen as a credible option. Rather than our having the injury of crimes that have been committed compounded by the agony of having to provide free bed and board, those who harm or damage our community must pay with the sweat of their brow for the harm that they have caused. We are working towards that, and we believe that it is the Government's and the Parliament's duty to acknowledge the problems that exist, take responsibility for them and take action to help alleviate the pressure on the prison estate.

No, I will not. The existing HDC scheme, which the previous Administration introduced in July 2006, provides for the early release of short-term prisoners—those who are serving between three months and four years—for a period of between two weeks and four and a half months. There are around 330 people on home detention curfew right now. The scheme provides for early release from prison, but people on it are subject to control under curfew, normally for around 12 hours a day. The hours when the curfew applies and the extent of curfew control may vary, but compliance with the curfew is monitored by electronic tagging.  As I said, I ask members to support motion S3M-1488, which will extend the maximum period for which the current group of prisoners who are eligible for release can be released on HDC from four and a half months to six months. The legislation that governs the HDC scheme requires that prisoners in custody must serve at least a quarter of their sentence, so the full period of six months will apply only to prisoners who have been sentenced to two years or more.

No, I will not. The provisions will not mean that more short-term prisoners will be released on HDC. They will mean that the same prisoners who are assessed as suitable for HDC can be released up to six months, rather than the current period of four and a half months, early. The effect will be to create a little but very much needed space in the prison estate. We have no reason to believe that prisoners who are released on HDC for six months rather than the current four and a half months are likely to breach their conditions. The law excludes certain categories of prisoner from consideration for the scheme, including those who are subject to the sex offender notification scheme and other schemes. That will remain the case, and correctly so. If the prisoner meets the criteria for consideration for release on HDC, that must be supported by a positive assessment in which the offending history of the prisoner is taken into account. The assessment is provided by social work services and takes account of the views of the people who are living at the address to which the prisoner is to be released and other matters relating to domestic violence or child protection issues. Seventy-nine per cent of prisoners successfully complete their period on HDC, and the majority of prisoners who breach the terms of their HDC licence are recalled to custody, which shows how seriously the Government treats breaches. In introducing HDC in 2006, the previous Administration considered that it could be used flexibly and was an appropriate tool to ease reintegration. We agree. HDC may not, in itself, stop future reoffending; nor does it give someone employment. However, it allows an individual to be reintroduced into the family and, because of its restrictive nature, it gives them an opportunity to break ties with peer groups and reduce offending behaviour. It also allows prisoners the opportunity to follow up contact that was begun in prison with outside agencies that can support their rehabilitation. It does all that with the assurance that if the prisoner does not take the opportunity  that is afforded by HDC and commits a breach, they will be returned to custody. That view was reinforced down south by a National Audit Office report. For all those reasons, we are moving the motion in my name and addressing the motion that was moved earlier by Mr McLetchie. There is a crisis in our prisons. We cannot have the Tories or Labour playing narrow, sectarian party politics in a way that jeopardises good order in our prison estate. I move the motion to ensure the safety of our prisons and to allow our excellent prison staff and governors—and members—to do their job. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the draft Home Detention Curfew Licence (Amendment of Specified Days) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The debate has been thoughtful and helpful. We are happy to accept the Labour amendment. Pauline McNeill made the point—which Paul Martin and others echoed—that we have to get the law right. The Lord Advocate started out by saying that we have an opportunity to do that and that we must ensure that what we introduce is fit for purpose. I echo other members' thanks to all those who have been involved in the process. In particular, I thank the Scottish Law Commission, whose significant work has allowed us to focus and will be the basis for the bill that the Government will introduce. We acknowledge that the Parliament is united in recognising that we have a problem, and we will seek to ensure that our proposals reflect the Parliament's will. We recognise that we are a minority Government but, perhaps more important, we also recognise that the Parliament is not divided on the issue. We are all on the same side, and if there are disputes over technical matters or matters of interpretation, we should seek to work them out rather than come at them from different perspectives. Shirley-Anne Somerville correctly paid tribute to the previous Executive, and I put on record my thanks to my predecessor, Cathy Jamieson, whose reference of this area to the Scottish Law Commission instigated the review. She now has other responsibilities and is not present to contribute to or hear the debate, but we owe her a debt of thanks for driving the matter further forward. I will comment on three preliminary issues that came up during the debate—obviously, other matters were raised as well. Members have recognised that we need to take a twin-track approach. This is not simply about changing the law; we must challenge and ultimately change attitudes in Scotland. Many members mentioned that issue, and I will come back to it. We must acknowledge that we should tackle it together, as I said, and the Government will seek to do that.  We recognise that the law in Scotland on sexual offences and a whole array of other matters is not fundamentally bad and has served us well for centuries. However, we need to address a particular problem in relation to rape and sexual offences—the problem is with the cases that are reported but which do not proceed to prosecution and with the ones that proceed to prosecution but which are ultimately unsuccessful. Whether the conviction rate is 4 or 40 per cent, the fact is that, at whatever juncture, we are failing some individuals, and we must seek to change that. That point also came out during the debate. The Lord Advocate began the debate by acknowledging that problems exist and that we need to tackle attitudes as well as introduce new offences. Margo MacDonald and other members said that, sadly, sometimes juries reflect prejudices that exist in our society. Mike Pringle mentioned the perceptions that individuals have, and Gil Paterson commented on young women dressing attractively and being under the influence of alcohol. No means no—I think that Marlyn Glen and Elaine Smith made that point. No matter what the circumstances are, they do not legitimise rape. We must challenge underlying attitudes if we are to move forward. The Government has made clear its support for Rape Crisis Scotland, to which many members have paid tribute in the Parliament. I echo those comments. Elaine Smith, Marlyn Glen and others raised points about the trafficking of women, with which we have a particular problem in Scotland. The difficulty is that we know that something is going on, but we do not know the nature or extent of the problem or, sadly, who the main culprits are. However, the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency is addressing the matter and I had a conversation—indeed, a meeting—with Vernon Coaker about it. The problem transcends the borders of Scotland and, indeed, the United Kingdom. The solution relies on co-operative working not simply on a pan-UK basis but on a pan-Europe basis, and we will work the Home Office and with Europol on that. I tend to take Margo MacDonald's view that simply seeking to bring in one law that relates to a particular issue will not address the more fundamental problem. We have to get to grips with and find out about the trafficking of women, and we are seeking to do that. Whatever perceptions exist in the Parliament about my inability to work with the Home Office, I assure members that we had warm meeting with Mr Coaker. We made it clear that we support him on the matter and he advised me that he is off to Stockholm and Amsterdam to review the laws on prostitution in those jurisdictions. I have asked him to keep me involved so that we in Scotland can consider any  information that comes to light from those cities. I understand that Amsterdam is reviewing its position and considering the notoriety that it has attracted. The points that members have raised on trafficking are valid, but the solution is not necessarily change to the law on rape. The fundamental problem is that trafficking is an evil crime that is part of the globalised world in which we live, and it needs to be tackled. I undertake to return to the matter. We have to challenge attitudes. That is why the Government has committed funding to support the Rape Crisis Scotland adverts. As others have said—and as I said earlier—no means no. Simply being under the influence of alcohol and dressed attractively does not legitimise sexual assault or rape in any circumstances.

Margo MacDonald will well know the maxim that beauty is in the eye of the beholder: what some perceive to be attractive is viewed as distasteful by others. We must recall that we are dealing with individuals and that people have rights. Obviously, our society has standards and mores. As we have seen with difficulties in one individual's case, people are not allowed to venture forth naked on to our streets and highways. That does not mean that we cannot disagree about what is acceptable or unacceptable, but the statistics are quite clear: there is a problem with a small minority in Scotland—thankfully, it is a small minority, although it is still far too large—who perceive as provocatively dressed a woman who anyone else would describe simply as attractively dressed. That is not acceptable.

To some extent, those questions are for a different debate on a different day, but Patrick Harvie will find that juries are already instructed to ignore those matters. The problem is that some people in Scotland have an underlying prejudice, whether conscious or subconscious, which we must overcome. It is clear that we must address the law with regard to consent. As far as the Government and I are concerned, the law has served us well, but there is a particular problem with definitions. We have to ensure that the law on consent is understandable not only to specialist lawyers but to everybody else. That is why there has to be a definition. People serving on juries and everybody else should have some understanding of the law. Some areas of law will always be too complex for anyone but specialist lawyers to understand, such as information technology, media or construction law. However, some fundamental parts of the law should be clear. We have to ensure that our whole population—whether legally qualified or otherwise—understand the basis of consent and that simply being dressed a certain way does not constitute giving consent. Other problems arise when someone has not specifically said no because they are afraid or intimidated. All those matters have to be clarified. Pauline McNeill was correct to raise the issue of how we deal with children and the under-16s, to which the report referred. We want to discuss that issue in the Parliament. We are happy to bring proposals before the Justice Committee and the whole Parliament and to see them through. I reiterate that the Law Commission has made it clear that the under-13s have no ability to consent and that any sexual relationship with them is entirely unacceptable; that always has been and always will be the case. It remains entirely unacceptable for males aged over 16 to seek a relationship with those aged between 13 and 16, except in the circumstances in which the male believed, or was misinformed, that the younger person was over 16. However, we have to consider the situation, to which Margaret Smith referred, in which a 15-year-old boy has a sexual relationship with a 15-year-old girl. Do we criminalise that? Should a sheriff fine the boy? Should a fines enforcement officer deduct the fine from his pocket money? We are abolishing unruly certificates, so we are not going to send him to Saughton. However, as Paul Martin and Pauline McNeill said, that does not mean that we as a society should send the message that such behaviour is acceptable. We have to recognise that there are particular problems that we as a Parliament will have to address. The Scottish Law Commission has suggested that such cases should go to the children's panel. The  individuals involved might be beyond parental control, or they might be deeply troubled and require to go to a residential home. In some circumstances, they might even require to go to a secure residential unit. The Government is genuinely open minded about how to address such problems, which the whole Parliament must discuss. We are happy to engage in such discussion. We must recognise that there is a dichotomy in relation to the law of corroboration. The Scottish Law Commission is considering the Moorov principle, about which issues were raised after the World's End trial.

The member will be aware that after the World's End trial, we considered a variety of matters, including the Crown's right of appeal, evidence of past bad character and the Moorov principle, which relates to corroboration. The Scottish Law Commission has long-term plans to consider corroboration. We have asked it to ensure that it considers the Moorov principle. It has indicated that it thinks that Moorov should not be considered only in relation to sexual offences, because it can apply in cases in which people steal cars or break into houses. It is correct to say that we should review Moorov in the context of the entire law of corroboration, not simply the law of corroboration as it relates to sexual offences. I hope that the commission will report on its findings on Moorov either later this year or next year. I certainly undertake to write to Pauline McNeill about the timescales involved. If we are going to retain fundamental parts of the law of corroboration, we should remember that that will always mean that we are not capable of bringing proceedings against or convicting certain people. We have to set the calibration and strike a balance in that regard. I believe that corroboration is fundamental to the law of Scotland, although it will have to change as times move on. However, there will always be instances when we have good reason to believe that there has been a miscarriage of justice. I refer not only to occasions when the innocent are convicted, to which Mike Pringle referred, but to instances when the necessary evidence is not brought against those who should be living in black burning shame. We have to ensure that we get the balance right. On the point that Paul Martin and Helen Eadie raised, the fundamental issue is how we treat victims of these heinous offences. The law has to ensure that they are treated with dignity and compassion. The Crown is moving matters on  through work on the victim notification scheme, for example. That principle remains enshrined.

I regularly meet representatives of all police forces. Only last Friday, I attended the launch of Strathclyde Police's national mobile data project. The innovative use of technology by Strathclyde Police and other forces will free up officers' time so that they can police our streets. That is the kind of initiative that we wish to encourage. Indeed, I had lunch with the chief constable of Strathclyde Police on Tuesday.

As the member well knows, such matters are subject to operational directions from chief constables. That has always been the case, and it will remain the case. Where police officers are deployed in Strathclyde is correctly a matter for the chief constable there.  The Government is committed to providing 1,000 additional police officers. In addition, the three Rs will serve us well, as we have said. We will not only recruit officers but retain existing valuable officers who are leaving and redeploy officers. The chief constable of Strathclyde Police has been setting an excellent example in that respect to ensure that our communities are better served. I simply say that the 150 additional officers whom we have committed to providing will be through by the end of the financial year. That will ensure that the level of recruitment that we inherited, which was the lowest since devolution, is rectified.

I absolutely agree with the member. I am aware of the scheme that operates in Strathclyde, but I have also seen similar schemes that operate in Clackmannan and elsewhere. Such things seek to keep young people out of trouble and away from cheap alcohol, so we have supported the police's approach. We have considered whether proceeds of crime funds can be utilised for such schemes, but it appears that they are operating well without our additional input. The Government believes that such diversions and alternatives are good, so we will support them in any way that we can.

I recognise the considerable problems that exist in Glasgow in particular and in other areas of the west of Scotland. Indeed, I discussed those problems at lunch with the chief constable. During the recess, the member for Glasgow Govan, Miss Sturgeon, and I visited the police and discussed the gang problem that we face. It is clear that the chief constable of Strathclyde Police will act to address the matter. That force will have the Government's full support. I am always happy to meet any member to chat with them about particular issues. Issues have been raised that I cannot deal with in my position as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, as they relate to cases that are subject to on-going appeals. However, the member can rest assured that Strathclyde Police is seeking to address the problems of violence and intimidation in our communities by gangs in particular. There are too many gangs and they have been with us for far too long. The Government will provide support in any way that we can to those who seek to enforce the law either through the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service or front-line policing in order to ensure that we break violence and intimidation. Whether we do that through enforcement, diversion or other means, we will back that means in whatever way that we can.

As the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Development announced in his statement to Parliament on 13 December, funding for police pensions is included within the local authority funding settlement. It is for police boards to negotiate budgets with their constituent local authorities. The issue of police pensions was discussed at a meeting in January with ministers, police board conveners and representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. The meeting confirmed that it is for councils, police authorities and chief constables to address pensions pressures. I understand that virtually every force has now reached agreement with its constituent local authorities on funding levels for the next financial year.

That is the same song that Labour ran with at the last election—talking Scotland down with doom and gloom. The meeting in January was attended not only by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth but by Councillor Paul Rooney, the convener of Strathclyde police board and the chair of the police board conveners group, who accepted that the issue that Jackie Baillie raises is a matter for the constituent local authorities and police boards and their chief constables to address. If he has not passed on that view to Ms Baillie, that is not a matter that is within my control. However, I should say that I have the utmost confidence in the abilities of Mr Rooney and it might just be that there are none so blind as those who will not see.

We published our review of community penalties on 27 November and the Scottish Prisons Commission is due to report in June. They will help us to deliver a safer and stronger Scotland, where prison is the appropriate sentence for serious and violent offenders but community penalties are a tough and effective disposal for those who can safely serve their sentences in the community.

I thank Dr Simpson for the spirit in which he raised those matters. I am advised that the Lord Advocate visited the Bath Street time-out centre last week and that Fergus Ewing will visit it next week. We recognise the good work that it does, but we also recognise that not everybody who goes there will not reoffend. Sometimes people fail to take the opportunities that they are presented with or, indeed, do not manage to overcome their drug addiction or other problems. However, statistically, the rate of recidivism is significantly lower among people who have been presented with such opportunities. That is why we are seeking to build on initiatives such as the one that Dr Simpson mentioned and which, in his time as a minister, he sought to promote. With regard to alternative measures, there is a clear and on-going problem. I am aware that, in a particular sheriffdom, matters were drawn to the attention of sheriffs, who accepted that there was a problem. We will seek to work with the judiciary on that issue. On the community reparation order pilots, the position is that the orders have not been seen to work out in practice. I give Dr Simpson the same reassurance that I gave to Pauline McNeill. If it can be shown that the orders can work and that matters could not be dealt with using a community service order, a probation order or some other order that currently exists, we are more than happy to review the situation. The door is not closed. On the reasons for the massive increase in the number of people in remand custody, there are significant problems. I will consider whether we should invite the Sentencing Commission to do what Dr Simpson suggests. It might be that there are other ways in which we can address the issue. However, he has raised a significant problem that we must address. I am happy to work with him and members of any party to address what is a national problem.

We have been over this ground before. We have said that it is always for the judiciary to impose the appropriate sentence. I remind Mr Aitken that when I went to Cornton Vale—I know that he has been there too—I was told that 98 per cent of the prisoners have a mental health problem, a huge percentage have been subject to abuse during their life, and 70 or 80 per cent have an addiction problem. There are people who have committed offences who have to be detained and locked up but, equally, we have within our prison and penal system people who have underlying addiction and mental health problems. As a society, we do not seek to have community care and to take people from a big house on a hill only to remand them in a prison. That is not what prison is for. The Government will always remain committed to ensuring that those who are a danger to our community and who commit serious and violent offences will be detained, if need be for a very long time and if need be until the day they depart from the planet. Others, who have an underlying problem, will be treated in a manner that is cost effective for us, better for our communities and, ultimately, better for them in ending their cycle of reoffending.

I thank the member for raising that very serious issue, which I am keen to resolve as quickly as possible. Officials have contacted the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Association of British Insurers, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and representatives of victims organisations, and will meet them as soon as can be arranged to discuss the best way to meet families' needs following a homicide in a person's home. I will write to the member after discussions with the relevant agencies are completed.

A national fund would be appropriate. One of the problems that we are trying to work through is to do with differences in tenure—how we can deal with those who are in owner-occupied houses, how we fund those who are in local authority housing and how we deal with those who live in a private sector let. It would be manifestly unjust and unfair if somebody in a certain category of tenure was able to be recompensed while others were not. Equally it would be unfair if we had a postcode lottery, in which people in only some parts of Scotland were eligible to claim from the fund and to be recompensed. This is not so much about the monetary aspect as it is about the trauma that goes with it. There can be nothing more heart-rending and fundamentally degrading—it adds insult and compounds injury—than for those who have suffered the loss of a relative to be required to clean it up and bear the ignominy of the costs. We are committed to addressing that matter and we will come back to the member on it. We accept that there is a variety of ways to provide funding. We have given increased funding to Victim Support Scotland, which I met last week, during European victims week. As a nation, we have perhaps ignored this issue in the past. We have sought to remedy that by recompensing victims, and—to the credit of the Lord Advocate now and in the past, when she was Solicitor General for Scotland—it has been recognised that we have treated victims unacceptably in the judicial system. I pay tribute to the work of the Lord Advocate, Cathy Jamieson and previous ministers in ensuring that we change those ways that were unacceptable and move on.

The police are acutely aware of the inappropriateness of police cells for the detention  of drunk and incapable people who have no other cause to be there. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has established a sub-group to consider the provision of care in police custody and it will work with other agencies to identify the most appropriate and effective alternatives for the detention of drunk and incapable persons for their own safety. The Scottish Government is also seeking to introduce a polluter-pays approach, to ensure that the licensed trade contributes to the cost of dealing with the consequences of alcohol misuse.

Absolutely. I visited Albyn house last year and was impressed by the services there. Others will agree that it would be a cause for regret if its services were not available. The Government's position is clear. Cells and casualty units are not appropriate places for people who find themselves drunk and incapable. Designated places are the appropriate places, and we believe that there should be a contribution from those who profit through the tills. Until such time as polluter-pays legislation can be introduced, I ask the licensed trade and those who profit from the sale of alcohol to consider contributing voluntarily. That would help to make Aberdeen a safer and stronger place. If voluntary contributions are not made, the member has the Government's assurance that we will seek to introduce polluter-pays legislation as soon as we can. That will allow the local authority in Aberdeen to levy a charge if it cannot obtain voluntary contributions.

Is the member aware that many of the crimes that have been referred to could have been cleared up by other methods? The suggestion that DNA retention is all-singing, all-dancing is not true; other policing methods could have achieved the results. In some instances, using DNA is beneficial, and that is appropriate, but it is untrue to say that it has had all the results that have been described.

The debate has been useful. It has shown that there is more that unites than divides us. Obviously, there are clear areas on which there is no agreement. The Government is happy to review points that were raised by members such as were made by Claire Baker and Margaret Smith, including the request for me to go before the Justice Committee. I am happy to do that, if the convener wants me to do so. The subject of the debate is one that we constantly monitor because it is an area that changes both in terms of technology and circumstances, so we have to adapt. The Government comes to the issue from the perspective of proportionality. Ian McKee mentioned that, as did Claire Baker and Christina McKelvie. In our society, we have to get the balance right. If we go too far one way, we run the risk of imploding the relationship between adults and youngsters in good organisations such as the Boys Brigade and of people fearing that any interaction with children could result in their possible classification as a paedophile. We have to make it clear that that is not where we wish to go as a society. Equally, we have to recognise that, although—as Margaret Smith pointed out—there is stranger danger, the tragic fact is that a child is still more likely to be molested by their ma's boyfriend than by anyone else. We have to be constant and vigilant, without disturbing the relationships that are good and beneficial to the child and society. The issue is one of proportionality and of keeping matters under review.

The whole purpose of a pilot is that it is a pilot. There is a pilot scheme in England and Wales—we should wait and see how it works out. Before the UK Government decides whether to roll out the pilot, it will have to see whether it works out. Our position is that we will examine whether the pilot works out and whether the measure would be appropriate and proportionate. I undertake to look at the pilot, but I do not confirm that we will introduce the measure in Scotland. We believe that matters should be dealt with in that way. I turn to Helen Eadie's contribution. The Scottish  Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency has expanded its e-crime unit in order to pursue a greater number of web-based paedophile cases. Mike Pringle raised the issue of circles of support. The Scottish Government has commissioned the Scottish centre for crime and justice research to prepare a report on such circles of support. We expect to receive the report in April. I turn to technology, which Elizabeth Smith and Bill Aitken spoke about. We recognise that there is a role for technology—although, like the Justice Committee convener, I am not noted for my technical abilities—but Government also recognises the restrictions on technology. Clearly, home detention curfew is a good measure. Using electronic monitoring, it allows us to track people, but there are limits to what the technology allows. Recently, I heard on a radio report that Network Rail has reported a significant increase in disruption on railway lines because greater numbers of people are using GPS. People buy a TomTom or other system for their car, and get the benefits of using it, but they can also end up on railway lines because the system cannot tell the difference between road and rail. Although GPS can be used to tell us where someone is, it cannot in every instance tell us where they are going or what they are doing. Although we cannot support the Conservative amendment, I give this undertaking: we recognise the benefits of technology and we will consider and analyse them. I turn to DNA. Our view is that we cannot support blanket retention of DNA, so for that reason we will support the Liberal Democrat amendment. Our policing culture in Scotland rests on consent. People must support the police and consent to what they ask them to do. Anything that we do that would make people afraid of or wary of the police, or of state intrusion, would be counterproductive. Some time ago, a dreadful rape occurred not far from where I stay. The police asked people who lived in the locality to come forward and give their DNA in order to expedite matters and allow them to pursue their investigation. People did so. They came forward not only because it would help the police to catch the perpetrator, but because giving a DNA sample would not impinge on them, as there was no risk of the sample's being used again at a future date. People say that if you have nothing to hide, you have nothing to fear. Of course, if we are talking about criminal convictions, good people have nothing to fear. However, we also need to be clear that, for a variety of reasons, people do not want the state to know what they are doing—often, they do not wish the boss or the wife to know. I am always minded by the country and western song,  "Long Black Veil", by Lefty Frizzell: "The judge said son, what is your alibi If you were somewhere else, then you won't have to die I spoke not a word, though it meant my life For I'd been in the arms of my best friend's wife" There are instances of sexual indiscretions, homosexual dalliances—

I am sorry, but I think that I am in my last minute. There are instances when people are at the pub and not at work and they do not want the boss to know. People may simply want to protect their privacy.

We have to ensure that we have the information on people who are dangerous, those who have committed offences, and those who we believe present a risk. That is why we are commissioning Professor Fraser's review. Clearly, if a person has a propensity to commit sexual or violent offences at 14, there is clear reason to believe that that propensity will remain at 34, 64 or 84. The review is therefore appropriate. That said, people who have committed no offence—those who have not been convicted of any offence other than doing something they do not want others to find out about—should run no risk of the state intruding unnecessarily into their lives. I return to the point that Claire Baker made and accepted, which is that there should be proportionality. There is clear concern south of the border about the fact that 40 per cent of young black men are on the register. We cannot afford to further divide our society. As I said, someone may have a reason to hang their head in shame, perhaps because they were in the arms of their best friend's wife or in the pub and not at work, but such matters are not criminal offences, nor are they responsibility of the state. People themselves should account for them.

Is the member aware that 40 per cent of young black men south of the border are on the DNA register? Given what she has said, does that give her cause for concern?

I thank Mr Martin for the manner in which he has presented his comments. Clearly, they pertain to matters on which we are unified in the chamber, as the protection of our children is paramount to any civilised society. There are, doubtless, matters on which we disagree; nevertheless, I welcome the fact that more unites us than divides us on the issue. We should focus on that, and I welcome the opportunity to restate the Government's commitment to public protection and tackling those who present a danger to our children. Last June, Parliament debated the  Government's approach to the protection of the public from sex offending, and there was clear consensus in the chamber around the robust approach that we set out at that time. As members know, sex offending is one of the most difficult and sensitive issues that Governments anywhere must tackle. Paul Martin referred to the work of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee, and I can confirm that I will write shortly to the convener of the Justice Committee to report on the substantial progress that has been made. Our current assessment is that a significant number of the 33 recommendations have either been delivered in full or are very near to being implemented. Mr Martin and the rest of the chamber can be assured that we are committed to full delivery. We are benefiting greatly from the sub-committee's in-depth research and the wide-ranging discussions that it had with all parts of the criminal justice system and beyond—it took evidence from other jurisdictions—which informed its final report. The recommendations are far reaching and can be closely linked to earlier reviews such as the reports by Lady Cosgrove, Lord MacLean and Professor Irving. Taken together, they have enabled us to develop a comprehensive sex offender strategy that is unique to Scotland. However, we are not complacent. Society changes and the way in which people who are sexual predators operate also varies; therefore, the Scottish Government is determined to build on that strong foundation and to react swiftly if circumstances change. For example, we will further tighten the sex offenders register to require more household and social data to be collected from registered sex offenders, including e-mail addresses—because of the world in which we live—and whether they live in the same household as a child. We are implementing the sub-committee's recommendation on a public information strategy, which will include information on disclosure and set out the measures that are in place to keep our communities safe from sex offenders. We have made it clear that those who seek to shirk their responsibilities as registered sex offenders will not be allowed to hide themselves with impunity, but will be sought, exposed and detained if need be. Paul Martin has raised the issue of community disclosure today and previously. Community disclosure was carefully considered by all the expert groups that have helped to build the robust public protection framework that we now have in place. Indeed, Jackie Baillie, who was the convener of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee, will be well aware that the committee welcomed the approach that we and ACPOS are now taking—namely, the development of a robust system of  warnings to be used by the police when sex offenders fail to comply with their notification requirements or with the reasonable directions of the police or other supervising authorities in relation to their behaviour or activities. The new warning system has been developed with the police and forms part of a comprehensive standard operating procedures manual that was approved by ACPOS on 20 April 2007. That both strengthens protection for the public and places the onus—correctly—on sex offenders to abide by the law and any police warnings about their activities or to face losing their anonymity. I note Paul Martin's support for the community disclosure pilot schemes that the Home Office will progress in four English police areas. We will follow with interest the results of those pilot schemes and their subsequent evaluations. We are particularly interested in the impact of the pilot schemes on offenders' compliance with their notification requirements and, to be fair, any incidences of vigilantism. It is vital that the arrangements mesh with other elements of the management of sex offenders and "balance 'the very real fear of parents and the wider communities for their children' against concerns that have been raised, including the possibility that such a move could drive dangerous offenders underground." So said Cathy Jamieson, my predecessor, in November 2006. The implementation of the pilot schemes will be challenging. To ensure that every issue is fully explored, the Home Office has established a steering group, chaired by Vernon Coaker, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Crime Reduction, to assist with the setting up, running and evaluation of the pilot schemes. Scottish Government officials are part of the steering group and are keeping me in close touch with developments. While that work is on-going, it is important that there is no suggestion that the Scottish approach to public protection is in any way less robust. We are committed to implementing the Justice 2 Sub-Committee's recommendations. We also have in place the strengthened multi-agency public protection arrangements, which were introduced in September 2006 and have been operating in all areas of Scotland since April 2007. The First Minister has made it clear that we will monitor closely how the new, strengthened Scottish system beds in and that we will always look to address any gaps that become apparent. Paul Martin referred to the retention of DNA samples. In the detection and prosecution of child sex offenders, forensic material can provide an important tool. Advances in forensic science, particularly in DNA analysis, are enabling it to make an ever-more powerful contribution. We  expect the Scottish Police Services Authority, as the core provider of forensic services for our police forces, to continue to provide quick and accurate analysis of samples that are taken from victims and crime scenes and to identify whether they match the profiles of known individuals who are on the database.

I listen to a lot of people, and I will shortly say who I am listening to. I regularly meet senior police officers, and we believe that we have to strike a balance. I am struck by the comment that, in Scotland, we currently have "a sensible balance"—that comment came not from chief police officers, but from Cathy Jamieson, my predecessor and the deputy leader of the Scottish Labour Party. She believed that in January 2007 and I believe that now. That is the balance that the Government has struck. We do not believe that it would be right to copy the regime that is now in place in England. As a matter of principle, we do not believe that a person's DNA should be retained indefinitely by the police if they have never been convicted of an offence, unless there is a good reason. That is not just our view; it is also the view of the Nuffield Council on Bioethics. Having said that, the Scottish Government is keen to see what more can be done. I have met Paul Martin and Margaret Curran, and we have sought a review through Professor Fraser. We will be happy to look at Professor Fraser's recommendations, because we have to get the balance right. I hope that all I have said is helpful and that it reassures Parliament that the Scottish Government remains committed to protecting our children from sex offenders. I move amendment S3M-1432.1, to leave out from "the crucial role" to end and insert: "that appropriate utilisation of DNA samples and fingerprints can play an important role in identifying offenders but that it is vital to strike the right balance between prosecuting criminals and protecting the innocent and notes the review that the Scottish Government has commissioned from Professor James Fraser; recognises the extensive powers already available to the police in monitoring sex offenders and ensuring public safety, and notes the Scottish Government's liaison with the Home Office as disclosure pilots progress in four English police areas and the Scottish Government's proposal to monitor  the outcomes of these pilots to determine what lessons there might be for Scotland, and welcomes the Scottish Government's proposal to write to the Convener of the Scottish Parliament's Justice Committee to report progress on each of the 33 recommendations made by the Justice 2 Sub-committee report J2SC/S2/06/R1."

The Government will not shy away from taking tough action to deal with alcohol misuse and the antisocial behaviour that it inflicts on Scotland's communities. We will set out a clear long-term approach for tackling alcohol misuse and consult on our proposals for action later this year. I have already made it clear that we want to crack down on irresponsible off-sales promotions that mean that it is cheaper for our youngsters to get drunk than it is for them to go to the cinema or to play a game of five-a-side. However, that is only one part of the picture. At this stage, we are not  ruling anything either in or out of our long-term strategy.

The right to sell alcohol is not a God-given right; it is given on the basis that the seller accepts various responsibilities. We expect licensing boards to enforce responsible promotion. I accept that responsible promotion is not limited to how alcohol is priced or promoted within the store and extends to how it is marketed outwith the store. The member has made an appropriate point that we are happy to take on board.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member accept that, as Lewis Macdonald said, if our dedicated prison staff are to do what they are qualified to do, which is to work with people to address addiction problems and underlying problems such as dyslexia and low levels of literacy and numeracy, they must be able to concentrate on those people? That means that they cannot simply be asked to provide control of prisoners for a day or two, a week or two or a month or two. If we are to allow SPS staff to fulfil their core functions, we must stop putting low-level offenders in prison for short periods of time. It is by enabling our excellent qualified prison staff to deliver what is necessary that we will tackle heroin abuse.

This has been a useful and worthwhile debate. A great deal unites us in the chamber, notwithstanding Mr Martin's best efforts. It is clear from the speeches of Labour and Liberal Democrat members that there is a great deal of consensus on how we can work together to tackle a national problem. Mr Martin is right that we have to provide resources and put victims first. Indeed, on Monday I was in Glasgow—although not in Mr Martin's consistency—to visit Victim Support Scotland. All that is valid, but we cannot go on as we are. Pauline McNeill is right that we have to ensure that those who sentence have faith in the community sentences available—our judiciary does not hand down sentences out of relish for putting people away. We have to ensure that communities feel that community sentences are working and that the judiciary feels that it has sentencing options available.

I will gladly move on to address that point. In response to Ms McNeill's point about reparation orders, I say that the reason why we decided to dispense with such orders was that they were not being used. We recognise that  options have to be available to sheriffs, but when sheriffs do not use them, we should dispense with them. We are more than happy to meet members and discuss that matter, as well as family contact centres. We want to ensure that there is payback—whether through a formal reparation order, community service, probation or whatever else. Such matters can be worked out and, as I said, the door is open to try to do so. We accept Pauline McNeill's point. On Low Moss, the delay that came about from the nonsensical, absurd system that saw millions of pounds—

The position remains the same as before; we are on track to meet the appointed date, but with a slight delay because of what we had to do. I am more than happy to return to the matter with the member. I give her an assurance that I am as anxious as she is to make sure that Low Moss is available to ease the pressure on our prison estate. We heard from Willie Coffey, Cathie Craigie, Robert Brown and others who recognise that we have to have tough community punishments. It is perverse that, when somebody in our community is injured by a crime being inflicted on them, the agony is compounded by taxpayers having to pay for the criminal to have free bed and board and television. Because of the nature of our system, we cannot even give them any work. It is much better that they should be put out there to do some work in the community to repay through the sweat of their brow the damage that they have done. That is what our communities want. [ Interruption. ] Cathy Craigie is right to challenge me—I tell her that I am not criticising her in any way. It is up to us to deliver what our communities want.

I am sorry; I want to make some movement in my speech. I do not seek to put words in the member's mouth and I accept that it is the Opposition's legitimate role to challenge the Government. We can work together to tackle that perverse situation that I described. I will deal with the Conservatives. Mr Aitken and I have discussed today's subject, whether over a pint in Babbity Bowster or in the chamber. I accept his points and know where he is coming from. However, I was somewhat scandalised by Mr McLetchie's position. It showed cant, hypocrisy and a total lack of humanity, which is what we might expect from him. As the old saying goes, let he who is without sin cast the first stone. I will give some examples. A gentleman who was sentenced to serve four years  for perjury and perverting the course of justice was released after two years spent in open prison, including in an open prison called HMP North Sea Camp. I speak of Jeffrey Archer and I do not remember scandalised Tories speaking out against that. Jonathan Aitken received 18 months for perjury but was released after serving only seven months, much of which was spent in the open estate. The situation was compounded by his being released on an electronic tagging order to serve the balance of two months. Again, I do not remember the Tories being outraged. But oh dear me, when it comes to the wee lassie of heroin-addicted parents from Pennywell or Penilee, the Tories will detain her, if need be, until the day she goes to meet her maker. As everyone in the chamber acknowledges, some people are a danger to our communities and we have to protect those communities.

I am sorry; I am in my last minute. It is unacceptable that the Tories fail to show the same compassion to the heroin-addicted girl from Pennywell or Penilee that they show to the cad and bounder who was caught with his fingers in the cookie jar and then rehabilitated and welcomed back to the club. We will always treat with compassion the wee lassie who was neglected by her ma, abused by her da and separated from her gran—the only one who ever loved her—and who is more likely to hang herself in Cornton Vale than to harm anyone else if she were released. We recognise how such people need to be treated. The cant and hypocrisy from the Tories is outrageous.

I say at the outset that we will support the amendment in the name of Margaret Smith. I also say to members on the Labour benches that, although the vagaries of the system mean that we cannot support the Labour amendment, we have a great deal of sympathy with what is espoused in it. If Ms McNeill and Mr Martin wish to meet me later, I will be more than happy to discuss how we can tackle matters where it appears to us that there is  a national problem that we need to address to ensure that our communities are safer. The desire to do that should unite us, and I am more than happy to work with them on that. The Scottish Government is committed to a publicly owned and operated prison service. We live in Caledonia, not Utopia, and there are bad people whom we need to detain to protect our communities. However, public safety, and not private profit, must always be our priority.

Yes, it is. Mr Aitken went on about the requirement for prisons. The Government has announced record investment in the creation of a modern, fit-for-purpose prison estate. We have committed to Addiewell, we are proceeding with Bishopbriggs, but within the Scottish Prison Service, and we are preparing for a new prison in the north-east. We have committed to three new prisons and a financial package of £120 million of capital funding a year for the Scottish Prison Service to continue the modernisation of its facilities and finally eradicate the scandal of slopping out. All those things reflect our commitment to deliver a modern, effective public prison service that makes a real difference in reducing reoffending and adds to the rehabilitation of offenders. I take the opportunity to announce that we plan to scrap the law that allows children to be locked up in Scottish jails with adults. There are seriously disturbed children in our communities who need to be detained, often not just for the safety of our communities but for their own safety, but they should be detained in secure residential units with other children. They should not be placed in the adult estate, where they face entering academies of crime and where their safety is jeopardised. We debated prison policy as recently as last September.

I can give the member that assurance. I listened to the Commissioner for  Children and Young People this morning. I do not know whether Mr Aitken has been to residential secure units, but I have been to several, both as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and in the past, as a defence agent. Those places are not prisons, because they deal with children, but they are secure, and troubled youngsters are detained there under lock and key. We set up the Prisons Commission under Henry McLeish to consider the purpose of imprisonment. I believe that we should look forward to its findings and not anticipate them. Mr Aitken seems to believe that some of the script has already been written. There is a national problem, and that is why we are prepared to work with all. We await with interest what is decided. In the meantime, we cannot ignore the present situation, which includes continuing increases in the number of people who are imprisoned. At a time when the level of offending is decreasing, it is perverse that the number of people in prison continues to rise. For the first time in our history, the number of people detained in custody in Scotland has passed the 8,000 mark. The Scots are not inherently bad or more prone to criminality than the citizens of other countries, yet we continue to lock up twice as many offenders as Ireland and Norway. Looking behind the numbers, we must all be concerned that a third of the offenders who go into prison have alcohol problems, more than half have drugs problems, and many have mental health problems. Recently, I visited Cornton Vale—an invitation was given to Mr Aitken, but he was otherwise detained. We were given a lecture and some information on the nature of those in the Cornton Vale estate. Some 98 per cent have an addiction problem, 80 per cent have mental health problems, 78 per cent have been the victims of abuse and 50 per cent self-harm. Those people need to be detained, but in many instances they also need treatment and compassion. Reoffending rates show vividly that prison does nothing for those offenders. Yes, the great numbers of offenders who get short sentences have broken the law, but the sentences do not end offending; rather, they continue the cycle of crime. The figure of 14,000 receptions for sentences of less than six months does not mean that there are 14,000 individuals—it is made up of a hard core. We cannot go on as we are. Prison is not cost free—it is substantially expensive. There comes a time when we need to invest in the good citizen and not just throw good money after bad on the bad citizen. We need to break the cycle of offending by tackling the root causes, whether they are mental health issues or drug or alcohol addiction. Building more prisons is simply not the  answer. They are costly to build and expensive to run, with a cost of £40,000 per annum per prisoner. We must have prisons, but we must ensure that we use them to best effect. Those who commit less serious offences should face tough sentences to pay back their community for the harm that they have caused. Equally, those who offend because of mental health problems or drug or alcohol addiction should be treated in the community with the compassion that they deserve. That is cheaper for us and better for them. We have a problem with the prison estate. We must ensure that it is used for those who need to be detained to protect our communities. However, we need to break the cycle of reoffending. We must punish toughly in the community and treat with compassion those who have addictions. I move amendment S3M-1385.2, to leave out from first "with concern" to end and insert: "that, while the offending rate has been falling, the number of people in prison currently stands at record levels and that Scotland has one of the highest imprisonment rates in the world; welcomes the McLeish Commission into Penal Policy and recognises that, in the case of serious and dangerous individuals, custody is the only appropriate punishment, and notes that the Scottish Government is committed to three new prisons and has increased investment in the prisons estate to an average of £120 million a year."

Does the member accept that, although those statistics are sad and rather shameful, they are significantly better than the statistics on the amount of reoffending by those who are sent to prison for two years or less, 75 per cent of whom reoffend?

Scottish Government officials frequently meet the sheriff principal of Glasgow and Strathkelvin to discuss a range of matters.

I am aware of Mr Whitton's interest in the issue, which he is right to raise, and I have seen correspondence with a ministerial colleague. We must ensure that the child remains at the centre of things. Some parents—often fathers—have difficulties maintaining contact with their children. The Government provides funding for contact centres through Family Mediation Scotland, which provides a range of support. We are happy to consider the issue. We have taken the position that the previous Administration correctly took. As I said, the child must always be at the centre of things. Difficulties frequently arise between parents and, unfortunately, children can be caught in the resulting firestorm. It is important to make facilities available, make arrangements, and try to negotiate settlements. I would be happy to discuss such matters with the member. As I said, the contact centres are dealt with through Family Mediation Scotland. We think that that is the best system at the moment.

I am aware of Elaine Smith's track record in quite correctly pursuing the matter. The point that she raises is perfectly valid, and it is appropriate for me to explain clearly that, as is mentioned in the legislative consent memorandum, we are seeking to address various gaps, for example relating to violent offenders doing something significantly wrong. I refer to actions that are taken—as is sought south of the border—regarding those people if it is felt that they might escape punishments or requirements by  moving north of the border. Clearly, people have been seeking to do that. There are matters under the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill that are being legislated on south of the border that relate to pornography. As Elaine C—I mean Elaine Smith—mentioned. [ Laughter. ] I apologise: I have a track record of previous convictions on that. As she has correctly said, legislation that will apply south of the border is being introduced in that regard. As was mentioned and has been dealt with by my ministerial health colleagues, there was a joint Scottish Executive and Home Office consultation on extreme pornography. We have legislative competence on that area here in Scotland. We are working on proposals and are more than happy to meet Elaine Smith because of the valuable input that she and the people with whom she has communicated and whom she has represented can give. We intend to legislate on the matter in due course, rather than introduce measures that have been decided on south of the border and which are predicated on the situation there. To an extent, the member answered her own question. I can say that, in due course, we intend to address the matter that she correctly raises, but we will do so within the competence of the Parliament and in a manner that is appropriate for Scotland.

The Scottish Government intends to consult in the spring on whether civil legislation should be introduced to protect those affected by forced marriage. That will link with the work currently under way to raise awareness of this serious issue. The Scottish forced marriage network is working with the Scottish Government on that.

I am grateful to Hugh O'Donnell for raising those points and for the spirit in which he did so. These problems are cultural and global. They exist in jurisdictions north and south of the border and interrelate with other cultural matters. One of the reasons that we have the network is that we do not yet know the extent of the problem. There is a general understanding that the problem exists, a recognition that we have to tackle it and a clear willingness in every party in the chamber to do so. We are more than happy to work with police forces everywhere and with others involved in prosecution to tackle the problem. I took a call recently from the Home Office minister Vernon Coaker about human trafficking, which is an issue that Pauline McNeill has raised. I am more than happy to ensure that when I discuss human trafficking with Mr Coaker, we also discuss whether we can deal with forced marriages. Although the problem of forced marriages is to some extent tangential, it does relate to the growing problem of trafficking, which Pauline McNeill and Bill Aitken have been quite right to raise because we must address it. I will take on board the points raised. I will see whether we have any information on the numbers involved and get back to the member about that. He can rest assured that we are seeking to do what is necessary. I do not know whether the solution is to introduce a new law. I presume that views on that will come out of the consultation. However, the problem exists and we have to tackle it.

To an extent, the answer goes back to the point that Mr O'Donnell was correct to raise. Many cultural matters are involved. Sometimes, proving whether something was an honour killing or was done out of badness and malice can be difficult. We need to address  the extent of the problem. As I told Mr O'Donnell, that is being examined not only by the Government, but by the forced marriage network, which is the correct body to address such matters. There is no one simple solution to the problem that Margaret Mitchell is correct to raise. Part of the solution is tackling the culture that—sadly—exists in a section of our community and part of it is clear enforcement. Margaret Mitchell's point that we need to know the extent of the problem before we can tackle it is valid. However, she will understand that, as the police and the Crown are dealing with a section of our community that does not wish to co-operate to an extent and will not confirm that a crime has occurred in some instances, working out the size of the problem is difficult. Nevertheless, she can rest assured that everybody in the forces of law and order is seeking to tackle the problem and to eradicate it.

Those suggestions are helpful. I return to points that Mr O'Donnell made. Part of the solution is not just enforcing the law, but tackling the culture that exists. If a new law is not required, members can rest assured that we will be more than happy to enforce the existing laws, many of which the Government believes have served us well over the centuries. If new laws are required, we will introduce them, but we will do that only if they are necessary and will make Scotland safer and stronger.

I met the British Transport Police earlier this week to discuss our concerns about its  use in Scotland of stop-and-search powers under section 44 of the Terrorism Act 2000.

It is simply untrue to say that requests were made repeatedly. I am happy to say that I had great pleasure in meeting Assistant Chief Constable McCall and several other officers, including one who travelled up from south of the border. They were staggered by the number of searches that had been reached. They agreed that matters were out of kilter and they have undertaken to conduct a review. It might cause Mr Foulkes angst to learn that the interpretation by me and my department is that the British Transport Police will conduct a review to ensure that it focuses searches and uses them proportionately and appropriately. I do not know whether George Foulkes has seen today's edition of The Herald , in which a spokesman for David McCall indicated: "I can confirm that the Assistant Chief Constable ... had a useful and constructive meeting with the Justice Secretary recently. Following this meeting the ACC agreed to undertake a review of the force's stop and search tactics." I reiterate to Lord Foulkes that we have made it quite clear that the Government supports the use of section 44 powers. When our constabularies have used those powers, we have backed them appropriately. When the BTP has used them, as is necessary when policing the rail network, it has received our support. The justice department and I have also given our fullest support to the action that the BTP is taking to stop and search for weapons and alcohol, which are significant problems in Scotland that the Government is seeking to tackle relentlessly.

The member has made a sensible contribution. At the moment, our railway stations are dealt with by the British Transport Police and our bus stations and airports are dealt with by local constabularies. This is an operational matter; I have discussed it with the police and will doubtless continue to do so. The proposal should be considered, especially given that developments in other authorities across the UK are proceeding apace.

The member has not answered the point that my colleague put to him. If we are simply to require people to say that they need an air-gun for good purposes, who is to be the arbiter? Will it be the shop salesman, which is what happens in some states of America where people can vouch for who they are by showing their driving licence? Surely the only way that we can regulate the ownership of air-guns, so that people have them only for fit, proper and reasonable purposes, such as pest or vermin control, is to have a licensing scheme. If the Labour Party does not think that there should be a licensing scheme, will Paul Martin tell us how it proposes to regulate the ownership of air-guns?

As a member of the Conservative party, the member will be a great believer in the land of the free market in the United States. Does he think it is such an impediment in America that individual states have their own gun laws? Why does the member think that such a system could not operate in Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom when it can operate in the United States of America?

I made it quite clear that, as a member of the SNP, I think that this Parliament should legislate. The member is talking about  2005, when I was referring to 2004 and the Home Office review. The fact of the matter is that the problem is probably worse now than it was then, and the actions of the UK Government—which has the powers—have not addressed matters. Does the member, or does he not, support a licensing regime for air weapons? What, precisely, is it that he will insist that Westminster brings in? We have made our position clear. What is Labour's position on air weapons?

Labour's amendment refers to "retaining consistency across all parts of the United Kingdom". There seems to be inconsistency in that Northern Ireland has a separate approach. Does the member think that Northern's Ireland's approach should now be dealt with by the UK Parliament, or  is she saying that there should be inconsistent approaches in Northern Ireland, which is a constituent part of the UK, and the rest of the UK?

This debate is long overdue. The misuse of firearms, particularly air weapons, remains a major problem in our communities. There is a distinct problem in Scotland, which we need to address. I regret that, so far, the United Kingdom Government is not moving as far or as fast as we would like and as our communities need. That is why I have written again to Jacqui Smith, the Home Secretary. We as a Government want to host a summit to look at improving the system of firearms regulations.

We all know that various matters relating to the Post Office are reserved to Westminster, and they may be involved. I assure Mr Henry that we are dealing with the matter as expeditiously as possible and that the Government has dispatched an invitation. I am not in a position to comment on why that has not arrived, but the member can rest assured that we are viewing the issue most seriously. We are genuine in trying to ensure that we protect our communities because, as I will go on to say, the current legislation is inadequate. We want a summit to check the current system. Anyone who wants to contribute, including Mr Henry, will be welcome to come. We want to work on improving the current piecemeal system in a collaborative way. This is not about the status of Parliaments or politicians, but about the safety of our communities. When I meet those who have suffered injury or bereavement through firearms, as I did earlier this afternoon with Sharon McMillan, Andy Morton and Dr Mick North, I am saddened that the action that is needed in our communities has not been taken. They ask not which Parliament has the powers, but what Parliament—any Parliament—is doing about it. As a Scottish National Party member, of course I think that this Parliament should have the powers. Indeed, discussions are taking place among the Opposition parties on the powers that the Parliament should have, and firearms may be part of that. However, we will not be precious or  stand on ceremony. If London wants to take action, and will take action, that is fine—but it must do so. If not, it must give us the powers to act. Air weapons are not toys. We know perfectly well that such guns can cause serious injury and, as such, they should not be freely available to just anyone. There are good reasons why some people who have a legitimate reason to hold them, such as for pest control or recognised sporting events, should be allowed to retain them. We must stop the people who want an air weapon to take pot shots for what they call fun. We all know that the proliferation of air-guns in our streets is damaging our communities—leaving residents as prisoners in their homes, injuring and maiming people, pets and wild animals, and even tragically claiming lives. For most firearms, it is for the police locally to decide whether an individual has a good reason and is a fit and proper person to hold a licence. The same arrangements must apply for air weapons. We cannot allow those who would use them for nefarious purposes to buy them over the counter. That is ridiculous and unacceptable. Is it appropriate that a licence is required for the use of a shotgun to deal with pest control while someone does not need a licence for an air-gun? Is it appropriate that someone who wants a hunting rifle has to meet good-reason criteria for each rifle and quantity of ammunition requested, and yet someone who wants a shotgun does not? If a shotgun licence is refused, the onus is on the chief constable to prove that the applicant has no good reason. An air-gun does not require a licence at all, but, as we all know, any firearm can be lethal in the wrong hands.

Off the top of my head, I do not know. I presume that we might be able to do something through a licensing regime. I took a call on the point from the Greenock Telegraph , and I made it clear that we would discuss the issue. Clearly, it is not simply a matter of air weapons but of the other matters that Mr McNeil raises. I am happy to look at what we can do, but we need to stop making piecemeal amendments to  legislation and instead pass one all-encompassing act; I will come to that later. We must treat all guns in the same way. Does it make any difference what kind of gun causes the terrible tragedies? The fact is that we need to do all that we can to prevent them from happening again. Moreover, we need to simplify the present convoluted system. We are determined to make the current regime easier to understand and easier for the police to enforce and, as a result, to make our communities safer. The Home Office published a consultation paper in May 2004 entitled "Controls on Firearms". In the document's foreword, the then Home Secretary David Blunkett stated: "This consultation is the first step in a comprehensive review of our firearms controls and laws." He went on to say that he wanted to minimise bureaucracy and to ensure that there were no unnecessary burdens on those who possess and use guns lawfully.

We are having a summit to involve all those who have an interest—whether through sport or farming, or as police. We must have a system that is fit for purpose and which is clear, coherent and understandable. At present, lacunas exist in relation to BB guns and air weapons, for example. A hunting rifle is dealt with differently from a shotgun, as I said. There might be good reason for having a differentiation in the legal system, but we should have one all-encompassing act and sort out what we want as a people. That is why we are driving the issue forward. The consultation document to which I referred said: "the legislation has been amended a number of times, and as a result the framework of controls can be difficult to understand and enforce." We agree about that, which is why we want to take action. The consultation sought the public's views on an overhaul of the firearms legislation. It is disappointing that, following responses to that consultation in 2004, no comprehensive review has been undertaken. Despite indicating that a wholesale review would follow, the Home Office no longer seems to consider the issue sufficiently important, but I do, the Government does and so do our communities. I therefore asked the Home Secretary to let the Scottish Parliament decide  what is best for Scotland and to do what we can to take the action that many people throughout Scotland demand to tackle the scourge of air weapons. Regrettably, she refused my request, but I have asked her to think again. I acknowledge the work that has been done in recent years to improve the legislation—most recently by tightening gun laws through the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006. That is welcome, but it did not go far enough and it falls far short of the comprehensive review that we were promised in 2004 and of a system that will be fit for purpose to protect our citizens in the 21 st century. A consolidated act is needed. As I said, the law must be understandable not just to the specialist few. However, when we are dealing with an act from 1968 that has been amended by something like 21 acts and affected by 13 statutory instruments, it is clear that not only cannot the man and the woman in the street understand the legislation but, often, those with legal expertise and police officers have difficulties, too. It is therefore time for an all-encompassing act that sets out who can buy a gun, for what purpose and from where. The police will tell members how time consuming the current system is, and we do not want the police to be tied up in needless bureaucracy, as Mr Aitken and other Conservative members know. Communities throughout Scotland are crying out for further action on air weapons and to ignore their calls is simply unacceptable. In every week that passes, further innocent victims are maimed by the use and misuse of such weapons. Already this year, two incidents alone have been brought to my attention in which an air-gun was alleged to have been fired at houses in North Berwick, which terrified people in their homes and neighbouring residents. In my discussions with Andy Morton, Sharon McMillan and Mick North, other incidents came to light. Unfortunately, such incidents in many parts of Scotland are not rare—they are far too common. That is why we must tackle the misuse of air weapons in our communities. We need to work with all—with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, shooting interests and others—on practical measures, whether they are legislative or non-legislative. We need to make the law easier to understand and enforce and, as a result, make our communities safer. No Government could fail to act when firearms casualties in Scotland rose by a quarter last year, when one in three of those casualties was a child and when the number of cases of attempted murder involving firearms was almost three times what it was a decade ago.  A Government has no greater duty than to protect its citizens. We cannot and must not sit on our hands. Our communities want action, the police want it and we as a Government demand it. It is time to act on the problem of air weapons in our communities. Whether legislation is passed here or in Westminster is incidental. As I said, the issue is about not the status of Parliaments or politicians, but the safety of our communities. Action needs to be taken and action there must be. If Westminster will not do it, Holyrood must. I move, That the Parliament recognises the increasing public concern about gun crime; agrees that action is required to give better protection to our communities by effectively banning the ownership and use of all firearms and air weapons other than for recognised and legitimate occupational and sporting interests, and supports the Scottish Government's intention to engage with the wide range of interests, including the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland (ACPOS), sporting bodies and gun lobbies, in re-energising the United Kingdom debate started in 2004, but not progressed, on reform of the existing firearms regime into a system that is simpler to understand, administer and enforce and places prime importance on public safety.

We published our proposals to reform summary criminal legal aid in a consultation paper in October. That paper formed the basis of on-going discussions with representatives of the legal profession. Further details will be provided following the conclusion of the extended consultation on 31 January. We have already announced plans to reform legal aid for solemn criminal cases and we are taking forward a series  of improvements to civil legal aid, which will build on the improvements to fees that we introduced last year, including specific increases for undefended non-divorce work.

Absolutely. Governments of whatever political hue in Scotland and at Westminster have always sought to uphold that tenet. I assure Ms Craigie that we want to ensure accessibility and affordability. We want to ensure that summary legal aid is dealt with swiftly and efficiently while the requirements for justice are always taken into account.

There are no plans to revisit the police funding distribution formula at present. The implementation of the previous revision of the formula, which was begun in 2004, already takes such pressures into account. The 2007 spending review settlement included funding to complete the implementation process, and a final levelling-up adjustment is being made in 2008-09. As a result, Grampian Police will benefit by an additional £1 million in 2008-09.

There are two parts to that question, one of which relates to the funding methodology, which is built on the methodology that commenced under the previous Liberal-Labour Administration. If Mr Rumbles has complaints about that methodology, which takes  into account Grampian Police's responsibilities relating to Balmoral, the oil and gas industry and other matters, those complaints are about the previous Administration. Mr Rumbles can rest assured that the current Administration has ensured that an additional £1 million will be made available to provide additional benefit for the people in the community that Grampian Police serves. We inherited a situation in which there was the lowest recruitment since devolution began, but we have ensured that additional police officers will be available. The projected figures are for the recruitment in Grampian of an additional 150 officers in 2008 and an additional 52 in 2009. There will be a further 28 officers as a result of the additional Government funding. Accordingly, Mr Rumbles can rest assured that Grampian Police will recruit a total of 230 officers over the period 2007 to 2009. It is projected that there will be only 92 retirals, thankfully.

I am happy to discuss those matters with the member and, obviously, we will always be happy to discuss them with our colleagues south of the border. Whatever complaints members of other parties have, they can rest assured that the Government, like Grampian Police, is happy to co-operate with people south of the border on policing at Balmoral. Most of the duties at Balmoral are fulfilled by the royal protection squad, which is of course part of the Metropolitan Police—those around the periphery of Balmoral are fulfilled by Grampian Police. That shows that the Government is more than happy to work together with colleagues south of the border when doing so is appropriate to ensure that not only the great and the good but our ordinary citizens are protected.

Our understanding is that they have. As I said in response to Mike Rumbles's question, such matters were considered many years ago under the previous Administration. However, Nanette Milne is right. There is house building and further development in the area and we must take into account the significant implications that geography, topography and demography have not only in Grampian but elsewhere in Scotland. The matter that has been raised has been discussed not only at governmental level but in conjunction with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I assure Nanette Milne that we will always keep demographic changes under review. Such changes are occurring not only in Grampian but elsewhere in the east of Scotland, particularly Lothian and the Borders. The door is open and the matter will be reviewed when that is appropriate.

I have met representatives of Grampian Police—indeed, I met the convener of the police board many months ago. It is rather rich of Mr Baker to make such a complaint while Lord George Foulkes, who has protested that we have not given capital city status to our police in Edinburgh, is sitting along from him. We have delivered. Perhaps Mr Baker should speak to Lord Foulkes to see whether Labour can get its act in gear.

I am happy to give Mr Martin that assurance. I hosted a meeting between Mr Pearson, Mervyn Rolfe—a man who is known to Labour members—and David Mulhern but, unfortunately, it did not proceed as I had hoped. I assure the member that I will meet Gordon Meldrum—I hope that that will happen shortly. As I have said, we retain the utmost faith in the SCDEA and the SPSA. There are issues, but I am sure that they can be resolved.

The Government has said on the record that it intends to introduce a criminal justice bill later this year. Our view is that what matters is not the number or volume of bills, but what they deliver. A criminal justice bill could cover low-level crime, antisocial behaviour and more serious matters. I am happy to give the member the undertaking that if we believe that particular measures that relate to serious and organised crime are essential, they will be delivered. The best way to do that will be not by multiplying the  amount of legislation, but by having one all-encompassing act, but I give him the assurance.

We are aware that fewer than 140 section 44 stop and searches have been carried out by the Scottish police forces, but more than 14,000 have been carried out in six months or so by the British Transport Police. Would we be correct to assume that Mr Stevenson, Mr Gorman and others were apprehended by the Scottish police forces? As a result of the 14,000 to 16,000 British Transport Police searches, how many serious organised criminals were detained, apprehended or brought to account?

How many terrorists were caught?

I welcome this opportunity to debate one of the major threats facing Scotland today: serious organised crime. Organised crime impacts on us all. For too long, too many people in Scotland have had to live with the cancer that is organised crime. Organised crime undermines legitimate businesses, distorts democracy and threatens the very fabric of our communities. That is intolerable and unacceptable in the 21 st century. The Government is determined to root out that evil, to allow honest people and their businesses to prosper and to help our communities be all that they can be. It is what the people of Scotland want, what they deserve and what we must deliver. It is important to consider what serious organised crime is. We live in an increasingly globalised world. Business is no longer constrained by geographical and political borders. While that allows legitimate business to grow and flourish, crime is also increasingly globalised. It evolves and flourishes, taking advantage of freedom of movement, past conflict in the Balkans and elsewhere, the opening up of the former Soviet republics, and cheaper international air travel. Criminal networks operate in many different countries with many spheres of interest, but all exist to make money at the expense of hard-working, law-abiding people. It is those networks that produce and supply the drugs that cause misery on Scotland's streets and cause harm in Scotland's communities. Drug trafficking remains the single biggest threat to our communities because of the illegal proceeds that it secures and the devastating harm that it causes. The police and the Crown have had significant success in disrupting supply, in seizing assets earned from that illicit activity and in bringing serious criminals to justice. An example of that is the recovery of 170kg of heroin, with an estimated street value of £13.6 million, in the Blochairn area of Glasgow. In October 2007, a 44-year-old man was imprisoned for eight years at the High Court in connection with that operation. However, organised crime is not about drugs alone. Its tentacles stretch to human trafficking, fraud and pornography and to using legitimate businesses as fronts for money laundering. It is evolving and searching for new ways to make  money at the expense of others. That is and remains a serious threat that we must tackle and address. There are other examples of successful operations against those threats. On 4 October 2007, following a four-year operation in which the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency supported Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary, the Leonardo da Vinci painting "Madonna with the Yarnwinder", which is owned by the Duke of Buccleuch and valued at around £30 million, was recovered. Four males were arrested, have appeared in court in connection with the crime and await trial. At the conclusion of an SCDEA intelligence-led operation into alleged counterfeit currency production and circulation, seven people were sentenced at the High Court in Edinburgh for a total of 22 years' imprisonment. When officers raided premises during the operation, £496,200-worth of counterfeit notes were being printed. Further investigations led to the recovery of €406,200 in counterfeit €50 notes. A further £672,880 in counterfeit Bank of Scotland notes with the same serial numbers was recovered from the banking system. What are we doing to address the problem? We have to recognise that we must work in partnership to ensure that Scotland is not seen to provide a safe haven for organised crime. Co-operation between law enforcement agencies in Scotland, the United Kingdom and Europe—and more widely—is key. To provide a strategic focus for that work and to ensure co-ordinated and targeted action, we have established the serious organised crime task force. The task force brings together all the major agencies that are involved in tackling serious organised crime: the Crown Office, the police, the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, the Serious Organised Crime Agency, Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs and the Scottish Prison Service. By working together and pooling information, we will have a better chance of putting the criminal networks out of business. The task force met for the first time on 22 October and meets again on 28 January. It is already clear that there is a lot that we can do. We can build on our knowledge of organised crime, take action to allow more assets to be seized, increase enforcement powers where necessary, support legitimate business and law-abiding communities and increase co-operation with law enforcement agencies in Europe and elsewhere. We must build on our knowledge of organised crime. We need to learn more about the scale of the challenge that we face. This Government will provide direct support to the Scottish police service to build a clearer picture of who is up to no  good in Scotland, who is orchestrating criminal activity in Scotland and elsewhere and who is supporting them and their criminal enterprises, and to identify the commodities from which they make their illicit and illegal profits. We also need to seize assets. Asset seizure is one of the clear success stories in the fight against organised crime. We already have powers under both criminal and civil law to seize assets to remove the benefit that criminals have gained from their conduct and to allow the courts truly to balance the justice system. Those powers allow us to target the core of criminality by removing the profits of the criminals and crime groups that impact on Scottish communities. However, we must look for ways of strengthening the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 further. We will extend the range of offences that are indicative of a criminal lifestyle. A lifetime of crime should be open to a lifetime of asset recovery, so we look to extend the time period for confiscation and asset recovery. If investigators were able to delve further into criminals' past financial records, that would assist in investigations, particularly into well-established organised criminals who have banked their criminal profits over many decades and who are now, sadly, living a life of luxury. In order to tackle the lower-level offenders who are affiliated to wider and bigger organised criminal networks, l want there to be a reduction in the criminal benefit amount from £5,000 to £1,000, as well as a reduction in the minimum cash seizure threshold. The recent reduction from £5,000 to £1,000 has already been a particular success in Scotland, and there would be benefit in a further reduction. I have today written to the Home Secretary, seeking her support for those measures. Maximising asset recovery requires the proper tools. That is why, for the first time, a proportion of the money that is recovered will be reinvested in experts in financial recovery work to allow us to recover even more assets.

My understanding is that the figure is 50 per cent above £17 million per annum. We are obviously happy to discuss the matter. That particular aspect was not covered in my letter, but I expressed our desire to ensure that we can take more assets. The door is open, and if the member wishes to discuss the matter with us further, we are more than happy to do so.  We cannot tolerate a situation in which some young men in housing schemes aspire to be drug dealers. We need to punish hard those who offend; we also need to promote hope and provide opportunity. We want to demonstrate to communities that those who prey on them will be caught and that those communities will benefit from the wealth that has been stolen. The drug dealers' four-by-fours, villas and speedboats will be seized and sold, with the proceeds used to provide sporting and other activities for young people and communities. We will expand young people's horizons and increase their opportunities to develop their interests in an enjoyable and supported way. We hope to announce more detailed proposals very soon.

The member and I have touched on such matters at hustings and on other occasions. She is aware that some matters are outwith the domain of the justice department's silo. The issue is one of getting youngsters into employment. In Scotland, the maxim that the devil finds work for idle hands applies. As the member will be aware, we are anxious to reinvest the money, and not simply in sporting activities, although a great deal of benefit comes from sporting activities and from providing facilities for youngsters who, in many instances, do not have many alternatives and whose time is spent consuming alcohol and getting up to low-level mischief, or indeed getting lured into serious organised crime. There is no one particular way of ensuring that alternatives are available, but the member can rest assured that we recognise that, across Government, we must tackle hopelessness and despair, we must try to get people into work and we must use the proceeds of crime that we recover to make communities better places and to let our youngsters be all that they can be. We must also use the proceeds of crime to redress the balance in those areas where virtually no facilities are available to children—and where it is therefore of no surprise that they get up to mischief. We will introduce proposals to strengthen legislation and further frustrate and disrupt serious and organised crime. We are not reluctant to consider how other countries approach the problem and to learn from their approach. We are therefore looking to follow the examples of Ireland and Canada in creating a new offence of being involved in or directing serious crime. That sends  a strong message to criminals who work together that they will be caught and suitably punished. We must also support legitimate business. We are all familiar with the stories of criminals infiltrating the private security industry, which has shaped our view of that industry and of the people who work in it. As a result of regulation that came into force in November last year, we are already seeing rogues move out. However, we need to ensure that they do not now move on to other sectors, damaging the reputation of legitimate businesses and threatening the livelihoods of honest, hard-working people. Let us take the example of taxi firms. Most taxi companies are fully law abiding, but we have all heard anecdotes about some taxi firms being used as a front for criminality, including money laundering. As I know from my own constituents and others, those illegal activities impact on legitimate business. Prices are undercut and companies go out of business, or the public simply lose faith in the integrity of businesses. We cannot allow those activities to continue. We will take firm action to cut off business opportunities for illegal groups while supporting legitimate business to thrive in our communities. We will not hesitate to legislate to regulate business if need be. That is something that many legitimate taxi firms support, as it will safeguard their integrity and custom. Scotland must also play a role on the world stage. I was in The Hague recently to learn more about Europol. An SCDEA officer is part of the UK liaison team at Europol, as is a member of the Crown Office. That direct link between Scotland and Europol has shown fantastic results. Although liaison with Europol has resulted in operational benefits and successes, work is on-going further to improve the interaction between Scotland and Europe and to make better use of the European intelligence system and the ability to share relevant data across national boundaries. I will also work with the Scottish police service to raise awareness of the role that Europol can play in supporting Scottish law enforcement and of the ways in which Scotland can help our partners anywhere to tackle serious organised crime.

I believe so. I met the director general of Europol. I am not aware of any evidence from police officers or organisations in Scotland that appropriate information is not  coming through. I am happy to investigate that. I did not raise the matter with the director general, because my visit was only cursory—I was simply there for a day, but I was happy to be enlightened. I understand that the relationship with Europol is meaningful and works well. We hope to encourage and facilitate further secondments by Scottish officers to Europol, because the director general of Europol made a request for more Scottish officers. That will not only benefit the individual officers by improving their knowledge but create links, provide information and benefit all of us. I assure Margo MacDonald that if there is any suggestion that information is not coming through or that there is a blockage, I will not hesitate to use the opportunity that I have been afforded to go directly to the director general to discuss it. I will clarify the situation, but I am led to believe that the information coming through is adequate. Perhaps the reality is that we are dealing with a growing problem that is coming in from the Balkans, where information is less readily available than it would be in the Netherlands, France or Germany, where there are clear links. The problem is apparent not only in the Balkans but in the Ukraine, Turkey and other areas. Trafficking is a global problem that will require a global solution. That is why I undertake to check whether there are problems with the information that we are getting. Margo MacDonald may rest assured that we are seeking to ramp up our involvement in Europol because we believe that that will benefit not only the individual officers on secondment but Scotland, Europe and other places as we seek to work together to tackle the people who are involved in trafficking. Law-abiding, hard-working Scots expect us to tackle the menace of serious and organised crime and strip criminal gangs of the assets earned from their illegal activities. I am confident that we will rise to the challenge. We will tackle this menace at every level. We will seek to frustrate and destroy the criminal gangs and their overlords and to disrupt their lieutenants, who orchestrate their activities, and their foot soldiers, who make life in our communities a misery. We will seek to take down those who seek to destroy, while providing hope and opportunity for those who seek to improve themselves and their communities. Those who seek to profit from crime in our communities undermine legitimate businesses and threaten the very framework and fabric of our society. That cannot and will not be tolerated. We will create a safer and stronger Scotland for all our communities. I move, That the Parliament recognises that serious organised crime is a major problem that has a devastating impact on communities and businesses in Scotland; believes that  tackling this menace should be a key priority for a safer and stronger Scotland; supports the Scottish police service and UK and European law enforcement agencies in ramping up their efforts to disrupt and destroy the criminal networks which inflict misery on law-abiding citizens; commends the agencies responsible for recovering over £17 million worth of assets using the provisions of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002; supports the view that serious organised crime cannot be seen to pay and supports further measures to ensure that criminals are stripped of the profits made from the misery they cause in order to reinvest in the youth of Scotland and communities, and supports the role of the newly established Serious Organised Crime Taskforce in spearheading a renewed drive and commitment to address this type of crime.

Our immediate priority is to ensure the successful implementation of the Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007, which was brought in by the UK Government and comes into force in April 2008. The act sends a robust message to organisations that failure to meet their duty of care to employees and the public will not be tolerated.

We recognise that a majority on the expert group on corporate homicide considered that there should be a secondary offence for individual directors or senior managers whose actions or omissions significantly contribute to the new corporate killing offence. However, we also recognise that the 2007 act does not provide for such an offence. We will therefore monitor the act. Equally, it is fair to say that the opportunity remains for people who carry out such acts, or who fail to carry out such acts, to be prosecuted either by way of a culpable homicide offence under common law or other statutory offences under the health and safety at work regulations.

It would be inappropriate for me to speculate on the outcome of the Stockline inquiry. Clearly, as a Government, we are glad that we could progress the matter expeditiously. The Lord Advocate has commented at length on the matters that are involved. Obviously, I am happy to meet members whenever I can, subject to diary commitments. We are seeking to monitor how the 2007 act works out. I say to Ms Gillon that it was introduced by a Labour Government south of the border, with the support of the Labour Administration in Scotland—an Administration that was in power for eight years. If she is so desperate to meet members of this Government because matters appear to be so appallingly bad, questions have to be asked about why the last Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration failed to implement the measures in the first place.

On 29 November 2007, we announced our decision to introduce a bill to reverse the House of Lords judgment of 17 October on pleural plaques. We also announced that the provisions of the bill would take effect from the date of the judgment. The effects of asbestos are a terrible legacy of Scotland's industrial past, and we should not turn our backs on those who contributed to our nation's wealth. We have, therefore, acted quickly to reassure people who have been diagnosed with pleural plaques through being negligently exposed to asbestos that they will continue to be able to raise an action for damages. We are determined that the legislation should be thoroughly prepared and properly scrutinised. That will include consultation on a draft regulatory impact assessment. Subject to parliamentary timetabling, I expect to introduce the bill before the summer recess.

We have been advised that the UK Government's position is that it is not prepared to legislate to address the anomaly that we believe the House of Lords judgment has raised. Our position is simple: we seek to continue with the situation that has applied in Scotland for 20 years. Obviously, I cannot comment on the situation south of the border: that is a matter for the UK Government. If UK Government ministers wish to discuss the matter, we will be happy to do so. Clearly, as Mr Brown knows, our taking action is a virtue of devolution. We intend that the bill should apply from 17 October 2007. We are aware of one case in Scotland that has been decided since the judgment. It is fair to say that the bill's provisions on retrospection are under careful consideration. We are talking about a complicated matter of law. I am unable to comment further, except to say that our legal advisers are looking at matters to ensure that we protect not only those who are involved in current and future cases, but those whose cases have been decided.

We welcome this debate. Summary justice reform is vital and has been debated before. I start with an anecdote, which comes not from my position as Cabinet Secretary for Justice or from having been a defence agent for approximately 20 years, but from witnessing an assault almost exactly a year ago today. I am still waiting to give evidence in the trial for that assault, which was nasty but is not a matter for a sheriff and jury; I understand that it is being dealt with as a summary matter. I was first cited in May, but the trial was cancelled. I was cited again in October, but again the trial was cancelled. I have been cited a third time for next week, and I hope that the trial will proceed. However, it is approximately a year since the incident, there has been no closure for the victim and there has been considerable inconvenience for me and numerous other witnesses, not all of whom reside in Scotland and who include members of the public as well as serving officers. That is why summary justice reform must proceed and why, back in January, Parliament passed unanimously the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill, as members will recall. I pay tribute to Sheriff Principal McInnes and his committee for their work, to the previous Administration and to the former Justice 1 Committee for creating the platform for the changes that the Government is seeking to make. In January, as now, everyone was in no doubt that we needed to get our summary justice system working better, smarter and in the way in which its name suggests it should work. It should be a truly summary justice system—a system that is quicker, more efficient and more effective. We are building on the legislative platform that we inherited from our predecessors and we are happy to give credit where credit is due. We supported the programme in opposition because it was correct, and we are delivering it in government because it is right. More than 90 per cent of all criminal court cases call in our summary courts, which are the first contact with courts for most offenders. By reforming the system so that that critical first contact is effective in dealing with offending behaviour, we can improve on Scotland's poor  reoffending rates, which remain a major problem not just for Scotland's justice system but for the nation as a whole. The provisions in the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 will improve procedures; result in a redistribution of cases to an appropriate level in the system through changes to sheriff sentencing levels and the increased use of direct measures; free up court time through more administrative enforcement of fines, which Mr Aitken is quite correct to go on about; and revitalise the practice of lay justice through improved training and appraisal. Lay justice is often maligned—I see similarities between it and community councils. At the end of the day, they are necessary if we are to have local democracy, accountability, a better judicial system and public involvement at appropriate levels. However, we must ensure that they work better and smarter, if not harder. In addition, we must allow the Scottish Court Service to use its expertise to run all of Scotland's criminal courts. The CPR act is only one part of the story. We recently published a summary justice reform system model, which details how criminal justice partners will work together to help to make our summary justice system live up to its name and make Scotland safer and stronger. No one can disagree with the aims of the system model, which are to have a summary justice system that is "Fair to the accused, victims and witnesses ... Effective in deterring, punishing and helping to rehabilitate offenders ... Efficient in the use of time and resources ... Quick and simple in delivery". The system model builds on legislative changes to address a wider need for change. In case any of us need reminding of that need for change, I will mention some of the indicators that were provided in the McInnes report, to supplement the anecdotal evidence that I gave on a summary case in our capital city. The report said that a system that fails to dispose of more than half of cases within six months of the offence cannot truly be considered summary, and that no evidence was led in around 90 per cent of cases that were set for trial. The system is not in crisis, but it is capable of being much better. Summary justice must preserve fundamental aspects and core tenets, such as the presumption of innocence, but it must also reflect the speed and ease that are appropriate to the lesser nature of the offending with which it deals. The system model will help to bring about "Greater use of direct measures (non-court options)", thereby removing—appropriately, we believe—cases from the courts. It will help cases to come to court more quickly and will allow early, effective preparation of court cases. It will be possible for  cases to be dealt with at the earliest possible stage in proceedings. Culture change is critical. Everyone who is involved in the system has a part to play. The police will provide high-quality information in their reporting of cases. The Crown will have more options for appropriate action and will use high-quality information to communicate with the defence to discuss cases ahead of hearings. Since October this year, the Crown has provided a disclosable summary of evidence to enable the defence to assess effectively the weight of evidence against their client. Other changes are also vital. We recently launched a consultation on changes to summary criminal legal assistance, which are designed to complement the system model. The proposed changes have generated considerable debate. Let me be clear on one of the main objectives of summary justice reform: we want cases to be resolved sooner, not after several hearings, and we do not want preparation to be done for trials that do not go ahead, because there is too much delay and inefficiency in the system. From my days as a defence agent, I recall that far too many trials were scheduled that did not go ahead after the plea changed to guilty at the last minute. As Sheriff Principal McInnes said when he gave evidence on the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill to the Justice 1 Committee in May 2006, too much effort goes into preparing for trials that do not go ahead because a guilty plea is entered, often on the day of the trial itself. As well as causing huge inconvenience to individuals, that has a cost to the public purse. We must address the inconvenience to witnesses who turn up at court for a trial that does not take place; the stress that victims suffer through unnecessary delays in cases' progress, which prevent people from getting on with their lives and, in some instances, having closure; and the waste—which is not cost free in time or money—for court staff, judges, the prosecution, the police and the defence. The situation undermines the public's faith in the justice system, which must be paramount. It has been suggested that the proposed reforms to legal aid and the wider summary system, which seek to encourage the early resolution of cases, will in some way infringe civil liberties. Let me be clear: anyone who wants to have their day in court will continue to have a right to it, and anyone who wants to plead not guilty will continue to be able to do so—that fundamental right remains sacrosanct. However, the system must also take into account the rights of the community. The process must be visible, speedy and efficient. We want to reward solicitors fairly for the critical work that they do in advising and representing  accused persons and protecting their rights. We want a system in which justice is upheld and the taxpayer receives the best possible value for money. On Margaret Smith's amendment, we do not believe that the proposed changes will create substantial problems in relation to eligibility for legal aid, but we are happy to consider the matter further, to ascertain whether there are genuine cases of hardship for which special allowance must be made. On that basis, I am happy to accept her amendment. On Monday, I had a constructive meeting with the Law Society of Scotland and representatives of local bar associations to discuss the proposed legal aid reforms. The people whom I met have concerns about the proposals and want to put forward an alternative approach. Any such approach must support the system model and be affordable, given the tight financial constraints that we face. I am hopeful that we can reach agreement and that it will not be necessary for me to impose a solution, so I have agreed to extend the consultation period until the end of January, to allow for further discussion. After all, it is good to talk—as the saying goes—and reaching agreement is better than enforcing a solution. The 2007 act received unanimous support, and work has been going on to prepare for the implementation of its provisions. The first phase of implementation will take place from next Monday and will include reforms to bail and remand, criminal procedures, sentencing levels and lay justice. The bail reforms were welcomed in the Parliament as a sensible way of making the law more transparent. It is correct that the court should decide, on the circumstances of each case, whether an accused should be remanded or bailed. It is right that the Parliament should set a framework within which the court reaches such decisions. Public safety must be considered by the court when it is deciding whether to bail or remand. Judges will be obliged to give reasons for bail decisions. The accused will be left in no doubt about the responsibility that is placed on them when bail is granted, and there will be increased penalties for breach of bail orders, coupled with tough enforcement. We want there to be increased respect for bail, so that breach rates fall. Lay justice is critical. Much important progress has been made in taking forward reforms. Since March 2007, 470 existing justices of the peace have accepted new appointments, which they will take up from Monday. Almost all of them have attended three-day refresher courses. Feedback has been excellent and reflects their enthusiasm about improving their skills. Strengthened lay justice will play a key role in the reformed  summary justice system. We are happy with the amendment in Mr Aitken's name, which is perfectly reasonable and acceptable. The Government is already on the case in the context of the enforcement of fines, the review of community penalties, the requirement for custodial sentences to be reduced in some instances and the requirement for offenders to be dealt with through firm, tough punishment in communities. As the amendment says, for some offenders the only suitable punishment is prison. The sacrosanct principle is that it is for the judiciary and the presiding sheriff or magistrate to decide whether a sentence should be custodial. More of the 2007 act's provisions will be implemented in March, with reforms to fines enforcement, court unification and procurator fiscal direct measures. By working together, criminal justice agencies can make the changes that we all want. As people on the ground will see the effects of the changes before anyone else, the national and local criminal justice boards will play a crucial role in monitoring and evaluating them. Of course, the impact of these extensive and complex changes will not become apparent overnight. When, in due course, sufficient data become available, this Parliament, and in particular the Justice Committee, will want to scrutinise them. I believe that when that time comes, we will have a summary justice system that lives up to its name and ensures that any citizen—no matter whether they are a Cabinet Secretary for Justice or anyone else—who is the victim of or a witness to an assault or other minor summary incident does not have to be cited to court on three separate occasions. The least that we can do is to ensure that a summary trial is held less than a year after the incident. Our job is not only to make better law for our communities but to provide some justice to victims. As I have said, I am happy to accept both amendments. I move, That the Parliament recognises that a summary justice system should deal with offending behaviour quickly and effectively; believes that the implementation of the provisions contained in the Criminal Proceedings etc. (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 will help bring about improvement in how the summary justice system deals with offending behaviour; considers that the legal aid system should complement the reformed summary justice system and ensure that solicitors receive fair remuneration for their work in advising clients while also providing best value to taxpayers, and looks forward to the Justice Committee providing effective post-enactment scrutiny on the impact of the programme of summary justice reform.

I am grateful to Pauline McNeill and the other members of the selection panel. The Scottish Government had no involvement in the appointment process, which is rightly a matter for the Parliament, but we are happy to accept the panel's recommendation. I congratulate Professor Miller on his nomination. His reputation goes before him, as Pauline McNeill, Robert Brown and Bill Aitken said. From personal experience I know that he has an impressive breadth of knowledge on human rights issues. He has been instrumental in devising and delivering human rights training for Scottish Government staff, as well as being involved in numerous matters around the globe, as Pauline McNeill said. If the nomination is confirmed in today's vote, I am sure that Professor Miller will be an excellent choice as the first chair of the Scottish commission for human rights.

We will establish a full public judicial inquiry to get at the root of the confusion, concern and controversy that have persisted for a decade. We are working hard on the details and I expect to be able to make a full statement to Parliament in a few weeks' time.

It would be inappropriate for me to comment on the specific remit of the inquiry as it is under review, discussion and negotiation with the person who will carry it out. However, I can say that this Government is coming at the issue from the perspective that a manifest injustice was done to Ms McKie. Mr McNulty was a member of the Administration that paid a substantial amount of taxpayers' money to Ms McKie because of that injustice, and we will not move from the position that something went seriously agley. We need to work out why it happened and why that injustice was perpetrated so that we can ensure that what happened to Shirley McKie does not happen to anyone else.

As with the answer that I gave to Mr McNulty, it would be wrong to comment on the precise details of the remit that is currently being worked out. However, I can give Mr Neil the assurance that I gave to Mr McNulty: we take the view that a manifest injustice was perpetrated against Shirley McKie. We regret that and we need to work out why it happened, why it cost the taxpayer money and—more important—why she and her family went through the trouble that they did. It is not a matter of carrying out a witch hunt; it is about working out what went wrong, particularly to ensure that such injustice is not replicated or perpetrated against anyone else as a result of errors in Scotland. Whatever irredentists might say, we will try to work out what went wrong and ensure that it never recurs.

The project to establish a crime campus at Gartcosh is going ahead. We have secured an option to purchase the land, established a project board and appointed project managers. We will shortly go out to tender for a design team and cost consultant. When those key people are in place, work can begin on producing preliminary designs and a fully costed business case. We will then be in a position to make decisions about the next stages and to agree a firm timetable.

I absolutely agree that the campus will be of great benefit to Gartcosh. In Scotland, we face a significant problem of serious and organised crime, and anything that facilitates the work of the forces of law and order in taking on pernicious elements will be supported by the Government, because we have made a clear commitment to tackle organised crime in all its facets in this country.

Progress will not be delayed by work on other sites. We are committed to Gartcosh, as I said. In seven months we have progressed the issue to the extent that I described; Labour had 10 years in London and eight years here and failed to progress the issue. The member can rest assured that we will act expeditiously and efficiently.

The Scottish Government does not intend to reconsider its decision not to commission costly research into the impact of trading by large stores in Scotland on new year's day.

I assure the member that I have met the Scottish Trades Union Congress and I have made our position clear. Those of us in the Government would have more sympathy with Mr Butler if he was accurate when he waxed lyrical about great savings that were to be made. In fact, the study was to address only large stores, not  small stores. It would not have affected those who, for example, were preparing for work on 2 January, and it would not have prevented those who were prepared to go in and do back-office work from doing so. If the study had been about delivering, I would have some sympathy. However, there seems to be almost rank hypocrisy, because the study was not about delivering what Bill Butler seemed to suggest. As was often the case with the previous Labour Administration, it was about pandering to a position and seeming to do something, but achieving nothing.

As a resident of the city of Edinburgh, I think that what is available to visitors and residents in the city is excellent. The matter is one to be discussed between employers and employees. That has always been the situation, and we do not seek to impose unnecessary Government regulations on people who may choose to open—or not. In the city of Edinburgh there is a great deal of vibrancy, not simply in the hogmanay celebrations, but in what is available for both residents and visitors to enjoy on 1 January. That is good for the Scottish economy, for those who have the opportunity to work and who wish to work, and for the residents who enjoy the atmosphere of a cosmopolitan city.

I am grateful to Sandra White for those comments, which I endorse. Frankly, £110,000 for a study that was going to advise us of nothing of which we were not already aware did not seem to be a particularly good use of public money. The previous Administration may not have worried about such sums, but if we can use that money to protect workers' rights more expeditiously in a variety of ways, we will do so. To fritter it away on consultants' fees does not appear to us to be of benefit either to the Scottish economy or to the workers whom Mr Butler seeks to protect.

The Government will use the £110,000 to plug the gap from the £500 million that shop workers who reside in Edinburgh would have benefited from had that money not been forced into a tram scheme from which they will not benefit and which they do not want. If Karen Whitefield listened, she would know that the SNP's position on the Christmas Day and New Year's Day Trading (Scotland) Bill was that—as Mr Mather and Mr Maxwell pointed out—it was an Elastoplast that would not have to be used if the Parliament had powers over the wider economic framework to create a fairer and more prosperous Scotland. The fact is that action requires to be taken to protect Scottish workers. However, if you wanted to do that, you would campaign for the Parliament to have the proper powers of an independent Parliament to deal with employment rights. At present, employment rights are reserved to Westminster, so you are seeking to produce something that provides no protection to those who have to load up shops for, or work in shops on, 2 January. You failed to campaign on issues that are pivotal to employment, health and safety and the protection of workers' rights. If you really want to protect workers' rights, you should campaign for the powers that the Parliament requires to protect our workers properly.

We have taken time to reflect. We have also seen the state of the books and the situation that we have inherited. I point out to Mr McLetchie that he voted for £500 million of expenditure on a tram scheme in  the city of Edinburgh that goes nowhere near where the vast majority of his constituents—whether they are shop workers or not—live. The Tories are demonstrating rank hypocrisy over the expenditure of £110,000; Mr McLetchie and Mr Fraser voted for £500 million of expenditure. They should look at their own position.

We are seeking not to re-recruit police officers who have already retired but to engage proactively with those who are about to retire in order to retain their valued skills and experience. As all members know, this Government inherited a situation in which approximately 2,300 officers will be eligible to retire over the session. That represents a huge pool of knowledge, experience and expertise that cannot be immediately replicated at even the best training college. Too many effective, experienced officers leave the service when they still have much to offer. We have not imposed any central targets for increased retention, but we are committed to working with police staff associations, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and police boards to ensure that opportunities exist to retain the services of the most skilled and able officers beyond the point at which they are eligible to retire.

The fact is that the 30-plus scheme is not working. There might be a role for it—some officers in Scotland have signed up to it—but it is clearly not as attractive as we wish it to be. That is accepted by ACPOS and the Scottish Police Federation. There are difficulties with how it operates. It is a UK scheme, and we are happy for it to be retained. I go back to the position that we inherited: 2,300 officers are due to retire, and they have skills and energy that we need to retain, much of which  cannot be replicated at Tulliallan. We are seeking to work out a new scheme. That is why we are working with all stakeholders, including ACPOS and the federation, and are in discussions with police board conveners. In considering the scheme, we have not ruled anything in or out yet. However, we believe that there are officers who wish to stay, forces that wish to retain them and communities that are crying out for them. I give this assurance: we will be delivering retained officers on our streets who will increase the visible police presence and we will be delivering our manifesto commitment of 1,000 additional police officers in our communities.

Quite simply, we are operating what is known as the three Rs. The three Rs have their own place in academia, but in relation to the police, we are talking about, first, the recruitment of 500 new officers. Given that Ms Smith asked me about that at the Justice Committee meeting, she knows that we have inherited the lowest number of officers being recruited since devolution. Thankfully, we have committed to recruiting 500 additional officers. We are also going to retain some of the 2,300 officers who are due to retire and we are seeking to redeploy officers who are currently not able to get out and serve their communities by being visible and proactive because they are stuck behind desks doing bureaucratic jobs that could be dealt with in other ways, whether through new technology or through civilianisation. Through recruitment, retention and redeployment, we will deliver 1,000 additional officers into our communities. That is what we promised and that is what our communities will get.

The deployment of police officers is an operational matter for chief constables. We shall work closely to support police officers across Scotland to build on their impressive track record in delivering efficiencies by redoubling their efforts to tackle bureaucracy, drive out inefficiency, exploit the opportunities of new technology and  free up officer time to be redeployed into strengthening operational policing in our communities. We have already taken steps in that regard. For example, I have written to the Secretary of State for Transport, Hazel Blears, to ask the UK Government to change the legislation that requires Scottish police officers to support officials from the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency in carrying out roadside checks. That is an example of the duplication of valuable public resources that should be stopped.

I am grateful for that appropriate question. One of the huge pressures on our police is the problems caused by alcohol on Friday and Saturday nights in particular. Police officers have to be drafted into many urban areas and most certainly our city centres to deal with the consequences of the abuse of alcohol. There is a cost to that, which we believe should be met by those who profit through the till or over the bar. Those officers should be out in our communities, but people who have paid council tax find that the officers are out in our city centres. I believe that the cost of additional policing in city centres should be met on a polluter-pays basis. That is the position to which this Government commits.

The Scottish Prison Service has no current plans for expansion of the open prison estate.

The member raises a valid point. There is clearly a great deal of concern in the Castle Huntly area—a sheriff in a fatal accident inquiry recently commented on that. The matter has obviously been taken on board by both the Government and, more important, the Scottish Prison Service. I assure the member that there are no plans to expand the current open prison estate, whether at Castle Huntly or Noranside.

No, they have not. What the member says seems rather to contradict Mr Martin's points. Is Mr Whitton telling the chamber that he supports Tesco law?

I am grateful for the points made about civil legal aid. The Government's position has always been that we are happy to provide facilities for civil legal aid. In Inverness, we did so with the consent of the profession. Is the member suggesting that we should expand civil legal aid into other rural areas even if the profession says that it is capable of providing legal aid? The Government's position has been that we should expand into areas where the profession admits that it cannot provide legal aid. We should move only at a pace that has the consent of the profession.

I intervene at Mr Martin's request. We accept that although the Law Society and the Faculty of Advocates each perform a pivotal role for their professions, they do not operate in isolation. Consumers groups are also important, as are individuals who are not represented by them and whose complaints have to be picked up and aired in the chamber by MSPs. We will listen to all those people. The member can rest assured that we will not simply process what comes through from the Law Society; our input into the changes that the profession makes to its fundamental structures will be pivotal. I give the member a complete assurance that we will listen to input from anywhere to ensure the provision of the legal services that we need in a changing world. It is not simply the legal profession that is changing but the nature of our communities, and that has to be factored in. We are more than happy to give the member that undertaking.

I appreciate that the level of excitement about today's debate is not quite on all fours with the anticipation for Saturday's 5 pm kick-off at Hampden Park, but I am grateful to all members who have agreed to participate. In a democracy, the rule of law is often said to be so fundamental that it is the most important matter that a Government can deliver. Clearly, a regulated, appropriate and integral legal profession is a fundamental aspect of that. For that reason, whatever view some might have about a debate that is very much related to legal matters, the issue is fundamentally important. Therefore, I welcome the opportunity to introduce today's debate on the structure and regulation of the Scottish legal profession. As many members know, I was proud to serve in that profession for 20 years, but I have now moved on to another calling. Some might call that jumping out of the frying pan into the fire given that, in a 2004 poll, politicians were ranked higher than lawyers—somewhere between public relations agents and reality television show contestants—in the list of most hated professions. Joking apart, the profession has served Scotland well. Alongside the church and the education system, the legal profession has formed one of the fundamental pillars of Scottish identity within an incorporating union for more than 300 years. It is perhaps not going too far to say that, were it not for the strength and independence of the Scottish legal profession, we would not be  having today's debate. That immense debt will not be forgotten by the Scottish Government. That is not just an historic debt. In the budget document that we published yesterday, we set out our strategic objectives for Scotland. Two of our most important objectives are that Scotland should be wealthier and fairer and that it should be safer and stronger. A flourishing and independent legal profession is a fundamental underpinning of both those objectives. The legal profession is a key part of our institutional framework, not just as a point of constitutional theory but because it does vital work. Lawyers help people at times of crisis and bereavement, they protect the rights of the vulnerable, and they support business and economic growth. When people buy their first house, get into matrimonial difficulties or become involved in the criminal justice system, lawyers and the legal profession come to their aid. Therefore, I will defend the legal profession against those who malign and misrepresent it. The Government will work with the profession to ensure that the challenges of the future can be met within a reformed and improved legal system. Reform and improvement are needed because the world is changing—fast. An ordinary family today faces legal issues that would have been unknown to our grandparents' generation. Such issues include advice on financial services, resolving disputes with education authorities and taking action against antisocial neighbours. In addition, businesses may not use Scottish lawyers or the Scottish courts if they can get a faster and better service elsewhere. We need to address that. I know that Scottish lawyers can deliver excellent services in new areas of law as well as old and that they can compete with the best in the world. We need to ensure that they are not held back by inappropriate restrictions and regulations that do not meet modern needs. The United Kingdom Parliament has just passed the Legal Services Act 2007, which creates a new legal services regulator, opens the door to mixed practices of lawyers and other professions and allows third-party ownership of law firms. That is an English act, but it has fundamental effects on Scottish firms. Our major law firms compete internationally—it is good for Scotland that they aspire to reflect, and go above and beyond, the daily practice of other sections of Scottish business such as financial services and accountancy—and Scots have always been prepared to think big and to think globally. One of the world's biggest accountancy practices—Ernst & Young—still bears the name of Arthur Young, the Scot who set up the practice a century ago. Today, we can be proud of the success of businesses such as the Royal Bank of  Scotland, which proves that we can compete with the best. We must not hold back those in our legal profession who aspire to similar success. The pressures of change affect not only the big commercial firms but our high street firms. Many of them find it difficult to recruit trainees or to pass on their business to new partners. Firms that offer a broad range of legal services struggle to compete with firms that specialise in high-value work such as corporate business or high-volume work such as remortgaging. Many of the core business activities of law firms are not restricted to solicitors, so alternative providers and English firms are entering the market. I can understand why some in the profession might feel concerned about those changes and that the profession is under threat, but that is not how I see it. As I told the Law Society of Scotland conference, I was impressed by how Bob Ayling, of British Airways, warned a group of travel agents some years ago that the internet was coming and that only those who adapted to it would survive. I know that many in the industry heeded that advice, developed new products—in specialised in-bound and out-bound tourism markets, for example—and prospered as a result. For me, the issue is not to wonder whether alternative business structures will change things but to respond to the changes that are already happening. The debate is already under way. In 2006, the previous Administration published its "Report of the Research Working Group on the Legal Services Market in Scotland", which identified the need for further policy development by the Scottish Government, working with interested parties. In July, the Office of Fair Trading published its response to the super-complaint that Which?—the Consumers Association—had submitted. The OFT report argues that many of the current restrictions on business structures that affect solicitors' firms and advocates should be lifted. Currently, all solicitors' practices operate under a partnership model. Only solicitors can be partners and no one else can own a firm of solicitors that offers services to the public. All advocates operate as sole traders and cannot enter into any form of partnership with solicitors or other professionals. There are restrictions on advocates taking instructions directly from clients and on their appearing with solicitor advocates in the same case. The OFT believes that lifting those restrictions could offer consumers a better choice and has asked the Scottish Government to set out a policy statement before the end of the year.

We have been in regular contact with the OFT. We have always been at pains to point out that we accept the need for consumers' rights to be preserved and protected. As I made clear at the Law Society conference, which the convener of the Justice Committee also attended, we also recognise that, at the end of the day, we are not simply consumers but part of a community, so we must also bear in mind our responsibilities in that regard. Our position is that we are happy to continue to liaise with and speak to the OFT. On the particular issue that the member raised, I will come back to her at a later stage. If I do not, I am sure that my colleague Fergus Ewing will mention the issue. We are considering carefully everything that the OFT has said. We agree that change needs to happen, but I have no intention of adopting a model that is unsuited to our needs as a country. Our geography, demography and topography are different from those of England. We are a country of small towns, islands and archipelagos rather than a series of large urban metropolitan areas. The English bar has 14,000 members, whereas the Scottish bar has 470. An SNP Government will do what is right for Scotland. We will not preside over any diminution in the quality and integrity of the Scottish legal profession. In September, I set out a challenge to the profession to lead the debate on how reform should be taken forward in Scotland. I am pleased to report that it has responded to that challenge. Two weeks ago, the Law Society published a consultation on alternative business structures. The Faculty of Advocates has also initiated a debate within the bar about how its rules might be amended. I pay tribute to the Law Society for the leadership and courage that it has demonstrated. It is difficult for a membership organisation to lead its members through radical change, especially when no clear or consistent view prevails among an overwhelming majority of its members. However, the Law Society's consultation rightly makes clear why the status quo is not an option and sets out a timetable for rapid change. The society aims to present detailed proposals early in the new year, following the conclusion of its consultation on 31 January. I anticipate that the bar should be able to match and even improve on that timescale. That urgency is not a response to a timetable set by the OFT, but a response to the practical issues faced by the profession and, even more important, by those who use our legal services.  We cannot build a wall against specialisation, commodification or competition from outside the profession—those are already happening. Senior and respected figures in the profession are already identifying how reforms might create new opportunities. At this stage I do not intend to limit their thinking, but I will set out the tests that I will apply to determine whether the proposals that come forward meet Scotland's needs. In short, it is our ambition that everyone in Scotland should have access to good-quality legal services when they need them. The word quality is fundamental—the right level of service at the right price. The badge of Scottish solicitor or advocate has always carried an assurance of professionalism, which I am determined to maintain. A key test for me will be whether our large financial institutions, which are able to choose where to take their legal business, increasingly choose to do that business in Scotland. There is something fundamentally wrong if key players in the Scottish economy choose to litigate in another jurisdiction. It is fundamental that we ensure that they make their home jurisdiction their jurisdiction of choice. As well as ensuring quality, we need to expand access. That means maintaining viable legal services in local communities. New business structures may be helpful—for example, if they allow a firm to offer a wider range of services. However, there are dangers in moving in a single step to a wholly open market, and we should not allow new entrants from outside the profession unless access and quality can be maintained. We need to deliver quality and access, and we will be able to do so if we strike the right balance between competition and regulation. If we act quickly, we can get ahead of the game. England's reforms are massive and will take several years to implement. As a small country, we can do what any good small business would do—we can be flexible and innovative, test out new ideas quickly and build on those that have potential. Of course, there are things that we must safeguard and difficult issues that we must resolve. I strongly believe in the value of an independent referral bar and will do all that I can to help the high street firms that offer vital services to our local communities. We need to ensure that the core values of the profession are not diminished and to consider how reform might affect important consumer safeguards such as the solicitors guarantee fund. I look forward to hearing Parliament's views on those issues, which will inform the response that we make to the OFT later this year. I hope that members will support our motion, but I am happy to accept the amendment that Pauline McNeill has lodged. In this and previous debates, I  have indicated that, although this may not be the most flamboyant or interesting subject for members, the general public or the press corps—representatives of which are entirely absent today—it is fundamental. I pay tribute to those who are participating in the debate and those on the Opposition front benches who are addressing the matter constructively, to ensure that the Parliament gets it right. We accept that this is a difficult time for our legal profession. That is understandable when people are afraid for their livelihood, because they fear that change may undermine their situation and damage their economic position. The Law Society is doing an excellent job of trying to allay understandable fears, at the same time as making it quite clear that the status quo is not and cannot be an option—not because the desire for change is driven from here in Scotland, but because there is change in our society and elsewhere in the world. We must adapt. If we do so, the profession that has served us well, not only through 300 years of an incorporating union but over the centuries prior to that, will be able to deliver. We are at one with Pauline McNeill in the desire to enhance justice at grass-roots level, through new forms of provision, where appropriate, and through continued support for those members of the profession who have served local communities over the years, often for modest rewards. We will remain a candid and supportive friend of the legal profession, helping it to continue to serve Scotland well in the years to come. We will doubtless have to return to the chamber on the issue. Whether there will be greater interest on the part of the media and others is a matter on which we will have to comment at that stage, but the issue is fundamental. Today's debate is taking place at an early juncture, but we can lay out what we envisage for the legal profession. It must maintain quality of service, continue to assure value, through regulation, and continue to ensure, as the Labour amendment makes clear, that it serves not only itself and those who have the appropriate financial means, but all our communities in as many ways as it can. The way in which the law serves its community is changing. The changes in our society mean that the legal profession must change substantially. Today we are taking a significant stride forward. I pay tribute to all members who are participating in the debate, which will be on-going and cannot simply be left to the legal profession. Given the importance and pivotal role of the legal profession in our society, everyone in our community—especially those who have been given the privilege of speaking in the chamber—should participate in the debate.  The Law Society has also taken a significant stride forward, and we should support it in its efforts. I hope that when we return to the chamber on the issue, the profession will be united on the direction that it wishes us to take. Ultimately, it is the Government's desire to work with the Law Society to deliver the appropriate legislative changes that the society wants, rather than to impose directions. We are making it clear that the status quo cannot be retained and that there must be change, because of matters beyond our or the profession's control. Together we can ensure that a legal profession that has served us well continues to do so and, as Pauline McNeill has rightly said, continues to serve our communities. However, as a Government with ambition for Scotland, we also look forward to firms that aspire to compete pan-UK, if not internationally, being able to do so, as we are now in a global world. I move, That the Parliament notes the Office of Fair Trading's response to the super-complaint by Which? on restrictions on business structures and direct access in the Scottish legal profession and the Law Society of Scotland's consultation on alternative business structures; believes that the regulatory and business structures of the Scottish legal profession should reflect Scottish circumstances and support improved access to high-quality legal services in a competitive and appropriately regulated market in accordance with competition law, and notes the Scottish Government's approach of working closely with the legal profession to secure reforms that will allow the Scottish legal profession to compete internationally while enhancing access to justice in local communities.

I set out the Scottish Government's position in a written answer on 19 September. A number of initiatives support victims of domestic abuse in Edinburgh, including space 44, the safe as houses pilot and the streetwork outreach service; and two projects work with perpetrators—the domestic violence probation project and the working with men project. All of that already makes a real contribution to the better handling of domestic abuse cases in the criminal justice system. The Scottish Government funds 11 organisations in Edinburgh that support the victims of domestic abuse. The case for any dedicated specialist domestic abuse court in Edinburgh will be better assessed once our reforms to summary justice have been fully implemented.

The Government supports the Glasgow pilot, but we should remember that it deals only with a specific and narrow geographical area. We are assessing the pilot to see how it can be rolled out so that it becomes a proper Glasgow domestic abuse court. Tackling domestic abuse is not simply about courts but about a variety of ways of challenging people. I mentioned the domestic violence probation project; the Solicitor General for Scotland, who is sitting on my right, recently passed me documentation relating to that.  Domestic abuse is an horrendous problem that scars Scotland. Courts have to address the problem, but no one simple solution exists. We will have to look at education, targeting and support for victims, and consider all such matters in the round. Obviously, what happens in Edinburgh will depend on a variety of matters. What is important is not simply what the Government wants but what sheriffs are capable of providing, what the core service facilities are able to deal with and what fiscals are able to cope with. As I said in answer to Mr Chisholm previously, it would probably not be feasible to roll out domestic abuse courts in every area. Lochmaddy does not have a resident sheriff, a resident fiscal or a resident sheriff clerk. Clearly, what works in Glasgow or another major urban area is not capable of being replicated everywhere. However, members can rest assured that the Government will do everything that it can, in as many ways as possible, to address the problem of domestic abuse.

I know the member's commitment to this cause, as evidenced both in this session of Parliament and when he was previously a member. The matter that we are discussing is something to which we aspire but on which we are constrained by space in some cases and by the availability of resources in others. Members who represent parts of Edinburgh would do well to remember that the Government would like to do an awful lot of things in this city but, as long as we are bound by the need to fund a tram system—which the citizens of this city do not want—at a cost of £500 million, we are prevented from providing a lot of the things that our citizens do want, including schools and domestic courts.

Johann Lamont makes a good point about ASSIST, which has performed a central function by providing support to victims of domestic abuse and providing information to the court. As I indicated, a feasibility study group is considering the options for supporting a domestic abuse court across Glasgow and has been asked to report to me in January. I know that that means that we are asking members to wait for a few months, but I assure members that matters are being addressed. I hope that we will be able to satisfy Johann Lamont.

It is everyone's responsibility to protect children and look out for their welfare. Families, the police and local authorities need to take the lead, supported by Government. We are taking immediate action to tackle underage and binge drinking. We are continuing implementation of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, ending irresponsible promotions, rolling out test purchasing for alcohol and overhauling the offences of selling and supplying alcohol to children. As agreed by the Parliament last week, we will convene a summit to consider proposals for tackling underage drinking as part of our long-term strategy to tackle alcohol misuse. We will do so with the full support and assistance of members across the chamber.

First, we have to recognise, as a country, that there is a problem. Thankfully, from the tenor of the debate, I think that all parties  in the chamber recognise that there is a problem. We are dealing with a cultural problem, so the answers will have to be long-term ones. They will also require efforts that go beyond legislation. We are trying to make it quite clear that it is not only selling alcohol to youngsters that is an offence but supplying it to them. We have the tragedy in some places of people providing children with alcohol, either because they are given inducements, or because they benignly think that they are helping the children and doing them a favour. We have to make it clear that we will not accept the selling or supplying of alcohol to youngsters. We hope that that will come out at the summit. We have to work with partners in the chamber and with licensing boards in particular. The powers that the act brings in will greatly enhance what the boards can do. The Government—and I hope that we will be supported on this by the other parties—will encourage licensing boards to deal with the matter effectively and not to countenance the appalling abuse that has been going on. It is also up to every adult in Scotland to realise that our behaviour is to some extent being mimicked by our youngsters. Until adults in Scotland learn that there is a problem and that we have to change, we cannot berate youngsters, because they are copying their elders.

I do not have the information to hand regarding the number of prosecutions, but I will write to the member with that. Regarding additional resources, the member will be aware—indeed, he has never hesitated to point out to us that he raised the matter—that the polluter should pay. We are happy to work with him on that. It appears to us that additional resources are required. Those who profit from the sale of alcohol should realise that it is not a God-given right to be able to sell alcohol. They should be required to face the consequences and meet the costs, whether those are to do with health, criminal justice or other areas. I look forward to working with the member to ensure that those additional resources are available to our licensing boards and to encourage the boards to use them.

That is a matter of the Government seeking to work with our partner agencies and, in particular, social work departments. We have to remember—especially given the age group that the member mentioned—that these are children. We do not seek to prosecute children, except when they commit horrendous offences and have to be prosecuted. We must treat them as children. The problem is that sometimes they do not deserve any sympathy, and it is hard to give them sympathy. However, we have to remember that these are children who are copying what has been done by adults for generations, and who are accessing alcohol that—as a result of legislation that they have not decided on—is far too easily available to them. It is up to us as adults, particularly in social work departments and in the Government, to address the issue. We have to keep in mind the maxim and the ethos that these are children whom we need to protect, not people whom we need to punish.

Fines totalling £49.6 million were imposed between 2004-05 and 2006-07 in the High Court and sheriff courts, and £38.3 million has been collected. That equates to a collection rate of 77 per cent. Those figures exclude any fines in excess of £5000, so significant health and safety fines are not included.

I agree with Bill Aitken's ethos that if a fine is imposed by a court on someone who has the ability to pay, that fine should be paid. For that reason, when we were in opposition we supported the previous Executive in rolling out legislative changes to introduce fines enforcement officers and allow deductions to be made from benefits. It is important to get the statistics right and acknowledge that about 80 per cent of the value of financial penalties imposed in the sheriff courts and High Court has been collected successfully in recent years. Of the remaining 20 per cent, 12 per cent was discharged by the defaulter serving a sentence of imprisonment—that matter is being tackled; 3.5 per cent was discharged by the defaulter undertaking a supervised attendance order, which is a sensible way to go; and 3 per cent was discharged by judicial order, death of the accused or successful appeal. All that was unrecovered was the 1.5 per cent that was written  off. I made this point to the member earlier: it depends on whether we see the glass as being half full or half empty. It seems to me that if 98.5 per cent of the value of fines imposed is being collected, that is not bad.

We took the decision to replace Aberdeen and Peterhead prisons knowing that it would not be possible to please everybody. We decided that there would be a new public sector prison to meet the needs of the north-east of Scotland. That has ended nearly a decade of uncertainty for staff and for the local communities.

I am obviously not in charge of the First Minister's diary, and he is extremely busy. I will leave that matter to him and those who represent him. On Friday, I attended the annual conference of the Prison Officers Association Scotland. On behalf of the Government, I was delighted to pass on, both to my party's conference and to the First Minister, the association's hearty congratulations to the Scottish National Party Government on delivering on its manifesto commitments. I rest my case.

We heard substantial representations from those who work in the sector. We also had representations from Aberdeen City Council and from Aberdeenshire Council, but they were not exactly singing from the same hymn sheet; there was a difference of views. The matter was discussed and debated. I told the Prison Officers Association and those representing  Aberdeen that we welcomed and appreciated their hard work over the years but that a decision had to be made and we believe that the correct one has been made.

I appreciate the efforts of all those who have come to the chamber this morning to participate in the debate. The topic may not be the most exciting—it does not divide parties or the chamber on the basis of ideology—but it is nonetheless an important aspect of our justice system for a small, but important, section of our society, so the debate will be greatly welcomed. I am grateful to all those members present—both those who volunteered to come to the chamber today, bright eyed and bushy tailed, or who were volunteered—to debate this important aspect of the law of Scotland. I welcome the opportunity to introduce the debate on the use of alternative dispute resolution procedures, which are less formal, value-for-money ways in which disputes between citizens can be resolved. Before I set out how the Government sees the interaction between ADR and the civil justice system, I will set out our priorities in relation to the operation of the civil courts and administrative justice. In so doing, I recognise that our civil courts have served the people of Scotland well over centuries. However, in an increasingly complex and diverse world—in the global economy and in our knowledge economy—we need to examine more cost-effective, time-effective and less stressful ways in which to resolve disputes. We need to ask ourselves whether the procedures and processes are as clear and understandable as they can be and whether court-based resolution is appropriate for the range of disputes that are currently decided there. That is particularly true for low-value cases—which, after all, are the vast majority of cases that appear before the courts—where no legal principle is at stake and where a pragmatic solution is required. I concede that major principles are involved in some minor cases. Any system needs to be flexible  enough to recognise that, if a requirement arises to move the case into a different ambit, that should be done. In the main, however, where matters are relatively low cost and straightforward, we should seek to deal with them as pragmatically and simply as possible. That is true across all ranges of dispute. A key priority for the Government is to develop and enhance a vibrant Scottish economy in order to generate wealth and prosperity in Scotland. We recognise that we are a small country, but we want to place Scotland in the economic foreground of Europe, North America and beyond. Scotland should be an easy place to do business. The law and courts need to back that up to make Scotland the jurisdiction of choice for resolution of disputes, and not, sadly—as is the case at present—a place where people prefer, despite cost and other factors, to pursue matters elsewhere. We have much to be proud of in the entrepreneurial spirit of the Scots and the success on the international stage of institutions such as the Royal Bank of Scotland, which has shown that we can compete internationally and globally with the best. However, in order to complement and support those levels of international success, our domestic courts and other dispute resolution structures need to be modern, quick and efficient and serve the needs of their users. In April last year, I participated in the civil justice reform debate in the Parliament, at which time I urged the then Executive to press on with a radical re-examination of the civil court system. My amendment, that the civil justice system "must also be accessible and affordable", was accepted by the then Executive and around the chamber. I also welcomed the announcement in February by my predecessor, Cathy Jamieson, asking Lord Gill to carry out a review of the structure and jurisdiction of the civil courts in Scotland. I look forward to receiving his recommendations when he reports in May 2009. It may be that some structures will change; or the legislation may be found to be appropriate. I give the chamber the assurance that the values and ethos that Scots law has always stood by and for will remain the same, but will be made fit and appropriate for the 21 st century in which we find ourselves. Currently, I am involved in discussions with the legal profession about the introduction of alternative business structures, which will change the way in which we offer legal services in Scotland. The issue will be debated in the chamber on 15 November. I look forward to the contributions to that debate—not only those from the Law Society of Scotland that will arrive in my e-mail inbox and doubtless in the inboxes of other members, too—but from members around the chamber.  I further welcome the serious consideration that the administrative justice steering group, under the chairmanship of Lord Philip, is giving to the establishment of a way forward for the provision of ombudsman functions and a modern, efficient, effective and responsive tribunal service in devolved areas. Sometimes, we can forget that our constituents are more likely to interface with and come before a tribunal than they are to be before a court of law. The courts not only take the publicity, but they are—understandably—at the forefront of our minds. However, in day-to-day matters, people are more likely to interact with a tribunal than either the High Court or a sheriff court. All those major initiatives comprise a major challenge to those of us who are deeply committed to the highest quality of dispute resolution system. Of course, structures are not enough in themselves; we all need to be willing to embrace new ideas and new ways in which civil justice can be delivered. My aspiration is to make the use of the formal court system the remedy of last rather than first resort. That said, the situation is not necessarily the same in all major arbitrations. My experience of mediation as an agent when I practised law is that it is a much better system than any sheriff could pronounce in matters such as access to children, or contact, as it is now called. It is much better for both parties to reach and sign up to an agreement than for the court to force a decision on them that neither party welcomes. A central part of ensuring the existence of an effective court system is the encouragement of an environment where alternatives to court are made available to meet the needs of different users and circumstances. Over time, a wide range of different dispute management processes have developed. This debate gives the Parliament an opportunity to explore and discuss that range of processes, and to debate how we can enhance and develop their role.

I cannot give that formal commitment, as each and every matter is different. Frankly, in some cases, the Government will have to go to court because the matter is urgent and we have to take immediate steps to defend the interests of the citizen or whatever. That is why we have measures such as interdicts and why we have at times to arrest or inhibit on the dependence. Sometimes, there have to be ways in  which to take immediate action to defend. The Government would sign up to the ethos that it is much better to discuss and negotiate. That said, there are instances where it is necessary to protect the interests, not simply of the Government or the state, but the citizens we represent. In those instances, as I said, we have to reserve the right to litigate, and to litigate urgently and immediately. Each process has its place, and none is of itself more important than another. As an Administration, we recognise the value of methods such as arbitration, adjudication, mediation, early neutral evaluation, reference to a person of skill, and assisted negotiation. I will focus on the first of those by setting out the Administration's strategy on arbitration reform. Unfortunately, the current law on arbitration in Scotland is very much in need of modernising reform. In at least one aspect, the law dates from an act of 1695, which was made by the first Scottish Parliament, although I do not denigrate that, in and of its own. Members who have read Arthur Herman's book "How the Scots Invented the Modern World" will know that the noted historian indicated that the single most important act that any Scottish Parliament has passed is an act from about that time—I think that it was 1696—on free public education. The act was driven by the desire of the previous Scottish Parliament to make our people literate so that they could understand directly the word of God. The act had huge benefits, not only for the enlightenment but for our nation. It benefited our people not only at home, but, as Mr Herman pointed out, when we went abroad. We landed on foreign shores literate and numerate. We could read the road signs in places where, in many instances, expatriate Scots communities are still well entrenched.

I say to my friend around the other side of the chamber that it is as we look at the glass in Scotland: is it half empty or is it half full? He is one of those who sees it as half empty; I prefer to see it as half full. We have our problems, but we are addressing them. The unsatisfactory state of the law here currently makes Scotland an unattractive place in which to arbitrate, but as world trade continues to expand, there will be an increasing demand for high-quality arbitration services as the preferred method to resolve cross-border commercial disputes. In order to support and develop domestic arbitration and to attract international arbitration business to Scotland, we are developing a three-track strategy for reform, in partnership with representatives of arbitrators and users of the arbitration process. The approach is, first, to  prepare an arbitration bill to modernise and codify the law and bring it into line with up-to-date arbitral practices in other jurisdictions. We will issue a bill for consultation among interested parties in the spring of next year, and I look forward to discussing and debating it with members on all sides. If we can assist prior to that with advice or information, members should feel free to contact me or my department.

As I was saying, we have to update it. We are in a global environment, and the nature of our economy and society has moved on. We need to build on our strengths and the fundamentals that are still appropriate, while ensuring that we have a system that is fit for purpose. Having spoken to a variety of interests, it is clear to me that, although we should have an advantage—over London in particular—in terms of costs and time, we do not, and many people still choose to go to London despite the increased costs and a variety of other factors. We should be able to do the work here. Secondly, we want to develop a dispute resolution centre, to which international arbitration as well as domestic business might be attracted. Thirdly, we wish to encourage representative bodies to enhance their arrangements for quality assurance among arbitrators, through accreditation, appraisal and training. In our manifesto, we undertook to work with Scotland's legal community to develop plans to create a Scottish international arbitration centre. We envisage a centre that will also have a role in other forms of dispute resolution. Arbitration is of course only one form of conflict management resolution. More broadly, ADR is a catch-all title, which takes in methods of resolving disputes that do not involve litigation in courts or tribunals. They all have their place, and they can enable people to resolve their disputes more quickly and effectively than by going to court. There have been a range of Government-led initiatives to develop ADR in Scotland. Despite that, the use and recognition of ADR methods still seems to be outside the norm here. Are we too reliant on traditional adversarial processes and laws? England and Wales have gone further in the use and acceptance of mediation and arbitration, especially in connection with the court system. We are happy to learn from that jurisdiction and other jurisdictions around the world. In Scotland, the Sheriff Court Rules Council completed a consultation exercise in 2006 on the use of mediation and other forms of ADR, and plans to adopt new rules to encourage the use of mediation or other forms of dispute resolution.  Much work is on-going. We want to encourage that, and we want there to be a wider recognition of the place of all appropriate forms of dispute resolution.

I am not in a position to answer that at present, but I will inquire. If possible, my colleague the Minister for Community Safety will answer that during his summing-up speech. If not, I will undertake to write to the member and give the relevant details. We see the potential to enhance Scotland's place in the world and its reputation as a place to do business. Modernising our institutions forms part of that. Scottish businesses and legal service providers can be key players in serving the global market, to the benefit of us all. The Government sees no reason why legal services, aside from satisfying the needs of our communities and our society here in Scotland, should not be able to access a wider market, which could enhance our economy, boost job opportunities and provide services in the global society in which we live. Whether it involves dealing with matters on a United Kingdom, European or global basis, our financial services sector is taking on the world, as we can see with the RBS and HBOS. In accountancy services, we provide locally and compete on a UK and international basis. Thinking about successful Scots, I am always reminded of one who remains a global brand: Arthur Young, whose name lives on in Ernst & Young. Mr Young was a double graduate at the University of Glasgow before he departed for Illinois, and the rest, as they say, is history. We aspire to serve our communities well, as has been the case down the centuries, but we also wish to add to what has been done and to compete internationally. I urge the Parliament to support our motion, and I am grateful that there are no amendments, which is indicative of our recognition that the subject is not a matter of dispute among parties, nor is it one where there are ideological differences. I am grateful in advance for members' contributions. Hopefully, together we can address a matter that, although it is a relatively unspectacular subject for the media, as I see from the absences in the press gallery, is in fact of significance and importance in making Scotland a better place. I look forward to hearing members' contributions.  I move, That the Parliament recognises the need to develop a broad range of appropriate dispute resolution schemes, as alternatives to the formal court system, which can offer more flexibility, quicker resolution, less stress and reduced expense for citizens.

Will the member explain what he believes are the extreme legal interventions that the Government is proposing? I view our regulations on liquor licensing as perfectly moderate. From where does he get the adjective "extreme"?

Is the member suggesting that the ways in which alcohol is promoted that I mentioned in my speech are acceptable? Is it acceptable that beer is displayed with the barbecue charcoal or that wine is displayed with a variety of other products? Does the member not accept that there is a subliminal message, but that we are talking about a commodity that is vastly different, given its effects?

I say at the outset that I will be happy to accept Pauline McNeill's amendment. We are seeking to address underage drinking and although we have laws, they must be enforced. She raises an appropriate point that other cultural matters that relate to the problem should also receive great consideration. We are more than happy to take that on board. It is timely that we are having the debate during alcohol awareness week. We should recognise the valuable work, led by my colleague Shona Robison, in partnership with the alcohol industry, to tackle Scotland's complex relationship with alcohol. She will explain more about that later. Although we are determined to tackle the problems of alcohol misuse, we are not prohibitionists—alcohol alone is not the problem. We are rightly proud of our brewers and distillers and the significant contribution that they make to the Scottish economy. Pub culture has been an important element of social life in Scotland for hundreds of years. However, the major problem now is our relationship with alcohol. It is not the drink but how we drink and, sadly, the balance is completely out of kilter. Drinking to get drunk is seen as acceptable behaviour. Alcohol is promoted, sold and accepted as just another ordinary commodity, and it is sold at an unacceptably low price—strong cider can cost less than bottled water. I have said it before and I repeat it today—nothing is off the agenda in consideration of proposals to tackle alcohol misuse. The Government is serious in its commitment to tackle the problem head on. I make no apologies for that. Voluntary measures are an important part of the solution but so, too, are tough legislative measures and direct action. We must be prepared to consider new and innovative ideas. The problem cannot be solved overnight, which is why we are working across Government to develop a long-term strategy. It will take time to change the culture, and the extent of our problem with alcohol means that we have no time to lose. We need to shake ourselves out of the complacency that surrounds alcohol. The figures are stark: one Scot dies every six  hours as a direct result of alcohol. We have the fastest-growing cirrhosis rates over the past decade of 41 countries that were surveyed. Over 40 per cent of those who are accused in homicide cases were drunk at the time of the offence. The overall financial cost to Scotland of alcohol misuse is estimated at £1.1 billion. Statistics do not show us the whole picture: behind them lie the personal experiences of families and communities that have to deal with the consequences of alcohol misuse—family breakdown, acute illnesses, absence from work and violence. In addition, front-line services such as the police and the national health service have to deal every day with the aftermath of alcohol misuse in our towns and cities, which places them under an enormous burden. As well as the development of a long-term strategy, we can quickly put some measures in place. I have introduced regulations, instigated by the previous Administration, that will require off-sales premises to have separate areas for the display of alcohol. That means that there will be no cross-merchandising, no beer beside the barbeque charcoal, no wine by the pizza counter and no gin and tonic in the chiller cabinet alongside the lunch-time sandwiches. We are not yet talking about having shops within shops or separate check-outs—we are talking about dedicated areas for the display of alcohol in order that we can begin to shift attitudes.

Absolutely. The matter was flagged up by the previous Executive, and this Government will continue to move in the same direction. The fact is that we have to change perceptions, which brings us back to Mr Whitton's point that alcohol has become no different to other products in shops. Where breaches of conditions occur, I will expect the licensing board to take tough action in determining whether the premises involved should continue to enjoy the right to sell alcohol. At a recent meeting with a number of licensing board conveners, I re-emphasised that very point and set out our expectations with regard to tough and effective enforcement. As part of the culture change, the licensed trade must recognise that selling alcohol is a privilege, not a right. It must face up to its corporate social responsibilities and recognise that it is part of the problem, as well as being part of the solution.  Of course, moving alcohol to one part of a store will not affect how it is priced and promoted. We are all aware of the rising trend of front-loading, in which people buy a large amount of alcohol to consume at home before setting out for the pub or club. There have been many calls for meaningful action to prevent problematic off-sales promotions. We are all familiar with the multibuy offers that slash the price of alcohol to incredibly low levels and encourage people to buy incredibly large amounts. Recent promotions in which beer has cost less than water have been described as offering great value; however, in my view, they can also be described as irresponsible. Is it any wonder that people front-load when a pint can cost 43p at home but £2.50 in the pub? There has been speculation about a cut-price bonanza this Christmas to shift piles of extra stock that have been left unsold after the poor summer. That could mean prices being cut to the lowest possible levels. Although retailers are to be congratulated for their efforts through initiatives such as challenge 21—which is increasingly becoming standard practice—I am not convinced that anything other than a regulatory approach will change for the better the promotion of alcohol.

This Government feels that we should have those powers because they are, after all, powers that any normal independent nation has that allow it to act appropriately to look after its interests. However, the Government has to take action under its current powers. We will do so and will make representations when we need to. The fundamental point is that if we want to change our country, improve our economy or change our drinking patterns, we need fiscal powers. I will introduce regulations under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 to end irresponsible off-sales promotions. Premises will not be able to have promotions that offer alcohol free or at a reduced price on the purchase of one bottle or more. Moreover, the regulations will apply to all premises that sell alcohol, regardless of whether they are supermarkets, convenience stores or corner shops. These measures will bring the off-sales sector into line with the on-sales sector, which is banned under the 2005 act from offering certain types of irresponsible promotions. Of course, banning irresponsible promotions does not necessarily affect prices. Even though it will not be possible to offer multibuy promotions, the measure will not prevent premises from selling  alcohol very cheaply. It would still be possible, for example, to sell beer at a lower price than water, and alcohol could still be sold at below cost price to tempt customers into a store. I have made it clear on many occasions that I do not think that that is acceptable, and I hope that every member agrees.

We said at the outset that although price is not the only issue, it is a pivotal factor. We want to address the culture of price promotion and a variety of other matters. It is not rocket science—it you pile alcohol high and sell it cheap, more will be bought, more will be drunk and more problems will arise. The Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which was put in place by the previous Administration, already deals with pricing, but I have asked for advice on what we could do to end deep discounting of alcohol. I want to progress that as part of a wider alcohol strategy. I will not pretend that taking tough action on pricing will be easy, but there is evidence and a wealth of opinion that says that controlling price and availability can be key to achieving the cultural change that we require. I will examine those arguments carefully. In our recent consultation on licensing-fee levels, I asked for views on whether local authorities should, on the polluter-pays principle, have a new power to apply an additional fee. The aim would be to offset the costs that pile up, whether for policing or anything else. Such revenue could be used for taxi marshalling, late-night transport or whatever the local authority thinks appropriate. I have also floated the idea of introducing places of safety in towns and city centres to ease pressure on police and accident and emergency departments. I want to explore the potential of those and other such schemes. Let me be clear: selling alcohol is not a right. It is reasonable that the people who profit from it should be expected to meet some of the costs of the ill effects of alcohol. The Government does not seek to take all the credit—some measures were proposed by Paul Martin and the previous Administration, while others have been implemented south of the border. We will work with all parties to take up ideas, regardless of  where they come from, that will ensure that we address cultural and other specific problems. Whatever doubts some members may have, it is clear that it is time for comprehensive action. We must take direct action now, coupled with a long-term strategy. Sustained action is required to turn round our relationship with alcohol. Such action will produce a safer and healthier Scotland. We are all aware of the problems and the consequences of doing nothing. Can we all share a commitment to change our drinking culture for the better? I trust that members will support the motion. I move, That the Parliament notes Scotland's first Alcohol Awareness Week and endorses the partnership approach between the government, industry and the voluntary sector to educate consumers about alcohol units, while recognising that further work is needed to ensure that alcohol is accepted as different to any other product for sale; further agrees that tackling the problems surrounding the misuse of alcohol is one of the great social and public health challenges of our time, requiring direct, innovative, long-term and sustained action; recognises that this includes tougher enforcement action against those who sell and promote alcohol irresponsibly; notes the importance of close co-operation with, and support of, Scotland's police forces and licensing boards in this respect; welcomes the recent commitments by the Scottish Government to regulate the display and promotion of alcohol in off-sales premises and to find a method of ensuring that those licensees who profit from Scotland's alcohol culture help offset the damage done by that culture, as well as to develop a long-term strategy to tackle the negative effects of alcohol misuse, and further notes the need for the NHS to play its part in early identification and intervention for those individuals drinking at harmful or hazardous levels.

Will the member give way?

The member refers to what I said about our not being in a numbers game but, as well as saying that the previous Executive increased police numbers to record levels, he said that the main source of complaints in Rutherglen is crime and antisocial behaviour. Does that not show that simply increasing police numbers does not by itself reduce crime and that we require to tackle the root causes of crime and ensure that the officers that we have are best utilised?

Will Pauline McNeill remind us how many new bobbies Labour committed to recruit? Was the number, in fact, zero?

We welcome the debate because this Government is committed to making Scotland safer and stronger and to delivering a more visible police service working in our communities to deter criminals and reassure good citizens. That is what our commitment was; it is what our communities need; it is what we said we would deliver; and it is what we will deliver. We will deliver an increase in  capacity of 1,000 officers in our communities, and we will do so after the strategic spending review, just as we said we would. We welcome the Justice Committee's inquiry into police resources. The committee has already been presented with a great deal of evidence and I have followed the inquiry with interest. Some of the experts called by the committee have provided much food for thought. For example, only on Tuesday, Dr Ken Scott, head of the school of social studies at the University of Paisley, stated: "Simply looking at the gross increase in police officer numbers underestimates the complexity of the situation."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 23 October 2007; c 156.] I will come back to that point, but Dr Scott is to be applauded for hitting the nail on the head. Perhaps the Conservatives should have enlisted his help when drafting the motion for today's debate.

We do not expect reasoning or logic from the Conservatives. Whatever criticisms Mr McLetchie had of the SNP manifesto—doubtless, he had many—let us consider what his colleague Jackson Carlaw said on 6 June about his own manifesto: "the SNP committed to providing 1,000 more police officers, while we committed to an additional 1,500. It would be interesting to know how the SNP arrived at its requirement figure"— I say to Mr McLetchie that perhaps it did so via Dr Scott. Jackson Carlaw went on to say: "come to that, it would be interesting to know how we arrived at ours."— [ Official Report , 6 June 2007; c 421.]  Perhaps the Conservatives failed to consult Dr Scott on that occasion.

Not at the moment. Bill Aitken said that the Tory commitment was to recruit 1,500 officers. If you want a police resource figure of 17,734, which is the logic of your argument, you cannot do it by simply recruiting 1,500 officers. As Dr Scott would explain, because of the nature of retirement, he would have to recruit substantially more than that. It is for that reason that this Government has correctly analysed the problem, which involves addressing more than simple numbers. The Conservatives are so obsessed by numbers—

As I said, we are delivering as you will see—not just from this speech, but over time, as matters unfold. We believe that effective and efficient policing depends on so much more than head counts. Our commitment is not simply focused on numbers, because, like Dr Scott, we agree that that approach, in itself, does not provide the complete solution. We will recruit. We will make an announcement about that shortly in the light of the spending review, as we promised. However, members can rest assured that that announcement will be broadly and warmly welcomed—although perhaps not by the Conservatives. As I said in the chamber on 6 June, "Tackling the fear of crime and deterring criminals requires effective front-line policing."— [ Official Report , 6 June 2007; c 406.]  That is what the public wants and expects and that is what we will deliver. Over the past decade, the overall number of police officers in Scotland has increased, yet crime has not fallen, and violent crime is on the increase. In the crime survey that was published earlier this month, nine out of 10 members of the public expressed the view that crime remained a problem. We all know how fixated the Opposition parties are on numbers. We are not in a numbers game; our commitment is to deliver. This is about a genuine improvement in how policing is delivered. We will deliver that improvement in three ways. First, we will provide funds for substantial additional recruitment. I make it clear that additional recruitment will take place and that new bobbies will be on the beat. Secondly, I am only too aware that too many experienced and highly skilled officers leave the service at a time when they have much more to offer. Retaining their talents and skills, which cannot be taught in college but which can be learned on the streets, is vital, and we will retain them. Thirdly, we will enable existing officers to maximise their potential by cutting the red tape that has enmeshed them in recent years. We will allow our officers to protect, guard and patrol instead of being desk-bound, processing, logging and filing. I say to Mr McLetchie that when we have 1,300 officers in Edinburgh's A division but still struggle on occasion to get 50 bobbies out on the beat, there is a significant problem that is not simply  about numbers but about how we use and deploy officers. That is how we will deliver on our commitment to the delivery of genuine, visible, front-line policing in our communities. Our bottom line is that every community in Scotland should have a clear understanding of the standards of policing that they have a right to expect and should know whether those standards are being met and how they can contribute to setting them. I believe that all members share those same goals. I confirm that we will deliver a visible police presence and provide an additional 1,000 officers for our communities, and that we will do so through recruitment, retention and redeployment to maximise potential, not simply by increasing numbers but by working smarter rather than necessarily harder. We are well served by police officers, but we need to ensure that their time is used productively and that they patrol, guard and serve rather than process, log and file. I move amendment S3M-677.1, to leave out from "with serious concern" to end and insert: "that the Scottish Government will set out its plans for a more visible police presence in the context of the Strategic Spending Review 2007 and will deliver an additional 1,000 police officers in our communities through increased recruitment, improved retention and redeployment."

If the Conservatives' manifesto commitment was for 17,734 officers, how many officers did it propose to recruit?

rose—

This Government is committed to delivering additional policing capacity—the equivalent of 1,000 officers over the parliamentary session—and ensuring that additional capacity is directed at providing visible and identifiable policing in Scotland's communities. Delivering that commitment will require a co-ordinated, carefully planned and innovative approach that will involve not only central Government but police authorities and chief constables. It will consist of a mixture of additional recruitment, improved retention and a freeing up of existing officers' time through tackling inefficiencies and exploiting new technology. We are currently developing those plans and intend to make an announcement in the context of the outcome of the spending review.

I will happily reply to Jackson Carlaw's caution. I am surprised that he goes on about deficiencies in specifications, given that the last time that he asked the question, he commented: "the SNP committed to providing 1,000 more police officers, while we committed to an additional 1,500. It would be interesting to know how the SNP arrived at its requirement figure; come to that, it would be interesting to know how we arrived at ours."— [ Official Report , 6 June 2007; c 421-422.]  Jackson Carlaw requires specifics from the Executive, but his party apparently did the work on the back of a fag packet. Jackson Carlaw has a commitment: we will recruit new officers. However, this is equally about retaining existing officers, far too many of whom leave with skills that are still required in our communities. Most important of all, this is about current and new bobbies using their time appropriately and visibly in our communities,  rather than being hidebound by the paperwork and bureaucracy that the previous Executive imposed on them.

I reiterate what I said in response to Mr Carlaw: the Government is committed to delivering additional policing capacity by the equivalent of 1,000 officers in the lifetime of this parliamentary session, ensuring—given what Ms McNeill said—that that additional capacity is directed at providing visible, identifiable policing in Scotland's communities. We will ensure that those 1,000 officers—the bobbies whom we recruit, those whom we retain and those whom we use effectively—will be visible in our communities, making Scotland a safer and stronger community.

There will be 1,000 more officers in our communities providing the visible policing that communities need and want. We have faith in the bobbies whom we will recruit and in the excellent service that will continue to be provided by those whom we will retain. We will ensure that they will be freed up to do an excellent job in our communities without being overburdened by the paperwork that was the responsibility of the Labour part of the previous Executive and for which Labour's junior partnership colleagues, the Liberal Democrats, are equally culpable.

Tackling underage drinking is a key Government priority. On Monday, I met licensing board conveners and police representatives to establish what more the Government can do to assist them in taking tough, swift action against those who make underage sales. The Scottish Government will raise the age for tobacco sales to 18 from 1 October to make buying tobacco more difficult for young people, but we must couple that with tougher enforcement measures, such as test purchasing and smoking prevention work to prevent young people from taking up the habit in the first place.

Claire Baker raises a variety of matters, and I thank her for her questions. I have had the pleasure of meeting Chief Superintendent Laing from Fife, who was responsible for instigating the test purchasing scheme. The member will be aware that the Government is committed to the polluter-pays principle. The industry must deal with many of the issues. The ability to sell alcohol or cigarettes is not a God-given or inalienable right. People who are given that right have consequent responsibilities and must meet some of the social and economic costs. We have received the final evaluation report of the Fife alcohol test purchase pilot, which we will publish. As for rolling out that pilot, the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 was amended to enable the test purchasing of alcohol to take place throughout Scotland from 1 May 2007. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has worked closely with trading standards officers to finalise a common operational procedure for Scotland. A phased approach to the roll-out will be taken; forces will undertake the relevant training and recruit young volunteers between now and the beginning of next year. However, I assure the member that there will be a roll-out, because the scheme was effective in Fife. We welcomed it and we will ensure that the benefits that Fife received are experienced elsewhere.

Roseanna Cunningham makes a valid point. The problems of alcohol do not just exist in our major urban areas of Edinburgh and Glasgow; they are experienced in other cities, such as Perth, and in smaller communities. I reiterate that the polluter must pay. We expect those people who are given the right to sell alcohol to take the consequent responsibility. The member is right to point out that the licensed trade has responsibility for what happens after a  sale, for ensuring that the consequent costs of policing and taxi marshals are picked up, and for how its members sell alcohol to individuals in their premises. I believe that the ethos of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 is appropriate. It should make the trade much more of a profession. We expect those who are given a licence to sell alcohol to do so while exercising suitable care. We will give every support to licensing boards to ensure that they are effective in getting those who have the right to sell alcohol to accept the consequent responsibilities. There have been tragic cases where people who clearly should not have been given further drinks continued to be provided with alcohol. That must cease. That is not what a professional licensee should do. That said, the licensed trade in Scotland has made considerable progress and it is co-operating in relation to the provisions of the 2005 act. Together, the trade, the licensing boards and the Government can make Scotland a safer and stronger place.

I had the opportunity to meet representatives of the Scottish Grocers Federation and other representatives of the retail sector earlier today. The 2005 act will empower licensing boards to act in a more hands-on way. Licensing boards were previously subject to a great deal of constraint; for example, they could not impose immediate suspensions. We seek to work with licensing boards so that they have the appropriate powers and can take immediate action if necessary. As I said in response to Ms Baker, the purpose of our meeting with licensing boards and the police was to recognise that the arrangements are tripartite. The Government must ensure that the appropriate powers are available. The police must do all that they can to ensure that the law is implemented and that those who transgress it are apprehended. Licensing boards have an obligation to protect their communities. When the new regulations kick in, we expect that the licensing boards will act swiftly, and that those who breach their responsibilities will forfeit their rights immediately.

We will make regulations to ensure, through licensing boards, that the polluter pays. That will not be imposed by central Government; rather, we will provide a framework of regulations that will allow licensing boards that see a problem to take action. That might be done in the city of Glasgow; I certainly hope that it will be done in the city of Edinburgh; it might even be done in the fair city of Perth. We expect action to be taken, because huge costs arise as a result of the sale of alcohol. It must be borne in mind that people make significant profits at the till and over the bar. Rather than being so begrudging, perhaps Mr Martin could recognise that we are seeking to work with his and other licensing boards to deliver policies that will make Scotland safer and stronger.

I did that on 24 August 2007, when I made a statement to the Justice Committee about the procurement process for HMP Bishopbriggs and the future operation of prisons in Scotland, although I consider the issue on an almost daily basis, and I discussed it last night with the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service at the Prison Reform Trust meeting that I hosted in the Parliament.

It appears that Mr Whitton takes a different view from his party leader, who supported the Government when we cancelled the proposed procurement process that would have been undertaken as part of plans to build a privately run replacement prison. If the new prison were privately run, 24 per cent of our prison population would be in private prisons, which would be the highest percentage anywhere in the world. Even Governor Schwarzenegger in California does not aspire to have as many prisoners incarcerated in private prisons in California as the Labour Party sought to have in Scotland. Thankfully, Wendy Alexander realised the error of those ways. There has been a delay of several years in the construction of HM prison Bishopbriggs, which has come about because of the last Labour-Liberal  Democrat Administration's nonsensical scheme to have a public-private bid, with the Scottish Prison Service tendering. What is worse, that mistake cost £2 million before this Government could cancel the process and head towards restoring faith in a prison service that is a service, not a private agency.

This week, we laid regulations to improve payments for undefended civil actions to more accurately reflect the work that can be involved in such cases. That should make actions such as seeking a protection order more financially viable for solicitors who provide a legal aid service. The regulations also make changes that might permit solicitors to claim an additional uplift fee in cases involving vulnerable witnesses, and increase the current uplift in specified circumstances. Those changes reflect the commencement of new legislation but also take on board concerns that were expressed by the Family Law Association. In addition, we have agreed to expand the Inverness-based legal service that is provided by a solicitor who is employed by the Scottish Legal Aid Board. Women who are experiencing domestic violence will be a key client group for the new service. We are also reviewing the block fees that are payable for civil legal aid, to ensure that they provide appropriate remuneration.

I appreciate Gil Paterson's long-standing commitment in this area. The regulations have been laid, but I do not know the precise date when they will come into force. We are dealing with the issue as a matter of urgency, having received representations from the Family Law Association.  We face a difficulty, because we have inherited a situation in which—as one newspaper has mentioned—it is possible that, in some areas of the country, legal aid services will go the same way as national health service dentistry has gone. That situation needs to be addressed, and we will do it in part by making changes to the Scottish Legal Aid Board. In addition, some aspects will be addressed by the work of Lord Gill, who is reviewing how legal services are structured. However, I assure the member that this Government recognises his commitment and the requirement for the Government to protect those who are vulnerable and who suffer the scourge of domestic abuse and violence in the home.

Getting children the right help at the right time in the most effective way is a key priority for this Government. Consequently, we are working with all agencies, including the police, on the most effective means of meeting the needs of children, including those with substance misusing parents.

I am assured by my colleagues that discussions have been taking place. As for the issue in Edinburgh to which the member referred—which, as a constituency representative, I know well—the report in question  shows that, just as we as a Government have inherited huge difficulties, my colleagues on the Scottish National Party council have also inherited a difficult situation. The member can rest assured that my SNP colleagues in the City of Edinburgh Council will do exactly the same as my SNP colleagues in the Government of Scotland and set those matters right.

The only thing I would say is that I do not know where the member gets the phrase "set free". I have told Mr Aitken and, indeed, have reassured Mr Martin's executive colleague sitting next to him that we have not said that. That matter is, and remains, one for the courts. Any suggestion that those people will be set free is factually wrong.

I appreciate the point about firearms that the member is genuflecting towards. On that basis, perhaps she will support the Government's desire to take measures against the use of firearms, particularly air weapons, and our call for the powers on that matter to be repatriated, as it is clear that nothing adequate is being done south of the border and it is about time that we took powers and took action in the Parliament.

As the member correctly says, we are seeking to extend the pilot to the whole of Glasgow. Glasgow sheriff court is the busiest criminal court in western Europe. Does the member realistically believe that what is suitable and necessary in Glasgow would work in Lochmaddy? I have had the privilege of attending Lochmaddy sheriff court, and I must say that what works in Glasgow will not necessarily work in Lochmaddy, just as what is needed in Lochmaddy will not necessarily be appropriate for Glasgow. Surely what we need is an approach that works on the ground, not a court that, given the size and specific problems of Glasgow, might not be capable of replication in jurisdictions such as Lochmaddy.

Will the member take an intervention?

In response to Bill Aitken's question, I gave the assurance that that option is not being taken away from the judiciary. My colleagues and I give the assurance that we are not taking that right away. The member suggests that our prisons will be emptied by a reduction in the number of sentences of less than six months, but the statistical information that has been given to me is that, in any snapshot on any day, 70 per cent of prisoners in Scotland are likely to be serving a sentence of more than six months.

I welcome this opportunity to engage with Parliament on the Government's vision for a modern and coherent penal policy. Our aim is to work with Parliament and all those involved in the criminal justice system to create a safer and stronger Scotland for everyone. We will make every effort to reduce crime, but, sadly, we will never eliminate it, so we must create a system that deals effectively with all offenders. Today's debate is an opportunity to reflect on the challenges that we all face and to discuss the progress that has already been made over the summer towards achieving a progressive and coherent penal policy. The Government refuses to believe that the Scottish people are inherently bad or that there is any genetic reason why we should be locking up twice as many offenders as Ireland or Norway. Why are the people who we lock up more likely to display certain attributes than the general population and why do they tend to suffer from problems associated with drink, drugs and deprivation? A third of those who enter prison are assessed as having an alcohol problem on admission, more than half are assessed as having a drugs problem and a worrying 70 per cent have some form of mental health problem. One study indicated that half of our prison population comes from 15 per cent of Scotland's poorest council wards. We need to face up to some tough questions. Who are we sending to prison and why? Is prison the most effective option in all cases? What do we do with offenders to stop them reoffending? There are also some contradictions and tensions. The public feel that crime is rising and that prison is not used enough, but in the past 10 years recorded crime has fallen by 5 per cent and the prison population has risen by 15 per cent—there are now more than 1,000 more prisoners at any one time than there were 10 years ago. Prison is considered effective and tough and community penalties are seen as soft, but three quarters of those who are sent to prison for under six months reoffend within two years whereas only 42 per cent of those who are given community service reoffend within two years. Statistics alone cannot tell the story, but that figure clearly demonstrates that prison is not the right place for  many people, despite the efforts of our prison officers.

Absolutely. I can give Bill Aitken and the rest of the chamber, including Pauline McNeill, who raises that issue in her amendment, an assurance that we do not and will not seek to interfere with the discretion of the judiciary in relation to sentencing. It is for the judiciary to decide whether someone should be given a sentence and what that sentence should be. If the judiciary feels that the sentence should be one of six months or less, they will have the right to impose that sentence. However, we can say that there are good reasons in relation to punishment, cost and safety why they might care to reflect on the possibility that that would not be appropriate. It is not necessarily tough to make somebody lie in bed all day watching TV rather than repay the community for the damage they have caused, and it is more costly to have them locked up than to have them repay the community. If it is statistically more likely that they will reoffend if they go to prison, it may be better in safety terms to seek to address the problem. I assure the member that we will not interfere with the rights of the judiciary—if they feel that a custodial sentence is appropriate, that will remain their decision.

I do not believe that there is. We are giving a categoric assurance that sentencing remains with the judiciary. That is part of the separation of powers that operates in our democracy and in democracies elsewhere. When alternative sentences are available and when it is clear that they have merit in terms of public safety, cost to the community and the opportunity to try to stop the person reoffending—the rate of recidivism is the matter of most concern—I think that they are an option that our judiciary, who I think are eminently sensible, will take cognisance of before they impose a  sentence. I make it clear that sentencing in individual cases is a matter for the courts. Some offenders must be punished: if they are serious or dangerous offenders, that should mean prison, and for a long time. The protection of the community is paramount. When knives are being used, for example, we need to demonstrate that such behaviour will not be tolerated. The Scottish Prison Service's ability to work with serious offenders to reduce their risk is being compromised by having to deal with the churn created by a large number of short sentences. Prison staff, who are extremely professional and dedicated, work with offenders to tackle drug use, to address health needs, to provide education, to address offending behaviour through programmes and to assist in throughcare to the community. However, those things cannot all be done at once, especially if they are just trying to keep a lid on a difficult situation. Prisoners serving short sentences can be assessed for their immediate needs, but education modules or offending work lasting several months cannot be done with a prisoner who is in custody for only a short period of time. At present, more than three out of every five offenders who leave jail in Scotland reoffend, so something is not working. There are no easy answers, but it is clear that we cannot keep perpetuating the same tired debate that labels sentences as "tough" or "soft". We must focus on what works. For a minor offence, a short custodial sentence that gives the offender no opportunity to pay something back for the wrong they have done does not in our view constitute a smart sentence. Minor offenders should have the opportunity to right their wrongs by doing something for the community. Those who need help to turn away from a life of crime should receive that help alongside an appropriate punishment. We need to use our prisons effectively, so that they can do their work appropriately. The Scottish Government is committed to delivering a world-leading prison service run by dedicated public servants. We believe that that model will best protect the public and reduce reoffending most effectively. I take the opportunity to commend the commitment and professionalism of the Scottish Prison Service. In August, we announced the suspension of the procurement process for the new prison on the site of HMP Low Moss. The private sector will still be invited to bid for the design and construction of the prison, but it will be operated by public sector professionals.

Not at the moment. We also announced that a new publicly run prison for the north-east will be built in the Peterhead area, to replace the out-of-date prisons at Peterhead and Aberdeen. If Bishopbriggs had remained in the private sector with Kilmarnock and Addiewell, just more than a quarter of Scotland's design capacity places for prisoners would have been operated by the private sector. That would have been the highest proportion in the developed world—greater than in the USA or in any other nation that pursues private prisons. There is more to the issue than buildings and staff. We need to take a fresh and impartial look at the challenges presented by the use of prison in Scotland today. We do not believe that the previous Administration's policies intended to break all records on the prison population in the face of falling crime figures, but that is what is happening. We support the principle of ending automatic and unconditional early release and remain committed to delivering that in our offender management strategy, but we must ensure that any change does not compound current problems and put intolerable pressures on prisons and justice services in the community. We have therefore decided to establish an independent commission to consider the purpose and use of imprisonment in contemporary Scotland. It will report by next June.

Absolutely—I am happy to do that. The SPS and the community justice authorities that have been created must be given an opportunity to bed in. The worst thing that we could do would be to embark on further structural change when they need an opportunity to deliver what is necessary. It is clear that change is needed to the method of delivery. I have discussed with Patrick Harvie and Margaret Smith  such aspects, which the Government is happy to consider. I am happy to tell Parliament that one of its former First Ministers—Henry McLeish—has agreed to chair the commission. That shows our view of how important the issue is. He has the blend of skills and experience that that testing role will require. The commission's remit will be to discuss the purpose and impact of imprisonment in contemporary Scotland and to make a report. I have set the commission the following objectives. It is to consider how imprisonment is used in Scotland and how that use fits with the Scottish Government's wider strategic objectives. It is to raise the issue's public profile and provide better information to allow a deeper understanding of the options, outcomes and costs. It is to compare the underpinning rationale with current law and practice, including the impact on courts, prisons and community justice services of the early-release provisions of the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007. It will report and make recommendations by 30 June 2008. The full membership of the commission is being finalised and will be announced soon. The commission will comprise a wide range of interests that go well beyond the criminal justice arena. In the review of community penalties that is under way and in the commission, we see all the strands that are contributing to our development of a coherent penal policy. The subject is complex. Dostoevsky said that the degree of civilization in a society can be judged by entering its prisons. Scotland is undoubtedly a civilised society, but perhaps it relies on prison to do too much with too many. It is simple to say that we will build more prisons, but resources are not infinite and each new prison means one fewer new hospital, school or community investment that would benefit the people of Scotland.

That is why we need a coherent penal policy and why I have pleasure in moving the motion. I move, That the Parliament believes that Scotland should develop a progressive penal policy which improves public safety, delivers appropriate and proportionate punishment, ensures that the interests of victims and communities are given proper consideration, contributes to reducing reoffending and encourages rehabilitation in order to build a safer and stronger Scotland; recognises that, in the case of some offenders, custody is the only appropriate disposal, and welcomes the proposal to establish an independent commission to consider the purpose and use of prison.

The delivery of excellent court services across the north-east and, indeed, all of Scotland will be achieved through the Scottish Government's summary justice reform programme, which includes steps to get cases to and through court more quickly, the use of effective direct measures—non-court disposals—investment in lay justice and the unification of the administration of all Scotland's summary criminal courts.

The consultation on courts in the Grampian Highland and Islands sheriffdom is on-going and will not end until 30 September 2007. Accordingly, it would be entirely inappropriate for me to make any comment or commitment until all have had an opportunity to contribute to that consultation. I understand that the member who has an interest in the matter has a meeting organised with Scottish Court Service officials, which I am sure she will attend. We are dealing with the rolling-out of a system that was started by our predecessors and which we have inherited. Specific matters relating to individual courts will have to be adjudicated on and decided. At present, until such time as the consultation programme has ceased, it would be inappropriate for me to comment one way or the other.

The Scottish Law Commission is working on its final report on rape and sexual offences. It is expected that it will submit its report and recommendations to ministers later this year.

I pay tribute to Elaine Smith's involvement in this area. She correctly pointed out the role of the previous Administration in pursuing the problem. The percentage of people cited in the poll is cause for concern, although we must recognise that the overwhelming majority of people in Scotland do not hold such views. The fact that such a large minority hold those views, however, is clearly a matter of concern. Speaking for the Government, I assure the member that it will never be a defence that somebody was dressed attractively or, I dare say, provocatively. Such a defence is simply unacceptable. Elaine C Smith—my apologies; I mean Elaine Smith—is correct to point out that we must address a variety of issues. Some of those issues are cultural; some are legislative; some are  procedural. My colleagues the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland, now and under the previous Administration, have attempted to make progress. They have travelled far, but there is a considerable journey still to go. They are addressing the issues. Legislative change is pending, as we have mentioned. We will address issues concerning the Scottish Law Commission and other matters. There remains a cultural factor, in which all of us, both in Government and outwith Government, have a role. We will happily work on that with Elaine Smith, Rape Crisis Scotland and others in order to change some people's neanderthal attitudes, which are unacceptable and inappropriate for the 21 st century.

I am grateful for the member's intervention on the matter. I am aware that she has commented and written on the subject—I have seen some documentation on it. It is a matter of concern. We must remember that, although such instances are horrendous, they are thankfully rare in Scotland. That said, they are still far too common and the consequences—of the incident itself and the long-standing effects on the individuals who have been abused—are significant. We seek to work on the problem on a consensual basis. We have spoken to members of the Labour Party and the Conservative party to discuss how to review and maintain a vigorous regime to address those who offend sexually, against children and in a predatory manner. We will continue to do that. The Government remains committed to a sentencing council, which will have teeth.

Specialist courts were touched on in this morning's debate on drugs. We support specialist courts. Those that have been rolled out in relation to youth and drugs have been of benefit, as has been the court to which Malcolm Chisholm referred. We have no plans to introduce rape courts. We believe that the best way to proceed is for the Crown to take a robust approach to prosecution in cases of rape. We will consider how we address the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004, which has been beneficial. The media has drawn to our attention instances in which that act does not appear to be working as best it should, but that does not mean that we should jettison the baby with the bath water. The issues are how we review the act to make it work better and how we change the court system to ensure that it works better. As I said, we have no plans to introduce rape courts. However, I assure the member that, as I said to Elaine Smith, the Lord Advocate and I will do whatever we feel is necessary to address procedural matters—through legislation if need be—and to address the culture that is at the root of why people suggest rape courts, given that some individuals on juries appear to have had views that we as a society require to change.

The average cost of induction training for new police officers at the Scottish Police College is £7,427. Extensive training programmes are also delivered in-force, but details of those costs are not held centrally.

If Ms Eadie wants to challenge the figures, she can certainly write to me and I will investigate. However, the cost of training a police officer at the Police College is as I said. Obviously there are a variety of schemes in relation to how police forces train officers, and other training happens after people have gone through the initial induction period. With regard to the broader figure on our Government's commitment to ensuring a visible police presence, I can only reiterate that we wish to ensure an additional capacity of 1,000 police officers. How do we achieve that? I reiterate that we wish to recruit new officers. However, equally, we wish to retain serving officers. One of the tragedies in the Scottish police service at the moment is that far too many officers are leaving who still have a great deal of skill and talent that we need to retain. Some are leaving long before the end of their period of service and others are leaving towards the end of their period of service. It is important that we enhance current schemes in order to retain them. As well as recruiting new officers, we wish to retain existing officers. We also wish to review how to get best value out of our police officers. The issue is not police officers having to work harder—they work very hard—but how we can help them to work smarter in a much more complicated world.

I thank colleagues from all parts of the chamber for their contributions to the debate. Many members spoke eloquently, passionately and, indeed, poignantly—some because of their commitment to the issue since they entered the world of politics and others because of their experience in their previous occupations. Each added to the strong commitment that the  Parliament must have to tackle the problems of drugs misuse. I am grateful for the consensual nature of the debate, which was pointed out by Bill Aitken and Paul Martin. Paul Martin is correct; in seeking to create a consensus, we do not expect to have a supine Opposition. That would never be the case, and the adjective "supine" does not describe the members involved, but we are keen to try to work together towards common solutions. We accept that the Opposition will disagree on some matters and it is appropriate that it should challenge us—that is the role of the Opposition—but we hope to make it clear that our door is open and that others can come and speak to us before something becomes an issue of political debate. If we can resolve the matter, all the better. If we cannot, we will require to disagree about it and vote on it in the chamber, but let us seek to work together first. I am grateful to the members throughout the chamber who have sought to make a commitment to do that. The Government acknowledges that we do not face the problem of drug misuse alone. It is a problem that we must tackle together. We do not face the problem alone because it does not exist only in Scotland. Most western democracies have significant problems with drug taking. I recently returned from a weekend in the island of Ireland. It is well known that those of us on the SNP benches and in the Government greatly admire the success of the Celtic tiger and the Government of Ireland, but we should not forget that a significant drug problem exists not simply in Dublin but in rural Ireland too. Members from all sides made the point that drug misuse occurs not only in areas of urban deprivation but in rural areas. In Ireland, it occurs not simply in Tallaght but in the Gaeltacht. The United States of America has the strongest economy in the world, but it still has significant problems with drug abuse. Even with all the resources of its drug enforcement agencies, its military and its police, it cannot stop drugs coming in. It is clear that there is a significant problem. Bill Wilson mentioned that there are even significant problems with drug taking in Switzerland, which everybody in the world recognises as a haven of great wealth and stable democracy. The problem affects us all and we have to try to reach a solution. I welcome the change in terminology. The Westminster Government is to be given credit for moving away from the language and nomenclature of a war on terror, but we must do the same in relation to drugs. It is not a war on drugs, because that would be a war on our own communities and on individuals who are often more to be pitied than punished. Certainly many are to be punished, and I heartily endorse the credit that Paul Martin paid  to Graeme Pearson. The Government will not seek to diminish the action that is taken against those who peddle drugs and those who are involved in serious and organised crime, with the attendant risk to those in law enforcement, but we have to accept that this is not a war; it is far deeper and more pernicious than that. As many, such as Margaret Curran and Trish Godman, have said, it is also clear that beneath the statistics there are stories and tragedies. Paul Martin commented on that in relation to his area. For all the statistics, these are individuals. They may not be citizen of the year or the most pleasant people to spend time with, but they are somebody's son or daughter. Tragically, they are quite often somebody's mum or dad, and they are a death far too soon that we could do without. Something about common humanity means that we have to address that. We have listened to many of the points Liberal Democrat members have made, and we will be happy to reflect on them, but I ask them, in the spirit of consensus, to consider withdrawing their amendment, which we do not feel able to accept. We accept the spirit in which it was lodged, and we hope that we can rally around that. I will try to run through the various points that members have raised. If I do not manage to deal with them all, the error will be mine and I will be happy to meet privately or answer a letter. Margaret Smith spoke about the expansion of residential places, which we clearly have to address. We have to provide support for those who recognise that they have reached such a juncture in their lives and make a cry for help. Some of that can be given as direction from the centre but, ultimately, it has to be delivered at grass roots level. We have to work with all bodies to ensure that those who work in the community are able to provide support. We are reviewing the matter, and on Monday coming the Minister for Community Safety and the Minister for Public Health will meet alcohol and drug action teams to work out how we can improve delivery, because this is an area in which we must deliver. Margaret Smith and Bill Wilson mentioned heroin prescription. It is sometimes forgotten that practitioners may already prescribe heroin if they so wish, although they require a Home Office licence to do so. Three practitioners in Scotland have such a licence but are not currently using it. It is not a simple matter, as there are clear problems related to it and there is no real suggestion that it is necessarily better, but it must obviously be reflected on. As I said, heroin prescription currently exists, but we would delude ourselves if we thought that it was a panacea.  Margaret Smith mentioned drugs courts. They started as a pilot, and we have welcomed their success. They were a pilot until March 2006. At that juncture, it was agreed to fund the courts for a further three years, and we will continue to maintain them under operation. She also touched on a variety of other courts. I remind her that what operates in one jurisdiction does not necessarily operate in another because of several factors, including the number of sheriffs and the size of the court. What can be done in Glasgow is vastly different from what can be done in Tain or Dornoch, but we accept that drugs courts have worked and are an important factor to be considered. Margaret Curran raised the idea of creating a drugs commission. We are determined to build on the national consensus, and we will consider a variety of views. We are conscious that, before we formed the Government, the Parliament had taken some steps and that Mr Pignatelli had been charged with investigating certain matters. We are considering a variety of mechanisms to take on board the genuine consensus and to work together—not simply in Parliament, because the issue involves all of civic Scotland. I echo the point made by Margaret Curran and others that we sometimes forget and ignore the role of the voluntary sector in Scotland. Trish Godman and Duncan McNeil recognised the importance of kinship and those people who do a great deal of good collectively through organisations or individually through simply dealing with their families. We wish to engage with them as they are significant. We should not forget them. This is a question not simply of spending more money, but of spending it wisely. We must also recognise that we address the problems in different ways. Some are dealt with through health, education and criminal justice; some are dealt with at central Government level; others are correctly dealt with at local government level. We are committed to providing the appropriate resources. Ring fencing will be difficult because of how such matters are laid out and how money is dispensed, but we are committed to ensuring that the appropriate resources are available to tackle not simply the health manifestations but the problems that we face in education. Drugs in prison have also been mentioned. There is clearly a significant problem that we have to tackle. We announced £4 million in additional funding last month to increase training opportunities for foster and kinship carers. Duncan McNeil raised points about children, which I would be happy to discuss with my  colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, because some of the matters he raised fall outwith the sphere of criminal justice. However, we have to ensure a holistic and joined-up approach. If I have not answered any particular points, members should feel free to come to me and I will address them in greater detail. I pay tribute to the consensus that prevails in the chamber and recognise that we have a job of work to do. We understand that if we work together, we are more likely to reach a solution. Matters are being addressed; we just have to work harder and work smarter.

The Executive consulted last summer on the options for reform in this area of the law but drew very few responses. Under the law as it stands, one spouse cannot be compelled to give evidence against the other spouse who is accused of a crime but can be so compelled when the offence is committed against them. The law is set out in section 264 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. I will consider the issue in more detail before deciding whether it should be included in any future legislation.

I am aware of the member's interest in the matter, which she has pursued with vigour. As I said in answer to her first question, I will consider the issue carefully, although I need to prioritise it along with many other competing issues. It is my view that the principal parental duty is to protect the child from harm, whatever vows someone may have taken in a church or civil ceremony and that there is therefore merit in considering the legal changes that have been implemented south of the border.

Absolutely. That is one of the reasons why the previous Administration was rather despondent at the failure to receive sufficient responses. Nevertheless, this is a matter that we are happy to consider. I agree that there could be problems if we made the spouse compellable in every situation. Also, we live in a society that is changing and we must balance this issue with other competing legislative claims. However, I have sympathy with the point that Ms Eadie makes. The primary duty of a parent is to protect their child from harm, irrespective of who has perpetrated the harm. There is something  manifestly wrong and unjust when somebody marries to evade their responsibility. That is an area that we will consider. One of the options that was consulted on—as Ms Eadie correctly states—is the situation that exists south of the border. However, we do not have a blanket provision under which a spouse is not compellable, as we have opened it up to deal with domestic violence and other such matters. We must consider how we protect our children. There is something manifestly wrong in someone seeking to evade justice by marrying the principal witness, whose principal duty should be to protect the child from harm.

We are acutely aware of the sensitivity of this issue and share the desire to find a system that will reduce the stress, anguish and delay for bereaved families. The Scottish Government, continuing work done by ministers in the previous Administration, has been in contact with the United Kingdom Government with a view to finding the best resolution of this issue, having regard to the legal context. That contact is on-going. We welcome the UK Government's desire to work with us to find the best way to investigate deaths of Scotland-based service personnel who are killed abroad.

Absolutely. I am aware of the member's service in the Falklands conflict and agree that it is the duty of this Government to co-operate with everyone who can help us to ensure that we can look after the interests of those who have served in conflicts, those who have suffered and those who have lost loved ones. We will continue to do so. The legal field is complicated, but I assure the member that we are keen to resolve the issue.

There are a number of factors to be considered. I announced to Parliament on 6 June 2007 that we are embarking on an extensive review of community sentences. At the same time, we are looking at how to manage custodial sentences to reduce the risk posed by the more serious offenders when they are released and to help them address their offending behaviour. Our plans must also take account of judicial discretion in sentencing in individual cases. That is important work, and we want to consider options carefully and seek Parliament's views before finally deciding on the way ahead.

Those who perpetrate domestic violence deserve the punishment that the courts correctly mete out. This country of ours requires a coherent prison policy. We need to move away from serious and dangerous offenders not being incarcerated when they should be while those who have been described as the flotsam and jetsam are incarcerated at huge cost to the  community, only to be released to reoffend. That does not resolve the problem. The Government's emphasis is on addressing the requirement for a coherent penal policy that will protect our communities by locking up serious and dangerous violent offenders, but which will ensure that the many people who require treatment because of mental health problems or drug addiction are dealt with sympathetically to ensure that we get the community and society that Scotland needs.

I have a great deal of sympathy with that view: it is clear that far too many sheriffs impose short sentences that they know will be of little benefit to the individual. They do so out of frustration, not out of desire, and because they believe that there is no realistic alternative. That is why it is the Government's priority to ensure that sheriffs have options and alternatives. Indeed, options should be available not only to sheriffs; the Crown Office's view is that as well as being able to impose a fiscal fine, it should be able to use a method of ensuring that those who transgress and who should pay back our communities have the opportunity to do so by visible work and by returning to the communities and removing the harm they created. I sympathise fully with the member's point that we must ensure that we provide appropriate alternatives. That is why, on sentencing, as well as putting measures on the statute book, we desire to ensure that measures that are already on the statute book operate in practice, which in many instances is not the case. We must ensure that the array of community sentences is expanded to provide assistance to sheriffs and the Crown Office.

Last week, as the member might recall, I set out our priorities for a safer, stronger Scotland. We are considering in more detail what legislation is needed to deliver those priorities and we will bring forward proposals in due course.

As the member might recall, I and the Scottish National Party fully supported Karen Gillon's bill. However, unfortunately, the previous Administration decided that a different route should be taken in terms of how we co-operated and interacted with the legislation that was introduced south of the border. Certainly, our position is that action needs to be taken. With us in the chamber today is the Solicitor General for Scotland, Frank Mulholland, who was pivotal in pursuing the Transco case that was, perhaps, the genesis of Karen Gillon's interest in these matters. We wish to ensure that adequate legislation is available, and we undertake to determine whether what was brought in by the previous Administration is adequate and fit for purpose. If it is not, we will need to review it.

This Government is conscious that legislation alone is insufficient, particularly in the area of justice. We have had a restored Scottish Parliament for only eight years but, clearly, our independent legal system—whether the constabulary or the offices of the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General—served us well in the centuries prior to the Scottish Parliament being restored. It is quite clear that we have to ensure that legislation adds value to the institutions that have served us well. There is a role for legislation, and I have no doubt that it will be required, whether it originates from this Government or, indeed, elsewhere—we will be  happy to take on legislation from the Justice Committee or Opposition parties. Although the point is well made that we need to allow legislation that relates to institutions that deliver frontline justice and law services to have some opportunity to bed in, we will not hesitate to legislate where it is necessary to do so. However, I agree that there is some wisdom in the adage that those who legislate in haste repent at leisure.

The Government is committed to delivering efficiencies across the public sector in Scotland. I will consider justice expenditure closely, as part of the spending review, to ensure that public money is spent as efficiently and effectively as possible and to generate efficiencies that can be fed back into providing more and better services. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth announced on 24 May that we will establish our efficiency programme for 2008 to 2011 during the spending review.

Most members will be aware of the excellent service and facilities in Gullane. Obviously, the Government is reviewing fire service and police issues, therefore it would be wrong of me to make a specific commitment. However, we recognise the excellent service that the fire and rescue services have provided and continue to provide in Scotland. We seek to build on and enhance that solid foundation.

Delivering additional policing capacity will require a co-ordinated, carefully planned and innovative approach. We are developing our plans to deliver the commitment, and we intend to publish them in due course.

Perhaps the member should discuss that with Mr Carlaw, who, in a debate last week, wondered why the figure of 1,500 was mentioned in the Conservatives' manifesto. Scotland requires a visible police presence, and the Government is committed to increasing policing capacity. A visible police presence not only reassures communities, it deters criminals. We must ensure not only that our officers—who do a fantastic job—continue to work hard, but that we work smarter to free up resources. We will seek to recruit and retain police officers. The Administration understands that, as well as bringing in more new officers to add to the officers that we have, we must ensure that we stop haemorrhaging officers—many of whom have a great deal of knowledge and wisdom to contribute—as a result of ill health or retiral.

Access to advice on civil matters will be improved by the development of a network of civil legal assistance offices, which will provide advice on matters of civil law. In the north of Scotland, the network will build on the existing part V project, which is based in Inverness. A new Public Defence Solicitors Office has been opened in Kirkwall, which will provide free legal assistance on criminal matters to eligible individuals in Shetland and Orkney.

The member is right to raise such a significant problem, which my predecessor as minister with responsibility for justice, Cathy Jamieson, recognised. The matter has arisen partly because of changes in society, in who is joining the legal profession and in how that profession is operating. It is clear that there are issues. On family issues, it is clear that huge swathes of the community are facing a crisis, which is why the part V project was introduced and why the Government is reviewing civil legal aid payments in family law cases. We are aware of the problem. There are civil law matters other than matrimonial matters that we must consider. We must examine how assistance is provided and how account can be taken of the difficulties that are faced by remote jurisdictions and jurisdictions that are peripheral to the central belt and the capital city, where legal establishments tend to the based, to ensure that there is parity and equality of service, to which all our citizens are entitled, irrespective of where they reside.

I am keen to meet representatives of Victim Support Scotland and of other voluntary organisations that work in the justice system as soon as is practicable.

It is a difficult area, but a great deal of progress has been made on how we deal with the victims of sexual offences. That progress was begun under the previous Executive, and particular credit must be given to the current Lord Advocate. For far too long, victims were treated simply as part of the legal process, and not with the sympathy and dignity to which they were entitled. Although a considerable distance has been travelled, progress must still be made, and the Government intends to continue to build on what has been done. I am not aware of particular problems, but I am happy to consider any representations that the member makes. There are difficulties for the Crown when, unfortunately, it is impossible to proceed in the public interest, even though a victim feels aggrieved. That can be the case for a variety of reasons, whether because victims or witnesses are not in a position to give evidence or because there are matters that it may be inappropriate to discuss with the wider public. Nevertheless, I am aware of the member's interest in the matter, the progress that the previous Executive made and the endeavours of the current Lord Advocate, on which the Government will seek to continue to build.

We are required to keep such matters constantly under review. As the member may be aware, some of the issues relate to the way in which the Crown Office interacts with victims and some relate to individual police matters. It would be inappropriate of me to interfere with the operational independence of chief constables. However, it is my experience as a constituency member and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that, in the main, the police try to keep members of the public and victims of crime informed. There may be times when, because of pressure of work or for a variety of other reasons, matters slip through the net. The Government will seek to monitor that and ensure that best practice is adhered to. From the lowest constable to the highest chief constable in the land, the police service has served us well and will continue to do so. Mistakes may be made, but I am sure that they will be rectified. It is a matter of trying to ensure that the best service is provided to our communities and to the victims of crime, in particular.

No, it is not the intention of the Government to usurp the role of the chief constables. We will, however, provide the chief constables with the additional officers to do with what they want. I know from my discussions with chief constables that they share the Government's desire to have a visible police presence in their communities. It is not for the cabinet secretary to specify where individuals should serve; it is for this Government to try to ensure that sufficient police officers are available to allow chief constables to deliver what their communities want, which is a visible police presence that reassures communities and deters criminals in our towns and cities.

As the member was not privy to the phone call that I took from the Lord Chancellor this morning, I am happy to say that although I and other members of the Government accept that there is a difference in constitutional views on how matters should be progressed in the UK, we acknowledge our shared geography and the requirement to work together to ensure that the islands on which we live are safer and more secure. I have had discussions with the Lord  Chancellor and I look forward to meeting him and other UK Government ministers.

It is appropriate that we should debate the subject of sex offending at such an early point in the life of the new parliamentary session. It will send a clear message that protection of the public is of the highest importance to Scotland's Government. I hope that today's debate will also signal that this is an area on which Parliament can come together, and I hope that we can secure broad support for the way forward. We have an early opportunity to do that by building on the strong foundations that were laid by the previous Administration, by building on the cross-party agreement that was reached by the Justice 2 Sub-Committee on which I served, and by building on the common ground that was agreed at my meeting last week with the First Minister and the Conservatives. Tackling the dangerous offender in our midst is not the prerogative of one party, but the duty of everyone in Parliament. Solutions do not lie just with Government—they must emanate from society. That said, we wish to travel in a certain direction and our policies and proposals will be subject to full and rigorous scrutiny in the days and months to come. We acknowledge the work that was done by the Justice 2 Sub-Committee and Professor George Irving. It laid the groundwork and there is no need to replace the strong foundations that are already firmly in place. The context for today's debate is, therefore, that I want to build on those past achievements and drive matters further forward. I also want us to acknowledge that the problem lies with a small group of highly dangerous offenders. They are few, but they are predatory and devious. More often than not, they operate within a trusting relationship, as a family member or masquerading as a friend, and turning what should be a place of safety into a place of abuse and harm. That is still a greater danger than a random attack by a stranger. Those hard facts emerged from the four major reviews of sex offending that were held in Scotland during the past six years, each of which have led to much the same conclusions, which have fashioned what we have done, what we are doing now and what we will do in the future to protect the public.  As a Parliament, we have legislated to tighten the granting of bail for sex offenders. We have given our courts new powers—through the order for lifelong restriction—to impose a strict lifetime regime of supervision and monitoring on those who pose the highest level of risk to our communities. I will not hesitate to ask Parliament to enhance those powers if needs be.

I am aware of Ms Marwick's long-standing interest in that tragedy. We now have multiagency public protection arrangements—MAPPAs—and risk management authorities. I will be more than happy to raise with them the matter that Ms Marwick raises, to ensure that there are adequate powers, and that gaps that may have opened over the years can be closed. As I said, we have given our courts new powers through the order for lifelong restriction, but we have to move on from that. We have also strengthened the operation of the sex offenders notification scheme, in line with Professor Irving's report. As from 20 April this year, Scotland's eight police forces have incorporated into their standing procedures a new warning system about sex offenders. The system sets decisions about the disclosure of identities into an overall plan for managing the risks that are posed by individual offenders and for protecting children and communities. We will closely monitor how the new system beds in and operates—although notifications there can be, and notifications there must be, in some circumstances. For the future, we will also explore how the warning scheme can be enhanced; for example, there is the traffic-light model, as set out in the SNP manifesto. From April, the new MAPPAs came into operation. They provide the framework for police, local authorities and the Scottish Prison Service to assess and manage the risks that are posed by sex offenders, and they ensure proper structures and a consistent approach to managing offenders across agencies throughout the country. Ahead of the rest of the United Kingdom, our national accommodation strategy for sex offenders sets the framework for housing providers and criminal justice agencies collectively to address the very difficult problems that are posed in finding safe accommodation in the community. Already, new technologies such as VISOR—the violent and sex offenders register—allow our police, and now  our criminal justice social workers, to access comprehensive and up-to-date information on sex offenders across the whole UK, which puts the sharing of appropriate information at the very heart of our strategy. The Parole Board for Scotland is using electronic tagging to tighten the licence conditions for some of the highest-risk offenders when they are released from prison. Detection methods have improved and conviction rates have risen, and we should not forget that most sex offenders comply with registration. However, compliance alone is not a guarantee of non-offending. I will not forget, despite the progress that has been made, that there have been recent and past tragedies—one of which Ms Marwick mentioned. There have been cases that show why we must remain ever-vigilant to protect our communities. We must send a clear message to every sex offender in the land: if they are given the right to be released, they must take responsibility for their own actions. On the few who fail to comply, we will crack down with the full force of the law. Those who are given rights have consequent responsibilities. The previous Administration and the Justice 2 Sub-Committee had already agreed that it was appropriate to publish photographs of missing sex offenders on the internet and elsewhere. Today I reaffirm that, if a sex offender goes missing and fails to comply, the response will be tough. We will give the police and local procurators fiscal all the support and powers that they need to track those offenders down.

Sometimes the issue is not simply about powers but about working smarter and working together, and about the MAPPAs. Mr Purvis was on the Justice 2 Sub-Committee and is aware of the issues. As in the tragic case of Margaret Ann Cummings, sometimes the issue is not about powers but about ensuring that we have joined-up thinking between the agencies. However, I say on behalf of the SNP Government that if there is a need for powers, we will ensure that those powers are provided. At the end of the day, we are dealing with a devious and dangerous minority who are highly manipulative—we will not stand on ceremony about whether their rights might be impinged upon. If our police and authorities require powers, they will get them. Where appropriate, and subject to guidance from the police and the Crown, that includes publication of photographs on the internet or elsewhere.  We will review systems and guidelines to ensure that suspects who are alleged to have committed sexual offences are identified effectively and are apprehended as quickly as possible. With our enforcement agencies, we will look at opportunities that are offered by new technology, such as satellite tracking and polygraph testing. Developments to enhance public safety are being trialled and tested elsewhere and although they might offer opportunities, we need to remember that they cannot guarantee absolute security. Only through perpetual vigilance by all individuals, Government and relevant agencies can we seek to offer protection. I recognise the distress caused by these most dreadful of crimes and I pay tribute to the victims who have borne their burdens with dignity. We owe it to them to work together for the common weal.

I will be happy to listen to any proposals from Margaret Curran's party. I am aware that the previous Minister for Justice put on record that she felt that the balance on that matter was accommodated in current legislation that was passed by Parliament. If the member wishes to make proposals, I will look at them with interest. The Government understands that the DNA of those who are charged with serious sexual and violent offences but not convicted is retained for up to three years, which may be extended by application to the sheriff by the police. Our position is that three years seems rather arbitrary. If Margaret Curran wishes to vary that, we are open-minded about considering it. If she suggests that we should look at how to make it simpler for the police to deal with DNA samples without going through the sheriff, we will consider it. However, if Margaret Curran is saying that the DNA of someone who is charged with a minor offence and who has a routine sample taken should be retained, that would overturn the balance. As we said to other Opposition members, we are happy to meet Labour members to discuss their ideas. I invite them to formulate their proposals. We reaffirm our absolute determination to do everything that we can in Parliament and elsewhere to make Scotland safer and more secure.

Police forces and local authorities, working with other agencies, as appropriate, are responsible for ensuring that protest events result  in the minimum level of disruption to the local community. Issues such as maintaining public safety and managing access to the road network are key elements of police and local authority activity during such events.

The member will be aware from yesterday's debate that this Government believes in rights and responsibilities. There is a right to protest and to march, but, equally, there is a responsibility to take account of the rights of individual citizens and communities. It might be de rigueur or appropriate elsewhere to seek to abandon or abrogate rights that are viewed as sacrosanct, but that is not something that this Government will support. People have rights, but we ask people to acknowledge that they have a responsibility to other citizens and to communities.

Will the member give way?

I am happy to assure the member that we will not seek to tie sheriffs' hands. That would be entirely inappropriate and would run counter to the criminal justice system's ethos. Parliament sets down the clear law and sheriffs make the decisions. Given where the member is coming from, is she arguing for mandatory sentences? The tone and tenor of her speech are that she wishes to tie sheriffs' hands and to make it clear that people should be jailed.

Most of Scotland's communities are great places in which to live, work and bring up a family. However, too many of them are blighted by antisocial behaviour and some are plagued by serious crime. Tougher laws on prosecution and weapons, much-needed reforms of the courts and enhanced support for victims and witnesses were all brought in by the previous Administration. We supported the previous Executive at the time and we acknowledge its efforts. However, as well as being tough on crime, we need to be tough on the causes of crime, which means that we must deal not only with the manifestations of crime but with the factors that so often contribute to it: drink, drugs and deprivation. That does not mean excusing bad or poor behaviour—it is a recognition that there are clear links. We believe that our criminal justice system must be guided by rights and responsibilities. We must instil a culture of responsibility: individuals must take personal responsibility for their actions and face the consequences. Equally, Government and agencies must take responsibility for all our communities. We need to promote good behaviour as well as punish bad behaviour. We will come down hard on serious and dangerous offenders, but we must at the same time deal with the underlying social and economic problems that lead to lack of self-esteem and a sense of hopelessness and despair. We will detain the dangerous, but treat the troubled. Tackling the fear of crime and deterring criminals requires effective front-line policing. A visible police presence deters crime and reassures communities. Therefore, our commitment is to deliver additional policing capacity—the equivalent of an extra 1,000 officers—and to seek to place them in our communities. We need—by cutting bureaucracy, streamlining processes, exploiting new technology and improving accountability—to help our police forces to work smarter and more efficiently to meet the complex challenges of modern policing. Modern policing is complex, but communities require a visible police presence. Much crime and antisocial behaviour is fuelled by alcohol. If that extra police capacity is not simply to be poured down the drain, we must do more to tackle alcohol abuse, but changing attitudes to alcohol will take time and it will involve  people taking personal responsibility. However, the Government must also face its responsibilities, as must those who sell alcohol. Tackling the underage drinking that fuels youth disorder is a priority for this Government. Licensees already have clear obligations: we expect them to comply or to face the consequences. In our manifesto, we said that we would crack down hard on those who sell or supply alcohol to underage drinkers. I will be meeting police and licensing boards to consider how best to achieve that as part of the implementation of new licensing laws. I also want to crack down on irresponsible promotions and discounts on alcohol. If the buy-one-get-one-free approach is unacceptable in our pubs, why should it be acceptable anywhere else? On weapons—as my predecessor, Cathy Jamieson, said—Scotland is scarred by the booze and blade culture. As was the case under the previous Administration, knife crime will not be tolerated and will be severely punished. However, it is insufficient simply to hammer knife crime. We must also tackle the underlying culture of knife carrying. For too many people in our communities, knives are seen almost as fashion accessories, not the lethal killers that we know them to be. We need to understand what motivates young people to carry blades and, more important, what will make them stop. Our solutions could involve our taking former knife carriers into schools to talk about their experiences, or our enlisting role models such as footballers or musicians. An increase in the emphasis on prevention and the changing of attitudes to knife carrying will be just as important as taking knives off our streets and will lie at the heart of our anti-violence agenda when we launch its next phase later this year. Organised crime causes misery to the people of Scotland. It also undermines legitimate businesses and damages our national economy. We intend to pursue organised crime with vigour and with a vengeance. We will be uncompromising in pursuing those who peddle drugs. I want their ill-gotten gains to be removed from them in as public a way as possible—there must be no incentive for a career in crime. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency has an impressive record in bringing down such gangs and tackling those networks and the Crown, too, has had important successes, so we will build on and enhance that situation. We will create a serious crime taskforce to bring together in one place all the specialist expertise, skills and knowledge that we need, which will give us the best possible chance of achieving not only successful investigations but successful prosecutions. In that context, I am discussing with the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General how we can ensure that prosecutors work in settings that allow them to investigate cases more effectively together with  the SCDEA in order that we can ensure that we get the relevant and requisite prosecutions and convictions. However, as well as tackling supply of drugs, we must address demand. Drugs are the great social challenge of our age. We must stop the situation in which young people, whether because of low self-esteem or lack of opportunity, shoot up and opt out. Our clear aim is to prevent and deter crimes, but those who offend must face the consequences of their actions, which is part of our belief in personal responsibility. We need a coherent penal policy. Prisons should be for serious and dangerous offenders and not for fine defaulters or the flotsam and jetsam of our communities, so we need to shift the balance, with the less serious offenders who currently clutter our prisons being sentenced to community punishments. I want tough community punishments that will protect the public, help offenders to turn their lives around and include some clear payback to the communities that they have harmed. I want to make early progress on reforming and revitalising community services by working across the political spectrum and with organisations throughout the criminal justice system. We will examine what more can be done to improve reparation and rehabilitation, to improve outcomes for persistent offenders, to drive up quality, and—perhaps most important—to change attitudes not simply to community disposals but to how we deliver them. I acknowledge that Government alone cannot and does not have all the answers to what are fundamental social problems. I will therefore work with others to find the solutions—the Airborne Initiative or whomever. This must be a common cause throughout our country. I am looking carefully at the pattern of investment in the Scottish Prison Service. We need to take time to address and assess the current situation and to see whether the developments that are under way will deliver the facilities and quality of service that we need as well as value for money. For the future, we are committed to a shift away from private running of new prisons being the expected norm. Debates on law and order always touch, at some point, on youth offending. It is important to remember, however, that the vast majority of youngsters do not offend. We must promote good behaviour as well as punish bad behaviour. I am delighted to announce that, thanks to the increasing amounts of money that are confiscated from criminals under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, we will establish a new approach to reinvesting that money to benefit Scotland's communities, especially those that are hit hardest by crime.  Today, the Lord Advocate announced that more than £4.4 million has been confiscated after convictions in the criminal courts in the past year, and that £1.6 million has been recovered through the civil courts as proceeds of crime. By the autumn, the Scottish Government will have about £8 million to reinvest in services and activities that will make a difference to young people's lives. We will seek early talks with a range of key players to determine the best way in which to make a visible impact where it is needed. I want the money to be matched by contributions from the worlds of business, sport and cultural interests, which will add value to the sums that have been recovered. A safe and strong community is not just one that is safe from crime and free from antisocial behaviour. There is such a thing as society, within which individuals have rights but also responsibilities. Individuals are responsible for their actions and the Government is responsible for all our communities. Where that culture flourishes, we will support it. Where it is fading, we will rekindle it. Where it is undermined and abused, we will fight for it.

This debate was always going to be overshadowed by the forthcoming election. It has also been overshadowed by the recent polls in the The Times and Daily Mail newspapers, which are not noted for their support of the Scottish National Party or the cause of independence. It is no  wonder that there is panic in the ranks elsewhere in the chamber. The debate started off with the First Minister, who was reminiscent of Harold Macmillan, saying that we had never had it so good. The problem is that the people of Scotland do not buy that in the light of statistics from organisations such as Barnardo's, as mentioned by Mr Fox, or UNICEF, which show startling poverty levels that bring shame on an oil-rich nation in the 21 st century. Mr McConnell delivered his text with an ease that was almost like Harold Macmillan's and he failed to deliver any passion or commitment. That contrasted with Nicola Sturgeon, who made it clear that the coming election offers a clear choice between instilling fear and promoting confidence; between looking backwards and going forwards into the future; and between failure and fitness to govern. It is time for Scotland to take responsibility. Mr Jackson, who I see is not present, made a jibe about Ms Sturgeon's absence from the discussion about Govan when she had to leave the chamber earlier. I assure Mr Jackson, who has carried out two jobs throughout not just one but two parliamentary sessions, that after 3 May he will be able to concentrate on his full-time job, which will be located not in this chamber but further up the Royal Mile. Mr Jackson spoke about the shipyards and Nicol Stephen spoke about his support and admiration for Finland.

I am on record extolling the virtues of Finland in this chamber—[ Interruption. ]

Finland should be admired. Mr Jackson should take note that at the turn of the 20 th century, the Clyde was the foremost shipbuilding area in the world. I do not doubt that when Mr Stephen went to Helsinki he learned that when Clyde shipyards were the foremost in the world, Helsinki remained part of the Russian empire. Finland has more people employed in shipyards and involved in shipbuilding than Scotland has today; that is a testament to the so-called union dividend delivered by the Tories and new Labour. It is time for Scotland to take responsibility, as Alex Neil said.

Not at the moment. It is time for us to take political, economic and social responsibility. Politically, we have to decide whether a war should be in our name. Members should be under no illusion: people elsewhere in  the world think that the Iraq war is in our name because it is being carried out by our Government. The elected representatives of the people of Scotland should be able to decide whether our young men should die in a ditch in Basra. We should decide whether our young men should go to war and what they are fighting for. Is it a cause worth dying for, or is it simply to prop up the relationship with the President of the United States? We need powers that actually matter. For example, we need a justice minister who can tackle the scourge of air weapons in our communities. How can we trumpet the powers that we have over our justice system, when we do not have the power to tackle such matters? We need more economic powers in order to find out whether we have been undermining our own efforts to take our people out of poverty and to treat our elderly with dignity and respect. The question is whether we have to continue the failures of London and this Executive. The fact is that not all of Scotland's social problems can be placed at the door of Margaret Thatcher or London rule, and our people and Government need to accept responsibility for tackling issues such as domestic violence and alcohol abuse. As a result, we need to take political, economic and social responsibility if we are to drive Scotland forward in the 21 st century.

I have to say that Mr Purvis is not one of those members who will be missed after 3 May, but I will address his question in a moment. The important point is that we need to be a nation state. Miss Goldie said that the union was in her DNA, while the First Minister talked about atomisation. Indeed, as Wendy Alexander, who has not contributed to this debate, has put it, the issue is whether, in the modern world, we should be independent or interdependent. Of course, all nations in the modern world are interdependent. Post 9/11, no country can isolate itself from terrorism, just as no country can isolate itself from global warming. However, no matter whether we are talking about the UN—where, despite the efforts of Blair and Bush to undermine it a few years ago, Britain still has to go—or the European Union, whose expansion we welcome and whose 50 th anniversary we celebrate, the building block of participation is not the devolved state or the federal legislature, but the nation  state. In the UN, it is a Micronesian atoll or Cyprus—not California or Catalonia—that can stand up and say, "This war is not in our name." As Mr Finnie well knows, when the European Union decides on fishing matters that affect our nation, it is not Bavaria that has the vote, but landlocked Slovakia or Luxembourg. The fact is that anything that is not a nation state does not have the right to representation. Of course, nation states have to cede some powers. Indeed, that will be the case in the interregnum that must occur when a devolved state becomes a nation state. If we want the benefits of EU membership, we have to acknowledge that, at times, a shared central bank will provide low interest rates and a stable economy. All such matters require co-operation and must be driven forward, but states that are not nation states are left with the problem that wars can be fought in their name; that their young men can die for they know not what cause; and that their elderly can be treated without the dignity or respect that they deserve. That is why Scotland must be independent. At the end of the day, we have a choice in this election. This morning, we have heard all about the apocalypse and catastrophe that will happen if people vote for the SNP. Even Mr Aitken in his summing up seemed to suggest that, all of a sudden, the earth will open up. However, the fact is that Scotland is looking for a change. We have had eight years of an Executive that has failed to move Scotland on. The time has come for the people of Scotland not to apportion blame or to say, "It's all the fault of 18 years of Thatcherism or the eight wasted years under this Executive." We must take responsibility, improve our economy, act internationally in a way that allows us to adhere to our moral values and change our society for the better. It is time to move Scotland on. It is time for the SNP.

If the member wishes to quote me, he should quote me accurately. I said that some of those responsibilities could be shared, but Scotland would still have an opportunity to direct matters. Rather than simply accept what was dictated, we would have the opportunity to contribute to giving the directions. That would be power.

Whether the agency is located in Bangalore or Swansea is another matter, but the issue is about control. It seems that Jeremy Purvis would prefer Scotland not to have any control.

Does the member accept that we have a rail park-and-ride to some extent at Newcraighall? One of the great problems is that people have turned up only to find that the train service has been cancelled. Rather than concentrate on promises of great things in years to come, should we deliver for people who are travelling in from Haddington or wherever, so that  the train is there, so that they get a seat and so that it is affordable? Should we not at some stage concentrate on delivering current services, besides pledging that there will be tramline 3, a subway in the east end of Glasgow or whatever? Is that not the real priority for hard-pressed travellers and commuters?

I declare an interest as a resident of south Edinburgh who sees traffic coming into the area every day—and who faces the parking consequences of that traffic. As a resident of south Edinburgh and as a parliamentarian, I congratulate Mike Pringle on securing the debate and endorse many of the things he said. Mike Pringle was correct to say that there are two issues, one of which is congestion. There are a limited number of routes into Edinburgh from the south. That affects not only people who reside in the city and peripheral schemes, but people in neighbouring areas, particularly Midlothian and the Borders. Until trains are an option, people will have to come in from such areas by bus—or by car, because of the lack of appropriate services, which is a more important matter. Furthermore, the roads into Edinburgh are not the widest or the most suitable for heavy traffic. Mike Pringle was correct to say that there have been winners and losers with respect to parking. I used to live at the edge of where the parking zone ends; I now live at the edge of where it begins. I have experienced a change. Obviously, our previous debate in the Parliament had an impact  on parking at the Royal hospital for sick children. The locations that people park at have moved southwards as the parking zone has been extended south from the Meadows. That is an issue not only for those who live in Newington, the Inch, Southhouse and Moredun; it is a vital issue for people who come in from Midlothian and the Borders. We all know that more than 50 per cent of those who live in Midlothian and are in employment work in Edinburgh. Edinburgh will continue to be a magnet whatever may understandably be done to seek to retain an industrial and economic focus in Midlothian. There are jobs at the hospital, in the universities and elsewhere. Mike Pringle was also correct about something else. Not only have the west Edinburgh park-and-ride facilities at Hermiston and the airport been successful, but the Ferrytoll experiment has been the best initiative. Sarah Boyack is not here to take credit or plaudits. I criticised her when I was the Scottish National Party's transport spokesman because I was sceptical about how successful the Ferrytoll scheme would be, but it has been remarkably successful. The site has not only filled up, its capacity has had to be expanded. It is correct to consider park-and-ride facilities further up the M90 corridor, but such a requirement does not exist at the moment. When I have driven past Danderhall, I have seen the semblance of a site being created at Sheriffhall. The sooner that site is on stream, the better, as it will benefit not only people who commute into Edinburgh, but people who want to use the direct route past the city and those who must go to the royal infirmary, which is the main hospital in the Lothian region. We have to address issues relating to the royal infirmary. There have been debates about whether there will be a third tramline that will service it and about additional matters. To its credit, Lothian Buses has sought to reconfigure its routes, but there are issues in that regard. We must ensure that the hospital is serviced. I see the Minister for Transport writing hurriedly. Park-and-ride facilities create opportunities for Lothian Buses to provide modest levels of input in respect of the services that will be required not only to provide the necessary transport infrastructure for those who come into Edinburgh from the Borders and Midlothian, but for those who must go to the infirmary.

I do not think that it has ever been said that I have consistently supported those schemes. Indeed, Mr Purvis's colleague usually says the opposite. Mr Purvis may have made an attempt at humour, but that attempt has fallen flat. I do not support the tramline 1 scheme or the tramline 2 scheme, and Mr Purvis knows as well as I do that what has been proposed will be well and truly sunk when we take charge on 3 May. If there is a change of administration at local authority level in Edinburgh, even the Lib Dems will seek to pull the plug on what has been proposed, because no finance is available for it. Furthermore, whatever traffic disruption and congestion we currently face in Edinburgh would be as nothing once people started to dig up the roads to provide a tramline. So, no, I do not support a third tramline. I believe that the provision of park-and-ride sites at Straiton, Sheriffhall and so on will present an opportunity to provide the quality bus services that members of all parties agree are necessary to service not only those who come from outlying areas but those who need to travel to the Edinburgh royal infirmary. I congratulate Mr Pringle on securing the debate and addressing a clear problem for south Edinburgh and beyond.

I apologise, as I will have to leave the debate before the conclusion of the final speeches to go to a meeting of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. The Scottish National Party heartily concurs with the minister. This is a short but significant—indeed, vital—bill. To some extent, the bill has been fast tracked, which is as it should be, and there were no stage 3 amendments. Although the bill is short and limited in what it does, it has huge significance for the few individuals involved. We have had debates at stage 1 and elsewhere, but discourse has been limited because the matter is clearly one on which there is unity in the country and in the chamber. We are aware that our proceedings are heating up as we approach the elections. It is often thought that a gladiatorial amphitheatre is replicated in the chamber at First Minister's questions, when politicians have battles over their respective ideologies. However, sometimes members clearly recognise that, irrespective of the political party that they belong to and the ideology that they profess, some things are manifestly wrong and unjust, such as the outcome of the decision by the House of Lords. Irrespective of where someone sits in this chamber or what political ethos they subscribe to, the situation was unacceptable and it was necessary that we acted with all speed. As the minister correctly said, great tributes go to those who have been involved with the bill: Hugh Henry; Des McNulty; those involved on the committee; and those who have pursued a battle not only over the bill but over the whole issue of asbestosis. It is a battle that has been fought for more than a generation. Sadly, the struggle will probably continue because, as was mentioned during stage 1, cases are springing up in areas where we had not thought that there would be the possibility of related diseases. When new technologies and new construction practices were first used many years ago, nobody started out with the deliberate thought that they would set out to make people sick, whether in the shipyards or in the construction industry. However, that was the consequence. Blame can be attributed to some companies that have acted shamefully. The bill will provide some solace for  individuals, but some companies have acted appallingly, and some may continue to do so. We must pay tribute to those in Clydeside and elsewhere in Scotland who have fought tenaciously—often with little support from Government or political parties—to raise the issue. The credit goes to them, but, as I said, it also clearly goes to others, such as Des McNulty, who picked up the baton and ran with it. We had a full debate at stage 1, when members clearly recognised the wrong that had come about. The chamber is frequently divided, but I hope that there is no division over this debate, because we all recognise the injustice involved. It would be perverse if we were to have petty party squabbles over something that matters so much to the individuals affected. The Hobson's choice that those individuals faced—either to seek some recompense in their lifetime or to leave it to their families to pursue recompense thereafter—was manifestly wrong. We have not necessarily resolved all the problems; doubtless, significant problems will arise for others. I mentioned during the stage 1 debate that, when I had the pleasure of being in the company of Harry Benson, he told me of an outcome of the 9/11 tragedy that I had not known about. Many of the photographers who took the pictures that we have all seen in newspapers and elsewhere got dreadful diseases related to asbestosis because of all the problems that occurred in the atmosphere in and around downtown Manhattan. Such issues will continue to arise, but—this is perhaps fitting as we come to the end of the session—as members of the Scottish Parliament, we must bury our differences and recognise that there is more that unites us than divides us and that we are here to address problems that exist in Scottish society. It is necessary for all politicians to recognise that some things transcend party ideology and must be sorted out. That is why the bill has had our full support and why it will have our full support at 5pm.

Will the member take an intervention?

Although there are aspects of the bill that we fully support, there are parts of it that still cause us significant concern. We are grateful to the minister for the many changes that have been made to ameliorate some of the problems that were flagged up at stage 2 and for the meetings that the Executive offered to hold to identify whether an accommodation could be reached. However, some difficulties remain, and we should bear in mind the maxim legislate in haste, repent at leisure.  I turn first to the aspect of the bill that deals with weapons, which the minister mentioned at the end of her speech. In her comments this morning, Ms Lamont made the valid point that although that aspect of the bill has been ignored, it is of fundamental importance, in that it addresses the supply and availability of weapons such as swords, which are of great significance to our communities and to society as a whole. The sale of swords is a social problem, but we must ensure that the response is proportionate and that people who have a legitimate need to access them—because, for example, they are involved in thespian activities, highland dancing or historical societies—are covered. I believe that the bill addresses such issues and, to that extent, we fully support it, just as we fully support all the measures that the Executive and the Parliament have taken to address the knife culture that exists in Scotland. The problem cannot be tackled solely through legislation, but legislation is necessary and the Executive has our full backing for the provisions. However, the sentencing aspect of the bill gives us greater cause for concern. We are aware that the present system is in disrepute, but the Conservatives' constant mantra about ending early release is unhelpful. The problem is that the public want a sentencing policy that they can understand. I remember being addressed by learned sheriffs who said, "What is the problem? We all know that a two-year sentence means one year." Any judicial system and any law must be understandable to ordinary men and women in the street. Aspects of law such as information technology law and media law require expert input, but if an offender is given a sentence, that sentence should be understandable to the victim and to the broader community; it should not be understandable only to those who are familiar with the lexicon and the jargon. We believe that what the Executive seeks to do will be beneficial—a clear statement should be made in open court of what the custody period will be. As far as we are concerned, the bill makes it quite clear that the sentence that is given is the sentence that will be served. The Tories can argue about that, but ultimately the length of the sentence will be made clear to victims and communities. There must be a community part to sentences if we are to address the fundamental problem of reoffending rates. We cannot lock people up for many years, or even just for a few months or a few years, and then simply open the door and kick them out. We must tackle reoffending not just by punishing people but by providing care, whether that is wraparound care, monitoring and assistance or supervision.  However, problems with the bill remain. The minister appears to be rather too laid back about the substantial increase in prison numbers that the bill will generate. It is manifestly wrong that prison numbers should increase by the figures that have been bandied about, when there will have been no increase in criminality to justify that. Prisoner numbers will increase by approximately a seventh without there being an increase in offending, at a huge cost to the taxpayer. That will not necessarily tackle the root problems. We need fundamentally to consider what our prisons are for. The Scottish National Party thinks that prisons are for ensuring that dangerous people are taken away for the protection of communities and for formally punishing people who have committed serious offences, the opprobrium of society for which can be demonstrated only by a custodial sentence. We must ensure that people who are flotsam and jetsam and have problems to do with drink, drugs or deprivation—whether or not their inadequacies are of their own doing—are taken out of the judicial system. If we do not ensure that people at the lower end of the scale are taken out of the system before the new arrangements kick in, we will simply increase the number of prisoners, with no benefit. We must also ensure that the consequential requirements for the provision of social work services, care and other services are met. The Parliament has produced too much legislation that has introduced requirements for local authorities, social work departments, police services or prisons without putting in place the necessary resources. We must ensure that prison numbers are static, if not reduced, by keeping out of prison people who should not be there because they are not a danger to communities and have not committed criminal offences. We must ensure that the resources are in place before the bill is implemented.

We welcome amendments 36 and 37 and, indeed, the bill's ethos on knives. It is uniformly accepted by all parties in the chamber that Scotland has a problem with knife crime that is not simply restricted to Friday and Saturday nights nor, sadly, to one geographical area. Although knife crime was once perceived as a west of Scotland problem, it is now uniform across Scotland and requires to be tackled. In that respect, we will give the Executive our full support on amendments 36 and 37. Obviously, legislation is not the only solution. The minister has correctly tried amnesties, which  have only sometimes been successful. However, these issues need to be worked through to effect the cultural change that is required. We fully support the minister's attempts and efforts to address the issue, such as by supporting the establishment of a violence reduction unit. Action needs to be taken. Access to weapons is obviously a problematic matter that needs to be addressed. Although not all weapons that are used by those who are out for malevolent purposes are displayed in army and navy stores—a bread knife can be used with equally calamitous consequences—action needs to be taken to restrict the availability of such weapons. Obviously, as all members will know from the communications that they have received, some people use such weapons for perfectly legitimate and innocent purposes. We need to strike the correct balance with sensible policing and sensible interpretation. Undertakings to that effect were given by both the current Lord Advocate and the previous Lord Advocate, so we can trust that good judgment will be used. Action has to be taken. We welcome the Executive's proposals. They have our full support.

My one worry about Mr Aitken's approach relates to how a judge can quantify the danger a person presents. I understand why a judge should be able to say that a vicious assault merits a seven-year sentence or that such a sentence is merited because of the nature of the victim, who could be an old-age pensioner, but on what basis can a judge possibly decide that somebody is a danger? How would a judge know that somebody will be a danger for seven years, but that they will no longer be a danger after seven years and a day? How can a judge quantify an intangible? A judge can certainly say that an act is reprehensible and goes against the mores, morals and values of our society and that a person should get X years for committing that act, but a judge cannot possibly be  qualified to say that a person will be a danger for X number of years. A person might be a danger for ever and therefore must be dealt with, but they could stop being a danger. How can a judge measure whether somebody is a danger?

We are genuinely open-minded on the matter and will listen to what the minister says. Mr Aitken's point is valid. We must take cognisance of the protection of the public, and we would be failing if we did not expect the judiciary to do that too. That said, we come back to the fundamental ethos of custodial sentences. Why do we impose them? Sadly, it is sometimes the case that prisons are receptacles for those who have social inadequacies or suffer from drink, drugs or deprivation. However, the fundamental ethos of prison is that it exists to punish dangerous people from whom we need to protect the public and/or to deal with people who have committed offences  that are so serious that the disapprobation of the community can be shown only by a custodial sentence. It can be argued that the element of protection of the public can be contained within the punishment that the sheriff or judge hands down. If that is the case, doubtless we will be satisfied. We will be interested to hear what the minister says on whether the protection of the public can be dealt with in the punishment aspect—in the sentence that the judge will impose—and on whether that will be taken as read. If not, we will have some sympathy with Mr Aitken. It is clear that we need an element of protection of the public. The question is whether it needs to be specifically stated or whether it is already dealt with and clearly understood by the judiciary.

The Scottish National Party has a great deal of sympathy with what the Executive is attempting to achieve with the amendments. It appears that what the public want, and what we support, is that the sentence that is given should be the sentence that is served—the minister has commented on that—and that judicial policy and sentencing policy should be understandable, not simply to a highly qualified lawyer of many years' standing, but to the victim, to the accused and to the ordinary man or woman in the court at the time or elsewhere. What causes frustration about the system is misunderstanding. It is all very well for sheriffs to claim that everybody knows that an offender who is given 12 months will be released after six months, but the man or the woman on the street does not understand that or have experience of that. Therefore, we welcome the progress on ensuring that people are provided with a greater understanding of what a given sentence will be. We certainly believe that the sheriff's official statement to the court on the custodial part of the sentence will be of benefit.  However, the problem with the provisions is that a great deal of difficulty will arise because of the complexity to which the minister referred. The new system will be deeply complex even for sheriffs of many years' standing and will need to be discussed, if not walked through, with sheriffs. Therefore, we have great worries about the complexity of the system that is being created. That said, as members from all parties have commented, the current system is unsatisfactory and is not—to use the buzzwords that are applied to many legislative provisions—fit for purpose. Therefore, we need to move forward. Only time will tell whether the proposals will work out but, given that we have the opportunity to decide only whether or not to support them, we will support the amendments despite the great worries that exist about the complexity that is being imposed.

On the face of it, Mr Fox's comments and the points that were made by Susan Matheson in Sacro's submission have some merit. However, we need to look at these matters in a different light. Sentences of 14 days and fewer have been handed down primarily for fine defaults and, frankly, that particular system has been brought into disrepute. People all over Scotland were aghast when they found that if people who were given a sentence of seven or 14 days because they had chosen, for whatever reason, not to pay a fine surrendered themselves at 6 am, they were free by 4 in the afternoon. We had to address the frankly unacceptable situation—one might describe it as a manifest injustice or illogicality—in which people who were given a two-year sentence had to do two years in prison while those who were given seven days were released after eight hours or whatever. I do not think that the solution lies in treating sentences of fewer than 14 days as a parallel matter. Instead, we must ensure that, when a fine is imposed, it is paid and that, if it is not paid, the money is secured by some other method or manner. By doing so, we will not have the nonsense of people not serving the appropriate time and, indeed, we will ensure that the taxpayer does not have to bear the great cost of putting such people in prison. Thankfully, that matter has been partly addressed in other legislation. For that reason, I simply do not think that the amendments would address the problem of fine defaulters. Should we be giving people sentences of fewer than 14 days anyway? In most cases, the answer is absolutely not. However, in some cases, a sheriff might think that such a punishment—similar, one might say, to a short period of disqualification for a driving offence—would be suitable. In dealing with driving offences, the sheriff might say, "Mr X, take two weeks' holiday and you won't have to lose your job as a result of  the disqualification". Such cases will be few and far between—and there are certainly better ways of punishing people—but I do not want to restrict the sheriff's discretion to say, "Mr X, you can use the two weeks that you would have spent sunning yourself in Spain to learn the error of your ways." Although there appears to be an illogicality in the bill, I think that we should leave matters as they are.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many officers were recruited by Lothian and Borders police in 2006. (S2O-12267)

Will the minister comment on a problem that the Scottish Police Federation in Edinburgh has raised with me? I refer to gapping, which involves officers being recruited and included in the figures for a year, but being on deferred or delayed entry. Such officers may not come in for several months—sometimes more than six months. Clearly, that practice would make the figures false. Can the minister advise us whether the officers to whom she referred have started their training course and are serving officers, or whether they are still gaps?

I congratulate Alasdair Morrison on bringing forward this debate, which is timely and appropriate. It is clear that, in Scotland, we have a significant problem with sectarianism, but as the member pointed out, there has been a seismic shift. It is also fair to say that sectarianism is a deeply rooted problem that does not appear only in football. It is a social problem, but it manifests itself in football grounds and in the behaviour of those who support or claim to have an allegiance to a particular club. Football clubs play an important role. We must pay tribute to them and give credit where it is due, because they have significant involvement in work to combat sectarianism. Alasdair Morrison mentioned the work that is being done in Glasgow and elsewhere, which must be built upon. As he said, sectarianism is a social problem, but there is an opportunity for football to play its role and, at  the same time, to improve the environment for genuine football fans and change the nature of grounds, which themselves have changed substantially for the better in recent years. It is ironic and perhaps rather tragic that tonight's debate comes shortly after recent events in which the problem of racism manifested itself. Racism is also a growing problem in Scotland and a spectre that we have to address. The recent problem did not occur in the grounds of the old firm teams that are perhaps seen as the principal protagonists. We must address both sectarianism and racism because they are both manifestations of disorder in our society and of bigotry and prejudice, which we must tackle. In the past, we have perhaps perceived that racism is not a problem in Scotland, but sadly it seems that it is a problem, and it must be tackled. Sectarianism has been with us for far too long. It is a cancer that has been referred to by the First Minister and we are appropriately addressing it. It is deeply rooted, but address it we must. In the past, I have criticised the actions that the old firm teams have taken to tackle the problem, but in recent years I have taken my criticisms back because they have taken action that is to be commended and supported. As was said in relation to Motherwell Football Club and racism, the problems are not restricted to the old firm teams. The problem is that, because of their size and their history, they have a significant role to play, but as someone who grew up in the east of Scotland, I know that there are also religious differences there. They do not exist to the same extent as is the case down the M8 corridor, but all clubs must consider the ways in which they tackle sectarianism and racism. It is to the credit of Motherwell Football Club that it took instant action on the disgraceful events there. We should give credit to the old firm for the constructive and sensible work that it is doing. Rightly or wrongly, footballers are role models and have great influence. We have to ensure that that influence is for the better. Footballers have an opportunity to change the culture of Scottish society, whether by trying to improve diet, as we all know has happened recently in Glasgow, or by tackling matters such as alcohol abuse, which we debated today, so that people drink less, eat better and are part of a healthier environment. Similarly, racism and sectarianism can be tackled if people see that everyone is on the same side and that footballers can be friends, whichever team they play for. I congratulate Alasdair Morrison on securing this timely debate. I pay tribute to the great progress that clubs are making, but I acknowledge that a significant journey remains to be made. As I have said in other debates, in Scotland we frequently  think that the glass is half empty when we should regard it as half full. We are on a journey and things are getting better. If we work together and support what the clubs are doing, we can eradicate the spectre of sectarianism.

The Scottish National Party's motion seeks to express the concern that is shared throughout the Parliament—and increasingly throughout the land—that Scotland has a significant problem with alcohol. The problem has been with us not just in recent years, but through the centuries. We must now face up to it and address it. We accept that there is no simple solution to the problem that we face and that we need to tackle a multitude of factors. The Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform is right to point out, in his amendment, the need for individual responsibility. Our position is clear. We need Executive action, but we also need culture change throughout Scotland. That will involve enforcing and extending existing legislation and changing the attitudes of all Scots. Our motion focuses on misbehaviour, often by young people in housing schemes in Scotland, but alcohol misuse is not restricted to the young or to those in marginalised areas. It is found among people of all ages and classes. The Government needs to act on the problem of alcohol misuse, but each and every Scot needs to look at his ways. As someone who offended in the past, I recognise the error of my ways and the requirement to address my consumption. The figures on alcohol misuse that the Office for National Statistics published recently are frightening and shocking. We should be concerned that alcohol misuse costs our country more than £1 billion. The health service will struggle to cope, not just to provide liver transplants, but in other ways. There are also clear correlations between alcohol misuse and violent crime, and between youth disorder, including antisocial behaviour, and the availability of cheap alcohol throughout the land. We need to address those correlations. Problems do not occur only on Friday and Saturday nights. Sadly, many communities are blighted by misbehaviour throughout the week. It is clear that we need to tackle the availability of cheap drink to youngsters—and, sadly, children—who are a danger to others and to themselves as they drink themselves towards oblivion. Our position on the Tory amendment is that we would, of course, welcome additional police officers on the beat. It is clear, and we have argued, that a visible police presence reassures  communities and deters crime. However, there is a time and a place for simply chanting a mantra and a time and a place for recognising that we have to target matters. That is why we will not support the Tory amendment. We readily accept and support a great deal of the minister's amendment. Over the years, we have supported what the Executive has done to tackle alcohol misuse, including its work with the industry, which plays an important role. However, we believe that there has been a significant change in Scotland that, to date, has not been tackled. That change is the growth of the off-sales trade. There has been a significant shift in the sale and consumption of alcohol away from on-sales and towards off-sales—that is, a shift away from people accessing drink in pubs and clubs and towards people buying drink from supermarkets and off-sales. Almost 50 per cent of the alcohol that is sold in Scotland is sold by the off-sales trade. We need to ramp up the action on that. The Executive is to be supported—and has had our support—in the action that it has taken against the on-sales trade. It is also fair to say that the trade has tidied up its act. There are still recalcitrant traders, but the licensed trade in Scotland has done remarkably well, and further measures are being introduced. We must now tackle the off-sales trade, because in many instances the people—youngsters, in particular—who are causing problems are obtaining their alcohol through the off-sales trade. They are not stumbling out of pubs and clubs after buying pints of lager or whatever; they are obtaining bottles of cheap cider and other drinks from supermarkets and off-sales premises. They are causing mayhem and carnage in our communities and are a danger to themselves.

The test purchasing scheme is welcomed in the motion, and the member's comment about education for parents and children brings us back to the culture change that is required, so I have no hesitation in agreeing whole-heartedly with him. There is irresponsible promotion and pricing in the off-sales trade. It is perverse that a person in Scotland can buy a bottle of cider that is cheaper than a bottle of water, although we are a nation surrounded by water and quite often deluged by  rain. The price of alcohol in pubs is being tackled. We are outlawing two-for-one offers and irresponsible promotions that encourage people to consume as much drink as they can as cheaply as possible. A measure on two-for-one offers in pubs should surely apply to such offers in supermarkets. If it is wrong to encourage someone to buy two pints of lager for the price of one, it is equally wrong to promote the sale of two cases of lager for the price of one. We must tackle irresponsible pricing and promotion by extending the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 to cover not just the on-sales but the off-sales trade and we must then enforce the law. Under the law of the land, alcohol should not be sold or supplied to minors. However, communities throughout Scotland know that the law is routinely abused. The sale of alcohol to minors is not always deliberate—people can be leaned on and threatened—but it is unacceptable. We need a proof-of-age card, because there is clear evidence from Canada and the United States of America, for example, that such an approach works and supports licensees who want to abide by the law. We must ensure that people who sell or supply alcohol to minors are prosecuted and have their licences revoked. The action that we need to take is widespread and is not limited to the measures that the motion and amendments describe. We must tackle the problem, because it is growing. We must tackle not just the on-sales trade but the off-sales trade. We must address the irresponsible sale and promotion of alcohol and the provision of cheap drink, in particular in supermarkets. We must stop the sale of alcohol to minors, for their benefit and for the benefit of communities. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the recent alcohol statistics published by the Office for National Statistics which show that men and women in Scotland are twice as likely to die an alcohol-related death as people in the United Kingdom as a whole; recognises the huge cost of alcohol abuse to the health service and the economy and its impact on families; further recognises the clear links between alcohol abuse and crime and antisocial behaviour; further notes that youth disorder and violence in many communities throughout Scotland are often fuelled by cheap and easily available alcohol; welcomes measures such as test purchasing and calls for the strict enforcement of existing licensing legislation to prevent the sale or supply of alcohol to those under age, and calls for the powers contained within the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 to be extended to off-sales premises, thus stopping irresponsible drink promotions in off-sales premises and the practice of deep discounting of alcohol by supermarkets.

Obviously, the minister is correct that the deployment of officers is a matter for chief  constables, but they can allocate only the officers that they have available to them. Following on from Mr Purvis's point, is the minister aware that, in Lothian and Borders, community officers are routinely pulled into the city centre for events at, or relating to, the Parliament? Although the city centre police unit, located in the Parliament, is welcome, there is clearly still a gap in the provision of officers to work on related matters. The Metropolitan police in London have capital city status and, although some genuflection has been made towards the city of Edinburgh and Lothian and Borders police by the creation of the city centre police unit, we still do not have adequate capital city status. Will the minister address that issue to ensure that community officers can be community officers and do not have to be brought in routinely for parliamentary and other matters?

Is it not the case that the Westminster Parliament recently passed consumer credit legislation that was substantial and was intended to set the scene for a long time to come, yet has failed to address subprime lending or predatory lending? The chance was given to Westminster, but Westminster failed. I am unaware of any proposals to instigate change to address subprime and predatory lending. Perhaps the minister can enlighten me.

In moving the amendment in my name, I say that we do not disagree with anything that the minister said. Clearly, the Executive is flagging up an issue that has been a considerable problem in Scotland for far too long. I will return to many of the points that the minister made. However, Scotland has additional problems that we have to recognise. First, there is a distinctive debt problem that is worse in Scotland than elsewhere in the UK, and we have to take that on board and address it. Secondly, I am reminded of the Donald Rumsfeld phrase about known unknowns and unknown unknowns, because as well as illegal moneylending we have legal moneylending, which, even if it is not illegal, is predatory—the phrase that the minister used—and immoral. We have to address that point. We cannot simply deal with the spivs and wide boys who are operating illegally as loan sharks in our schemes; we have to address the legitimate companies that are a bigger problem in our society. We need to tackle consumer credit legislation and the threats that were brought in—wrongly, we believe—under the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Act 2007. The minister is quite correct when he says that loan sharking, as it is often described, is not some form of social service—it never has been. Those of us who have read Jimmy Boyle's biography know that it is not some benign act of kindness with a higher rate of interest than is available from a high street bank. It is related to organised crime and is tied in with criminal gangs and drugs. Even in Mr Boyle's day, moneylending was related to violence, intimidation, slashings and broken arms and legs. It was unacceptable then and it is equally unacceptable now. It is social evil that we must tackle. As the minister has pointed out, the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service need to have the laws and resources to address the problem. We must stamp out those who prey on individuals who, for whatever reason, find themselves going to moneylenders. Whether someone has lost their wage packet or giro, or whether they have spent or squandered it, as happens in some cases, we have to protect  people from hardship and, sometimes, we have to protect them from their own foolhardiness. We are not just talking about legal enforcement, as the minister correctly pointed out. Credit unions are one way of addressing the problem, especially in areas of poverty and multiple debt where high street banks—despite their huge profits, such as those that have been announced recently—are no longer prepared to provide a service when there are bigger pickings to be made elsewhere, including through predatory lending. Where they are not prepared to service areas, credit unions are required. In members' business debates, the minister rightly has contrasted the situation with the one in the Republic of Ireland, where the credit union system is historically far better developed. There are good reasons for that. We need to drive our system further and faster. Money advice must be made available. There must be attitudinal change in Scotland. We have dined out on the reputation of the thrifty Scots, and sometimes we have resented the implication that we have short arms and deep pockets. However, Scotland prided itself on being a nation in which there was not simply probity but some element of thrift. Now we find ourselves in a significant situation: we are more in debt than people south of the border. As I will go on to say, some of the reasons for that are understandable, but we must warn people against getting into debt. We also have to legislate sometimes to protect people from themselves. Some might say that that is the nanny state, but sometimes we require a nanny state to protect people from their own stupidity. It is a matter of balance. Given the levels of debt and the need to stop people being taken to the cleaners either by illegal or legal loan sharks, action needs to be taken. In the SNP amendment, we state that the problem in Scotland is worse than elsewhere in the UK. The most recent statistics are clear—the average Scot's unsecured borrowing now amounts to £7,848, which is 31 per cent more than the UK average. That is unsecured borrowing rather than being mortgaged to the hilt. When I embarked on my career as a young solicitor, we were told that if someone wanted to borrow money to buy property they could have two and a half times their wages. Now, people are borrowing four or five times their wages. They are also borrowing to get the initial deposit. Given the level of secured and unsecured borrowing in our society and what might happen to interest rates, a considerable problem could come back to haunt us. That is why we require to address debt. Part of the solution is attitudinal change. We live in a world in which many more consumer and  material goods are available and people aspire to own property, have cars and go on foreign holidays. Sometimes, debt arises from necessity when a property is the only property that a person can afford and they have to borrow extensively against it. On other occasions, debt is caused by simply trying to keep up with the Joneses. Whatever the reason, we need to take action. The problem comes back to the fact that although illegal moneylenders and loan sharks need to be stamped out, predatory lending is also a significant problem in Scotland. Many predatory lenders are front companies, sometimes making vast profits for the major high street banks. They operate by postcode targeting, and target areas in which they know people are desperate for a variety of goods. One of the common tactics is to work with car dealers and offer people a variety of vehicles for £999 and instant funding. They say, "You can have this vehicle. Take which one you want and we will lend you £999." Of course, they do not point out that the interest rate is not 80 per cent or 90 per cent but sometimes 100 per cent or 140 per cent. Predatory lenders know that it is not 5 per cent or 10 per cent of debt that will go bad and be called in but upwards of 40 per cent. They then repossess the car and take whatever action is necessary. We need to take action against predatory lenders who deliberately target postcode areas, whether in Edinburgh or Glasgow and whether they work with car dealers or other high street retailers. Such lenders target vulnerable people, often in the run-up to Christmas. We saw the problems that befell people involved with Farepak. Even when people are involved with legitimate companies, they find themselves unprotected by consumer credit legislation when things go wrong. We have a distinctive problem in Scotland that is not being addressed adequately by consumer credit legislation from Westminster and it needs to be tackled. That applies to companies such as Farepak, but more so to the predatory lending of a variety of companies, some of which, sadly, are front companies for major high street retailers. This Parliament has to address the consequences of debt. We have to deal with the matrimonial problems, the crime problems, suicides and all the health problems that are a result of debt wearing people down. They turn in on themselves, they turn to alcohol or drugs, or they turn on and beat the wife. The problems of debt become magnified. Although we have to address the consequences of debt, we do not have the power to address the causes. This Parliament cannot properly address the needs and requirements of our people until such time as we can address adequately the causes as well as the consequences. Until such time as we can do that, we will be letting our people down.  Last year, this Parliament passed the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Bill. We fully agreed that a great deal of its provisions were necessary. The law in Scotland was out of date and we needed to move it forward. However, in terms of section 185, we allowed for a land attachment order to be attached to somebody's principal dwelling house. That was the reason why we voted against the bill, notwithstanding the huge array of provisions that we recognised would be beneficial. We knew and we said so in Parliament that land attachment orders would be used by predatory lenders. We knew that those high street companies would say to individuals, "You have a debt of £3,000. If you do not pay it, we will take your house through a land attachment order." We accept that in many instances such orders may be used as a threat rather than as a reality, but the threat remains. The Jimmy Boyles of this world threatened to slash people's faces or break their legs. Many of the predatory high street companies will seek to take back their money at huge interest rates, such as 80 per cent, 90 per cent or 100 per cent, and they will do so by threatening to take away family homes. The only way in which to address the problem is to remove the threat of someone's house being taken from them by a land attachment order. That is why this Parliament must commit to repeal that provision of the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Act 2007. We do not need to use primary legislation; it can be done by ministerial edict. The Scottish National Party has committed to so doing when we are the Administration. I move amendment S2M-5669.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the significant debt problem in Scotland, a problem that is more serious than in the rest of the United Kingdom; recognises that a main cause of Scotland's debt crisis is the irresponsible actions of legal money lenders; believes that the causes as well as the consequences of unmanageable debt must be addressed; regrets that current consumer legislation at Westminster is inadequate in protecting vulnerable groups from predatory lending; calls for the Parliament to have appropriate powers to deal with Scotland's distinct debt problem, and further calls for the removal of dwelling homes from the land attachment method of debt recovery, thereby ending the draconian situation of a person's home being at risk over a small amount of debt."

I listened with interest to Miss Goldie's well-balanced speech. We are happy to support her motion. She correctly pointed out that what we are discussing today is the principle of the matter. We considered lodging an amendment that would add the caveats that Miss Goldie and the minister mentioned, but they relate to the generalities rather than the specifics. Today, we are debating whether there is a manifest injustice in our legal system and whether—to use another legal phrase that Ms Lamont might well know—a lacuna or a clear gap exists. The matter has been remedied south of the border. Like Miss Goldie, I think that, in many instances, our jurisdiction serves us much better than the jurisdiction south of the border would, but it is clear that progress has been made in England and Wales that has not been replicated here. On that basis, we support the general principle that there is a manifest injustice and a gap in our law. That is why we are happy to support the motion. I agreed with a great deal of what the minister said. The tone and tenor of her position are acceptable. The matter cannot be seen in isolation. It is but one aspect to be considered if we are to deal with changes in the law, but it is an important aspect and a clear point of principle is involved. The minister is correct to say that great progress has been made in dealing with witnesses and the victims of crime. The Lord Advocate is not here to take the plaudits, but a great deal of credit should go to her, because the work involved not just changing legislation but changing attitudes and the culture that existed in a system where victims and witnesses were simply part of the machine. They were to do as they were told. What mattered was the aura or mystique of the police procedure, the fiscal's procedure or the courts' procedure. Thankfully, that has begun to change. There is still a further distance to be travelled, but we have to accept that. Although I accept a great deal of what the minister said, I am disappointed that the Executive is not prepared to adopt the principle. The questions about how we should address the issue, such as whether the Scottish Law Commission should consider it and whether we should have a single act of Parliament or include the measure in a broad all-encompassing act that deals with a variety of matters, are for the Administration that is  in place after 3 May. However, we accept that the matter must be addressed and we will do so. The minister was correct to say that certain details must be addressed. We cannot simply allow a procedure in which the Crown, after incompetence or negligence, is given as many chances as it likes to get prosecutions right. That is not what we suggest. We cannot allow prejudice or minor matters to clutter up our courts. The suggestion that such cases should proceed after a request by the Lord Advocate to the court of criminal appeal has a great deal of sense. I agree with Miss Goldie that that is where we should head. Two types of circumstance arise that lead to a significant problem of manifest injustice. The public cannot understand the law or why legislators do not change it. The first is when a person is acquitted but it then becomes clear that they committed the crime, because they say they did it and they are dining out on the fact that they did it. They can be prosecuted for perjury and perverting the course of justice, but there is a cathartic element to the court procedure for victims and for those who have suffered an injustice—they want a conviction. If it is clear that somebody committed a crime but was acquitted because they lied blatantly, we should not simply be able to punish them for lying; we should be able to return to the case, put the clear facts before a new jury and allow it to decide, so that there can be justice. If somebody commits a murder and persuades a jury, through whatever means, that they did not do it, but it later becomes clear that they did commit the murder, we should be able to prosecute them again. A failure to do so is a manifest injustice. The second type of circumstance arises because we live in the 21 st century and have made great strides in technology, particularly with DNA. There have been debates, discussions and disagreements in the Parliament about when and how we should use new scientific technology, but technology has changed the parameters of crime enforcement. We can now prosecute crimes that we could not prosecute before and we now have information that was not available before. In some instances, that information shows that somebody committed an offence but denied it, and was acquitted because there was insufficient evidence before the jury to obtain a conviction. We will fail as a legislature if we do not say that the benefits of modern technology should apply to the judicial system and the system of justice in our country. That is why we should allow retrials. We will have to debate and decide on the specifics, but the incoming Administration can deal with that. The matter could be considered by the Scottish Law Commission, a committee or some other body. However, today, we should address  the general principle that Miss Goldie has rightly raised. Something is manifestly wrong when somebody who commits an offence and is acquitted, either as a result of lying or because information is not available at the time, cannot be prosecuted again if further information becomes available. The proposal is not about pursuing a witch hunt or vendetta against individuals; it is about allowing justice to be served and to be done. The issue is not simply a matter for lawyers, because the current situation brings the whole system into disrepute. The public cannot understand why somebody who says clearly that they committed a crime should not be prosecuted again or why, if new information becomes available in a case, a person cannot be tried again. The proposal is about justice and giving the public faith in our judicial system. The Parliament will fail if we do not take on board the principle that Miss Goldie has correctly brought to our attention.

We concur whole-heartedly with a lot of what the minister said. Clearly, a variety of action requires to be taken, whether through legislation or local initiatives. We have supported such initiatives, sometimes through our council representatives and sometimes by assisting organisations—Executive or otherwise—to do their job. Notwithstanding the fact that the election is beginning to concentrate all our minds, it is important that we get matters in perspective. There is clearly a great problem in Scotland. Occasionally, the debate about antisocial behaviour and crime oscillates between the perception that we reside in Valhalla and the perception that we reside in a living hell, when the truth, as with many things, is that we are somewhere in the middle. There are problems with serious and organised crime and with violent crime, notwithstanding the statistics that the minister set out. We accept that the statistics show a decline in crime in many areas, but in some areas there has been a greater number of homicides. That clearly needs to be addressed. That said, we have to recognise that, for the vast majority of people in Scotland, life is actually tolerable and pleasant and that it is only in certain blighted places, as the minister knows from her constituency, that life is made a living hell. It ill serves us to allow ourselves to be portrayed as some version of Beirut, as the recent United Nations report did. We need to ensure that we debate such matters. One of our major problems is not so much crime as the fear of crime. However, to individuals, perception is reality. There is no point in any of us—regardless of our political hue—saying that the crime statistics are going down if people believe that there is a clear problem. It is fundamental that we address that problem. This debate is about community safety, which is, perhaps, more to do with antisocial behaviour than serious and violent crime, although the two are related. However, we must recognise that some antisocial behaviour is not criminal. A great deal of it is criminal, of course; we have laws against such behaviour, and we expect them to be enforced by our police and other authorities. However, there are other elements of antisocial behaviour that, while not being unlawful, are unacceptable—in Scottish terminology, we would describe it as downright ignorant behaviour. If someone fails to take their turn cleaning the stair—whether they are in a student flat in Edinburgh or in a council scheme in the west of Scotland—that can make life intolerable for those who have sought to  maintain the ethos and the sanctity of an area. We need to strike a balance in that regard. Some matters need to be dealt with by legislation and the enforcement of laws. For example, children—not just youths—are able to acquire alcohol, which results in bad behaviour. The laws relating to underage drinking need to be enforced. As I said, some elements of antisocial behaviour are criminal and some are not. In that regard, as the minister said, the important issue is one of respect. I have said previously that I support that agenda. We have also talked about individuals taking responsibility for their own behaviour. People have to realise that actions have consequences and that ordinary people—not just politicians—are tired of excuses for patently bad behaviour. If someone does something, they must face the consequences of their action and understand that, frankly, we will not be satisfied with hearing some excuse about what provoked or caused it. However, we must recognise that, in Scotland, drink, drugs and deprivation fuel a great deal of those actions. That does not excuse them, but there is a clear and consequent relationship between those factors and bad behaviour and criminality, which we must address. There is no one simple legislative solution. No Administration can bring in a single act that will eradicate those problems; a variety of things must be done across the board. In some areas, legislation will be required; in other areas, such as health, work will have to be done around education and intervention. We believe that the fundamental requirement in relation to securing trust and promoting responsibility is a visible police presence in our communities. That deters criminals and restores the confidence in the police and the judicial system that many people have lost. We might be able to bandy about claims of record numbers of police officers, but our police have responsibilities that they did not have before, not least in relation to terrorism, sex offenders legislation and a variety of other issues. Further, we have the problem of gapping, which is caused by officers being recruited but not coming on stream. Together, those factors have resulted in our having a less visible police presence than ever before. That is why the Scottish National Party agrees with many of the comments that were made by the minister. We fully accept and have supported some of the legislation that has been passed and many of the actions that have been taken. However, the fundamental way of bringing about the level of community safety that our people want is to have a visible police presence that will deter crime and reassure our citizens.  I move amendment S2M-5608.1, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "recognises the concern and anxiety in our communities caused by both low-level antisocial behaviour and serious and violent crime; appreciates the increased burden placed on our police forces by new legislation and additional requirements; believes that the best way of tackling both serious crime and antisocial behaviour is a visible police presence to reassure the public and deter criminals, and therefore commits to the recruitment of 1,000 additional police officers for our communities."

This has been an excellent debate; indeed, it has been one of the few debates on workers' rights in which uniform views have been expressed by members of Solidarity right through to members of the Conservative party. Members recognise the importance of the issue and the manifest injustices to which the Simclar workers in particular have been subject. Redundancies and workers' rights have been a theme in the debate, but the situation at Simclar in Ayrshire is at its heart. Irene Oldfather's speech was one of the best speeches that I have heard for a long time in the chamber—indeed, the Presiding Officer was correct to be rather indulgent in the time that he gave her. If Mrs Oldfather had spoken for considerably longer, members would have been equally interested and captivated. She encapsulated the manifest wrongs that have occurred and must be remedied.  I hope that the minister will answer the questions that my colleague Adam Ingram asked. We accept that the minister is limited and constrained in what he can say—quasi-judicial matters to do with the DTI, for example, are involved—but we have been heartened by his quick actions in meeting representatives and ensuring that there is communication with the DTI. We ask him to clarify the issues that Adam Ingram raised, but also to take on board the uniformity of members' views and the unity in the chamber. Members believe that the actions of Mr Russell and Simclar are unacceptable, and the minister has our full backing for taking whatever action he can take. Even with an election looming, we should not indulge in petty point scoring. We should sort out a fundamental injustice and address actions that besmirch employers in Scotland. I agree with Bill Aitken in that respect. What has happened is not a normal course of action for employers in Scotland. It is unacceptable, but—thankfully—unusual. Redundancies frequently happen, but they are a blow to people. Sometimes we forget the pain that they bring. They bring periods of employment to an end. We must recognise that employment is important to people, and its importance lies not simply in its defining who a person is or in letting people bring home money that enables them to look after themselves and their families; its socialisation aspects are also important. If a person has contributed a great part of their life to a job, irrespective of how humble that job is, losing that job can be a serious body blow. Statutory redundancy payments in this country are not kings' ransoms. The golden farewells that may occur in the City of London are not the norm for those who are made redundant in country areas or in Scotland. We must recognise that workers' dignity is affected by redundancies and that they must be treated with dignity. Sacking workers by text message is unacceptable. Local authorities have sent redundancy notices by taxi, which is an equally unacceptable way of treating people who have contributed a great part of their lives to an employer. They will have received pay, but they will have contributed a lot. Members have spoken about workers' rights. The Scottish National Party's position is that part of the problem in the United Kingdom is that we have not sought to codify and enshrine what workers' rights are. We have considered giving people legal immunities in a piecemeal way. We must consider the European model at some stage, which is not to give various people legal immunities but to clarify what the rights of workers are. We must take a pan-European approach and seek to reach the same levels that Denmark has reached. As someone who supports the European Union, I say that if the European Union spent more  time promoting the rights of workers than the rights of prisoners, it would receive more support and there would be a greater understanding of its social and economic importance.

As my colleague Jim Mather has stated, the Scottish National Party welcomes the Executive's proposals. We look forward to seeing what the Executive will outline and develop, but we are happy to support the principle. I also pay tribute to Jamie McGrigor for having brought the issue to the Parliament and for having focused the debate. All parties have acknowledged that tartan is part of Scottish identity. It is iconic and immediately recognisable as being Scottish—whether to 98 per cent of the world's population or less. We should welcome that and think of tartan as an opportunity and an asset; we should not hide from it or view it as an embarrassment. The minister was correct to say that tartan has provoked many mixed feelings in Scotland: ambivalence from some and scorn or pride from others. That has caused a great deal of angst and debate over recent generations, as a battle developed over whether we should promote ourselves as a kailyard country with a Harry Lauder image or as a contemporary and vibrant nation and a socially and scientifically modern country that is built on learning. However, there is no reason why we should not be able to marry the two, and that is what we must do. They are not mutually exclusive: it is possible to have an element of the kailyard and, at the same time, be a vibrant, contemporary nation. Scotland must come to terms with that. The problem is not with expatriate Scots or the 98 per cent—or whatever percentage—of people throughout the world who have the impression that tartan is related to the kilt. The issue is a mental image of Scotland. We must recognise that there is no problem with promoting tartan at the same time as promoting a modern, vibrant country that is based on learning, a modern economy or whatever else. The fact that that is possible is demonstrated by the booming tartan sector, which the minister touched on, and by the Scottish diaspora that many speakers have commented on. I mentioned the booming tartan sector. Earlier this week, I met one of the key players in the dressed to kilt event, which has become a fashion fixture not only in New York, but in Los Angeles and California. It is not necessarily my cup of tea, but it has put the First Minister on the catwalk and it provides an opportunity for Scottish manufacturers to sell their wares. We should not denigrate such an event, whether we like it or not. It does a lot of good for Scotland, the Scottish  economy and Scotland's image and brand. The organisers of the event have no problem with parading themselves in tartan and promoting a modern, vibrant, Scottish manufacturing sector. The same applies to our diaspora Scots. Whether they are recent emigrants or are descended from people who left centuries ago, they view tartan as a link to their Scottish identity. We should not seek to take that away from them but should welcome it. We should obviously lament the fact that some of our people have gone, but we should be grateful that they wish to link and bond with us. There would be more for us to worry about if they wished to have nothing to do with us, but the fact that, as Jamie McGrigor said, 30 million people or more wish to have some link with Scotland is a huge asset on which we must build. As the minister commented, tartan day is highly successful. It is now spilling out of New York and Washington. Whether it is a week in Sydney or events in Chicago, tartan day is going global. That is why Scotland must come to terms with itself. We must realise that being dressed in tartan is not something to mock or mimic, although there may be instances in which it is highly amusing or impractical. For many, it is an iconic image of Scots. There is nothing wrong with parading oneself in tartan on the Saturday of tartan week in New York and working in Wall Street the following Monday. Young emigrant Scots do that, and we must do it as a country. Let us sell ourselves, whether in the kilt or as a contemporary nation.

As Bill Aitken and others have said, this has been a consensual debate. That is as it should be. If the debate had not been consensual, it would have been shameful and the victims, their families and the people of Scotland would not have forgiven us. Thankfully, the tone and tenor of the debate were set early on by the Minister for Justice, who made it clear that the matter is about justice. Some things are not about partisanship and narrow party politics, even when an election is looming; they are simply about justice and doing what is right. When something is manifestly wrong, as it is in the case that we are discussing, those of us who are privileged enough to be in the legislature for the people of Scotland have an obligation to set things right. The bill reflects well on the Parliament and all those involved—ministers past and present, the Justice 1 Committee and others. It also reflects well on the campaigners who have pursued the issue doggedly. Clydeside Action on Asbestos has been mentioned along with other groups, such as Asbestos Action (Tayside), which my colleague Shona Robison knows well. For them, the passage of the bill is simply one further hurdle that they have had to face. I first came across asbestos and the diseases related to it when, as a young agent, I moved to Glasgow in the early 1980s. Mesothelioma was just beginning to come through. Hindsight is a great thing, and we can look back and wonder why we allowed men, in particular, to work with asbestos in the shipyards, but we also put it in our homes, our schools and our hospitals. We did not understand that problems would arise.  When the chickens came home to roost, those men experienced difficulties and deaths began to occur. At that point, some shameful actions came to light—not by all companies, but by some. A company would close down and a new company would be opened up, and the insurance agents—perhaps understandably, because of the terms of their contracts—would say that their company was not involved. People had to pursue cases with dogged determination, despite innumerable difficulties, some of which came about by accident rather than by design. With the wisdom of hindsight, we can see the problems with asbestos—be it brown, blue or another colour—but we could not see those problems at the time. That might be understandable, but the actions that some companies took were unforgivable. They knew what they were doing when they went out of their way to frustrate things. In many instances, they dragged out the process to ensure that a legitimate claim by an individual expired with their death. Thankfully, we have changed the process and accelerated the progress of cases through the courts. I have no doubt that there will be other hurdles, however, and it will be the duty of a future Parliament to ensure that those are addressed. As I said, the minister set the tone of the debate. She was right to say that the matter is about justice. As somebody who was involved in the law for 20 years before I was elected to the Parliament, I know that justice does not always equate with the law. The law can sometimes be an ass. Sometimes, the law is simply the rules and regulations that we, as legislators, have created. When matters go before the courts and the law is interpreted, people sometimes do not fall within the precise criteria in legislation. However, some things are so manifestly unjust that it is our obligation to take steps to ensure that we address them. Thankfully, that is what we are doing today.

Absolutely. We have all talked about the Hobson's choice that has had to be made, which is manifestly wrong. We want to strike the right balance, which is the least that we can do for these individuals. They should have the opportunity to claim money to allow them to have a final holiday, perhaps, or to enjoy themselves with their families. When they pass away, their  families should also have some recompense for their loss. We are trying to do the very minimum. As Carolyn Leckie said, no matter how high the damages awarded, we can never replace the loss of a loved one. I turn to the issue of the numbers involved. I had a chat with Harry Benson when he was here to take the Presiding Officer's photo, and he told me that many of the photographers who had been at the 9/11 tragedy are now suffering from asbestos-related problems. We might think that, given the demise of our shipyards, we have seen the end of asbestosis and related diseases. Given the problems in construction and demolition, it is likely that the law of unintended consequences will kick in and that we will see the incidence of these diseases increase as a result of something that we did not expect—although perhaps not as a result of a tragedy as massive as 9/11—in the same way that we did not appreciate what would happen when we started to use asbestos. We have addressed correctly the issue of retrospectivity. It is difficult to consider whether we need to roll back further the date on which the provisions come into effect. Clearly, sometimes the companies involved knew, or ought to have known, what would happen. We have made the position quite clear to the insurers, who are not being prejudiced in any way. We are not rolling back the date many years, which is usually what causes the problem with retrospectivity. In the circumstances, it is fair and appropriate to make the bill apply retrospectively. The insurance companies, which will ultimately have to pay out the money, are not being prejudiced in any way, because the minister made it quite clear what they would have to face. The appropriate balance has been struck. The minister referred to the Scottish Law Commission's review of personal injury law, which is to be welcomed. Those who have suffered from mesothelioma have found it difficult to find a company that they could sue and which would accept responsibility. In some cases, they pursued a company only to find that it was a shell company and that all its assets and money had been moved to another company bearing the same name, but with, for example, "(1980)" at the end. There are shifting sands and we have to ensure that our legislation moves along with them. We welcome not only the tenor that the minister set for the debate but her reassurance that the Scottish Law Commission is reviewing personal injury law, because there are a number of other matters relating to personal injury that we need to address. It is our obligation to make amends not just for the injustice of mesothelioma but for the numerous other injustices that still exist.

I thank Mike Pringle for bringing the matter to the  chamber for debate. His motion focuses on parking charges, but he discussed a variety of matters in his wide-ranging speech. For example, he paid tribute to the service that we receive from the sick children's hospital and he mentioned the plan to resite it. He also mentioned the problems that have been created by siting the ERI at Little France and he mentioned the question of parking charges there. Margo MacDonald is correct to say that pivotal among those issues is the PFI contract, which at the end of the day is the driver of the problems at the Little France site. That problem cannot be solved until the entire PFI scheme is reconsidered. As Mr Pringle correctly said, progress has been made and charges have been reduced, but the ignominy and the difficulties for staff, patients and visitors remain, even with the slightly reduced charges. Mike Pringle is correct that the sick kids hospital is an institution. It is a small distance from where I live, so I am aware of the parking charges and difficulties that are caused as a result of its being within the resident-permit area. However, the charges are relatively modest. The institution has served well not just the south side of Edinburgh, but the whole city; indeed, given the expertise at the hospital, it has served all of Scotland well. We should pay tribute to the staff and to the volunteers, who have given a great deal of service in raising the additional funding that has been required. Obviously however, as with everything, times move on. The location is not exactly ideal and there are problems with the Victorian building, so a new site is almost certainly required. There are good arguments relating to centralisation of expertise and services for why the new site should be adjacent to the ERI and the medical school. However, if the hospital moves to Little France, problems will arise. The problems with the ERI at Little France are twofold. The first, as Mike Pringle correctly mentioned, is transport; the second is parking charges. That goes back to the point that Margo MacDonald raised in her intervention that, if we were starting from scratch, we would probably not seek to locate the ERI at Little France because it is not only the hospital for the city of Edinburgh, but is one of the two principal hospitals for the Lothians. We now have huge difficulties in the region because the two pivotal hospitals—St John's hospital at Howden in West Lothian and the ERI at Little France in Edinburgh—are in extremely difficult locations. Issues arise not only for people in West Lothian who need to access St John's, or for people in Edinburgh who need to access Little France, but for those who must go back and forward along the M8 and the other routes that connect east and west and elsewhere.  The problems are created by the locations, but we are left with them. Improvements have been made, such as the additional services that Lothian Buses has introduced, which the Executive partly funded and which have been beneficial. Doubtless, the park-and-ride site that is being created at Danderhall will lead to further improvements in that it will increase the through-flow of traffic, which will be of benefit. We must consider how we mix the two modes of transport. The subject is not part of the debate, but I broadly support the point that Mike Pringle has made previously about consideration of some form of guided busway to Little France. We must do something to break the logjam and ensure that there is a regular service. To be frank, irrespective of what we do, the ignominy and the disaster of the parking charges at Little France will remain. However, we must not compound the difficulties as a result of a requirement to move the sick kids hospital from Sciennes to Little France. We cannot impose on users of that hospital the situation that those who go to the ERI—whether for work, visits or treatment—endure. We must ensure that the charges are capped and that the difficulties that those who use the ERI face are not also faced by those who use the sick kids hospital.

To ask the Scottish Executive what estimate it has made of the percentage of prisoners who will be detained in private prisons if both Addiewell and Low Moss are operated by the private sector. (S2O-11753)

Does the minister realise that that figure is more than three times that of the United States of America? If the Executive goes ahead in that way, Scotland will be the world leader in the use of private prisons, ahead of not only the US but countries such as Australia and  South Africa. Should not Scotland be ashamed of doing that? Surely some matters, including the safety of our communities, are too fundamental to be put into the hands of those whose first priority is private profit?

We welcome the bill. Obviously, we have some  scepticism about some aspects of it, but we appreciate the progress that has been made. As others have said, we made faster progress today than we have made in other cases. That is as it should be, because there is unanimity about much of the bill, which does not contain radical, ideological proposals for the Scottish legal system. Sheriff Principal McInnes and the Executive had considered how the existing procedures could be improved, so the bill was a matter not of tangentially proposing something new but of examining the system and asking how we can update it for the 21 st century. Our circumstances have changed, not just because of electronic media but because people's lifestyles have developed. It is therefore correct for us to move forward. As has been mentioned, the primary focus of the bill is our summary justice system. I do not share Colin Fox's fears. As far as we are concerned, summary justice has to be speedy and efficient. It must balance a variety of factors. Pre-eminent among those are the interests of justice and the rules and regulations that must be followed, but we must also consider costs, time and effectiveness. Summary justice is most certainly not arbitrary justice. The bill accelerates into the 21 st century rules that have served us well but which need to be tweaked, reviewed and amended. Bail is clearly a factor. The bail system is essential; we cannot do without it. We cannot remand everyone—people have to be put on their own recognisance to a degree—nor can we go back to the days of monetary bail. We have to improve the system because, rightly or wrongly, it was becoming discredited, and we have to ensure that it works better. Clearly, we had to improve sentencing. A balance had to be struck between summary justice and fiscal fines, which are an important aspect of the administrative system for dealing with minor offences. We do not want to go in the same direction as some areas in the United States have done, in which the district attorney becomes judge and jury and pressure can be put on the accused. We need to keep a balance and, at the moment, that balance is right. The bill will be effective in empowering our procurators fiscal to do more to make our communities safer. Some difficulty was clearly caused by JP courts, which were not recommended by Sheriff Principal McInnes. When I was a practising agent many years ago, like most in the legal profession I was sceptical, if not condemnatory, of district courts. My position has changed, and it is correct that we should keep district or JP courts. Not everything legal should be dealt with by those who have a professional degree. We have to recognise that  we must open out this area to our communities. To an extent, district courts have been affected by the same problem that afflicts community councils. They can be criticised, maligned and told how bad they are, but if we did not have them, we would have to invent them. That is why it was correct to ensure that we would maintain those courts and make them work better. District courts are sometimes abused as being made up of people who wear twinsets and pearls and who do not reflect the community. My understanding is that, in many instances, that is not the case. People I speak to and take advice from say that district courts are often representative of their communities. The same problems arise with the children's panel system, which also has difficulties. We have to decide how to make that system work better. We have also to address the fines enforcement officers mentioned by my colleague Stewart Stevenson. The system was becoming a joke—it was rather shameful that it was being abused by members of the Parliament as well as by others. Thankfully, the system will be changed. Unless there is some good reason why someone who has broken the law and been dealt with by the district or sheriff court cannot pay their fine, it is incumbent on them to meet the penalty that was imposed. They should not simply seek to opt out by manipulating the system so that they can avoid the consequences of their actions. That is why we are happy to support the bill.

In a letter to the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee, the minister has stated that no additional funding will be provided. If the Government's view is that a station at Blackridge can be paid for only out of savings that are achieved by the end of the project, who does it think will underwrite the cost of the station so that work on it can commence at the same time as the rest of the project? Will Network Rail, West Lothian Council, the Scottish Executive or some other body do that?

Such is the pace of change in our legislative process that, when I first embarked on these amendments, I think that we were talking about sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms. Changes have since taken  place and we now have judicial officers. Whatever the officers are called, they go back a long time and they have served our judicial system well. Changes that the bill will introduce and changes that have been initiated by the minister and by Elish Angiolini, both in her current office as Lord Advocate and in her previous office as Solicitor General for Scotland, will improve how witnesses are notified, cited and brought to court and will make improvements in other areas. Progress has been and continues to be made. I differ from the minister in that I believe that the current system works well. Sheriff officers—or judicial officers as we now call them—deal with witness citations in civil proceedings; in criminal proceedings, they deal with citations on behalf of the defence. We may create a bureaucracy that works clinically and efficiently, but we already have a system that has served us well in civil matters and in defence citations. We have qualms and worries about e-mail and postal citations, but the ethos of all members—ministers and back benchers—is to stop the waste of police resources. We have a system that serves us well and we should retain it. There seem to be two arguments against using judicial officers. There is a worry about how vulnerable witnesses are dealt with. However, judicial officers are well versed in dealing with people in difficult circumstances, such as children whom they have to cite in civil matters or people who have been traumatised. They are well trained and well regulated. The second argument relates to costs, and is clearly legitimate. People have been worried that the costs for various services would be a huge burden, but judicial officers have made it clear—the amendments emphasise this—that there would be a different set of tables and different arrangements. There has been no suggestion that existing rates for the processing of witness citations would be the same if prosecution citations were passed to judicial officers. With the caveat that we meet the needs of vulnerable witnesses and address the costs to the public purse, we believe that we should retain a system that has served us well and continues to serve us well, and that we should seek to enhance the profession rather than seek to create a new profession and all the apparatus that goes with it. I move amendment 10.

I have listened with interest to the minister and we sympathise and agree fully with much of what she said—our dispute is simply to do with the method by which we achieve it. However, it is a bit rich to castigate the creation of a monopoly of private outfits given what has happened with prison transfers. If that is such a matter of objection, we might need to reconsider whether Reliance should have a monopoly. I will press amendment 10.

We are dealing with the bill at stage 1, so we are considering its general principles. To that extent, we are more than happy to support the bill, as Fergus Ewing said. It is clear that there have been problems to do with the drafting of the bill, as Bristow Muldoon and others said, but we accept that the approach is now heading in the right general direction. We have a great deal of sympathy for the Executive. The issue is problematic and it is extremely difficult to legislate on matters that impinge on morality as well as criminality. The issue divides society and is often not simply black and white—there are shades of grey, as other members will no doubt say. I accept Bristow Muldoon's argument that the bill is not meant to be all encompassing but is intended to deal with a particular aspect of prostitution. In future, the Parliament might need to consider other aspects, but the bill that we are considering addresses the particular problem of street prostitution. It is important from the outset to kill the myth that prostitution is the oldest profession in the world and at worst can be regarded simply as a base capitalist transaction between willing sellers and purchasers—madames and their reputable clientele. I do not believe that it is any such thing; street prostitution is certainly not any such thing. As I was a defence agent in the city of Edinburgh for 20 years, I am well aware that street prostitution is almost universally conducted by heroin addicts who are victims of abuse and who, in many instances, were victims of abuse as children. Sadly, women are now trafficked in to Scotland from foreign lands. They think that they are coming to work in pubs or clubs, but instead find themselves abused in a country where they hoped to find economic and social advancement. We must kill the myth that prostitution is somehow legitimate; it is the exploitation of women and it must be treated in that way.

As I was going to say, I much prefer the situation that exists in Sweden. We are heading in that direction by dealing with kerb-crawlers. However, situations could arise in which somebody, perhaps because of their heroin addiction, persists in doing something, in Horse Wynd or anywhere else, that we feel to be morally unacceptable. That simply cannot be allowed. The number 1 aim should be to target anybody who drives round seeking to exploit women, but instances may arise in which we simply cannot allow something to happen. The issue is one of pragmatic enforcement. As I said, the emphasis should not be on criminalising women, but I would not support anyone who argued that we should decriminalise prostitution. The issue is about how the prosecution service and the police should address prostitution. If we decriminalised prostitution, instances could arise in which somebody, who could be misguided, sought to abuse the situation, for whatever reason. We should not allow that to happen. Decriminalisation would also open up an opportunity for the pimps and organised criminals who exploit women. They would know that they could make ill-gotten gains, but there would be no punishment. We see that in other aspects of society, such as the use of youngsters as drug mules because of their age and the likelihood that they will not be prosecuted. We cannot decriminalise prostitution. The bill goes in the correct direction, which is criminalising those who set out to exploit women, in whatever form.

Sorry; I am running short of time. That takes me to the issue of tolerance zones, which we must accept are not all sweetness and light. There may be circumstances in the city of Aberdeen that I do not know about, but the zone in Edinburgh was certainly not acceptable for those who had to live in the area. One of the issues may have been societal change—housing changed and people moved into areas that had previously been brownfield or undeveloped sites. However, for all the people who lived in the area, not simply women or young women, life was often intolerable. That situation simply could not be allowed to continue. For that reason, I believe that the bill is correct in going down the route of targeting those who seek to exploit and being sympathetic to those who are exploited. That is a change from the present approach to the problem, in which we tend to punish those who are to be pitied, rather than those who seek to abuse their financial muscle. I do not suggest that the bill is a final solution to the matter, but it is certainly a welcome step in the correct direction.

I echo James Douglas-Hamilton's comments. Credit must be given where credit is due and that is not simply for the speeches that have been made. All parties—not simply the political representation, but the Executive and the committee—have sought at today's stage 1 debate and throughout proceedings to work towards a solution,  notwithstanding the timetable and the juncture that we are at in the political calendar. It is accepted that the issue is too important to be made into a political football, so it brings credit to the Parliament and to all involved that we attempt and desire to work out the correct solution for the people of Scotland and not simply to score party-political points. We have to consider not simply where we will be at stage 3, but the current context, and we find ourselves in a difficult situation. In introducing the bill, the Executive seeks to balance a multitude of things. In some, there is a synergy that involves protecting youngsters. However, there is also a dichotomy because, at some stage, we reach an impasse between seeking to protect by legislating and imposing restrictions while, at the same time, seeking to maintain our society and the important aspects of volunteering that other speakers have commented on. We are seeking to introduce laws at a time of cultural and societal change. Those changes have not only taken place over recent years, but are taking place under our feet, and they all have an impact on the legislation that we create. That is why it is important that we take time to analyse proposals that we introduce and ensure that they are appropriate and flexible. We must be prepared to take a broad view of matters. There are great difficulties in legislating, but it is obviously important that we protect youngsters. No political party and no Government in Scotland would ever seek to leave not simply youngsters but vulnerable adults open to being preyed upon or abused, so we need to legislate. It is also important that we acknowledge that the Parliament, other legislatures and our predecessors have introduced necessary legislation as a result of appalling incidents and to try to address obvious lacunae. To some extent, the bill seeks to bring such measures together, if not achieve some consolidation. That is appropriate, as various measures have been introduced and had an effect over five or 10 years, at the same time as significant social change. We all know about the effect of an aging society. We have debated it in the Parliament and the futures forum has reported on it. It has an effect on how we deal with youngsters and how the generations interact. Some of those matters come round perpetually; there will always be a generation coming through that questions matters and an older generation that is more sceptical. However, there is a danger that we will go too far, which is why we must ensure that we get the balance right. If we do not get it right and impose too much through legislation, we will run into difficulties. We have to take into account the other social and cultural changes. As Fiona Hyslop and  others said, we will never be able to guarantee a risk-free society. Unfortunately, we are human and our society includes people who will transgress and commit horrendous acts, so we have to ensure that we have appropriate laws. However, as Fiona Hyslop said, laws are not the fundamental problem and will not offer fundamental protection, although we must have them; the fundamental issue is the relationship between adults and the youngsters or vulnerable adults upon whom they may prey or who they may seek to abuse. It is to the Executive's credit that it is prepared to make substantial changes to the bill. The Scottish National Party welcomes the general principles of the bill. We recognise that it is necessary and we recognise the difficulties—life is much more complicated than it used to be. We must acknowledge the importance of volunteering to our society and the importance of maintaining the relationship between the older and younger generations. It is sad that that relationship has, to some extent, broken down. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned the difficulties, about which we have all been e-mailed, with putting a seat belt on a youngster in a bus. To be frank, we did not legislate to bring that situation about, so it is clear that something is wrong. We can argue about whether that is a correct interpretation of the legislation but it reflects the society that we have created. Volunteering is important. The problem is not simply the legislation that we have introduced. There are other factors, such as the 24/7 society, the dislocation in families and Saturday fathers. Those all have an impact, but we must ensure that any legislation that we introduce to try to protect youngsters does not make matters worse, not only for volunteers but for the relationship between generations. That is why we welcome the commitment to withdraw part 3. We think that matters can be discussed and, as the general tenor of the debate shows, we can reach a solution together.

I thank the minister for introducing the bill and for the comments she made in her speech. We generally support the direction in which she is travelling, and we have a great deal of sympathy on some of the difficulties she is facing. At stage 1, we are dealing with the bill's general principles. We in the Scottish National Party are fully in sympathy with the two issues that the Executive is seeking to address through the bill: how to deal with weapons and sentencing policy. I wish to deal with both. The matter that the minister has accepted is less problematic is how we deal with weapons. The proposals are a follow-on from the strategy to target the scourge of knife crime, which afflicts not just Glasgow or the central belt, but the whole of Scotland. The minister has coined the phrase "booze-and-blade culture". She is quite correct.  Sadly, it blights Scotland, and we need to take action against it. We fully support endeavours to tackle those who use weapons and to address the supply of weapons. Many of us—probably all of us—have received correspondence from various individuals protesting that they are buying or using weapons for legitimate means. We should bear it in mind that the current Lord Advocate and the previous Lord Advocate have given undertakings that the matter will be dealt with through commonsense measures. We have to trust the common sense of the Crown Office, procurators fiscal and the police. In passing the bill, nobody will be seeking to penalise those who carry out mock historical sword fights or who take part in highland dancing; we are seeking to address the booze-and-blade culture that cannot be allowed to continue. It is not simply a matter of legislation and enforcement. As Mr Sheridan and others have said, and as my colleague, Andrew Welsh, has mentioned in debates in the past, it is also about how we educate people on, and address, a certain culture. Legislation there must be, however, and action must be taken. The Executive can be assured of our full support on the weapons aspect of the bill. The other aspect of the bill, which concerns sentencing, has been driven primarily by the need—which I and the SNP have fully supported—to end the absurdity of automatic early release. Not only do we have some sympathy with the direction in which the Executive is going, we realise that there are difficulties to address. It is all very well to say that we wish to end early release, but we must recognise, as the minister herself said, that it is not simply a matter of punishment or incarcerating those who have committed serious offences, or even of ensuring that communities and people are protected from those who present a danger; we must also ensure that we do not simply open the door and release people once their sentence has been served. In any democratic society, unless there is some good reason for imposing an order of lifelong restriction, people are entitled to be released at that stage. We must endeavour to ensure that they are not a continuing danger, and we must avoid the cycle of crime that, along with the booze-and-blade culture, blights Scotland. Reoffending is the basic problem that we face in addition to that culture. It is easier to say that early release should end than to determine how the issue should be addressed. Although we fully support the bill's general principles on sentencing, we recognise that there are difficulties and that the bill as it stands is not capable of being delivered. It will require substantial amendment. We hope that the minister will take account not only of the  Executive's amendments at stage 2, which will doubtless have come to mind, but of the issues that have been raised by sheriffs and academics such as Roger Houchin. There are particular matters that we feel have to be addressed. They include some more minor issues, but the concept of the Parole Board for Scotland almost as a sentencing body appears fundamentally wrong to us. The Parole Board's role is to protect the public and to decide whether somebody is capable of being released. There is an argument, to which I think there is some substance, that it is not appropriate, perhaps even under the terms of the European convention on human rights or the separation of powers, for the Parole Board almost to impinge upon a sentencing aspect. [ Interruption. ] That is not what the board was created for. We should not put the Parole Board in a position where it must decide what sentences people must serve, as opposed to when they are capable of being, or are entitled to be, released. [ Interruption. ] I do not doubt that the minister is well aware of the points that have been made about the deterrence aspect of sentencing. In imposing a sentence, the judiciary has to consider not only what punishment would fit the crime but a variety of other matters. There is merit in the point that Roger Houchin made in his submission to the Justice 2 Committee. How do we quantify empirically what deterrence is? How do we determine whether it works and what proportion of the sentence should be for deterrence? Historically, a view was taken that there was a clear social problem with razor gangs and we expected the courts to ratchet up the sentencing of members of such gangs to make it clear that their behaviour was unacceptable. We acknowledged the problem and recalibrated the sentence rather than clarified what factor of any sentence was for deterrence. We hope that the minister and her deputy will consider how we can square the circle, so that we can keep the judiciary on board. By all means let us ensure that we end the absurdity of early release, but let us also ensure that we do not compound the problems that we have by creating a system that is not fit for purpose—which seems to be the phraseology for many judicial matters—and is not viewed as satisfactory by those at the front line of sentencing policy and those who are involved in dealing with the readmission of offenders to society, whether the Parole Board or experts such as Roger Houchin. A great deal of trust and faith is being put in criminal justice authorities. We accept that, as well as incarcerating offenders, we have to deal with their rehabilitation and monitor them to ensure that they do not reoffend. We need to ensure that  greater emphasis is put on, and more resources are allocated to, dealing with offenders once they are released. I accept that some of the practicalities of implementation cannot be dealt with in the bill, but we have to get a grip and ensure that there is constant monitoring of offenders. In dealing with reoffending, we have to consider not only the period of punishment that people will serve in prison, but how to ensure that they are properly monitored and assisted to be rehabilitated into our society.

The minister is correct to say that the new proposals that the Parliament agreed and the police are implementing are welcome. People who have been charged with sexual offences are a potential danger and their DNA should be retained. However, does she agree that taking matters further and retaining for ever and a day the DNA of citizens who have simply co-operated with the police and done their duty as good citizens would undermine the trust that exists between our citizens and the state, and that doing so would represent a retrograde and detrimental step?

As is normal, I pay tribute to Colin Fox for securing the debate. As it is a members' business debate, it is important that we deal with the specifics of the constituency matter rather than with general points. It is appropriate that Colin Fox paid tribute to the people in South Queensferry who are campaigning to save their bus service. I am old enough to remember the time when South Queensferry was part of the county of West Lothian. The logic for its having become part of the City of Edinburgh is understandable, but there is in South Queensferry a clear perception, if not reality, that although residents there pay the same council tax as people who live in the city, they do not get the same benefits because of their  geographical distance from the city centre. That perception was increased when there was a possibility that South Queensferry residents may have had to pay a congestion charge to drive into a city in which they reside, with all the difficulties that went with that. South Queensferry residents are clearly not as well served by transport services as residents of a variety of areas within Edinburgh itself, so we must try to ensure that that deficit is addressed. The same applies to Ratho, which used to be part of the county of Midlothian. There are historical reasons for the situation, but the residents of Ratho and South Queensferry must be treated as part of the city. They pay the same council tax and so are entitled to be treated with the same dignity and have the same access to services as citizens in larger and more central parts of the city. As all of the other speakers have said, the City of Edinburgh has an excellent bus service. It is important that we record that it regularly wins prizes for having the best bus service in the United Kingdom. Problems arise in South Queensferry and other areas that were historically served by green buses rather than by maroon buses—to hark back to when I was a boy—and in which, in order to avoid a bus war, a relationship has been on-going. Indeed, at the moment, Lothian Buses and FirstGroup serve South Queensferry. However, it is a matter of fact that the areas that are served primarily by Lothian Buses get better treatment in the city than those that depend on FirstGroup. There are a variety of reasons for that, which relate mainly to distance and to the nature of the routes that FirstGroup operates.

I have no doubt that that is a factor. As a citizen of Edinburgh, I welcome the fact that not only does Lothian Buses provide a fantastic service but that the profit that it makes is ploughed back into the service. The company cross-subsidises its routes. Clearly with certain routes, there has been a problem that Mr Fox identified, but we all know that there are other routes that do not make the same amount of money and which use the cross-subsidy. We must acknowledge that, due to the good business acumen with which the routes are operated, some of the routes are extremely profitable, such as the flagship number 22 route, which shows what can be done by a bus operator in running a quality service with quality buses. That brings me back to other matters. As we have said, politics is about priorities. The statements of mine that Colin Fox quoted were,  perhaps, not presented in quite the context in which they were made but, nevertheless, the issue is about priorities. There are clear limits to what Lothian Buses can do in cross-subsidisation and in what the City of Edinburgh Council can do in terms of subsidy. However, we have to think about what we can do with the available money in order to bring about the best situation in Edinburgh. Colin Fox talked about rail fares, but Edinburgh's bus fares have risen to £1 from 80p and the routes that Mr Fox mentioned and some others, including routes east of the city, have been curtailed. That has happened when it is proposed that we embark on £700 million of expenditure on a tram system that will not provide any benefit to the areas that are losing their bus services, and which will also result in more bus services being removed. The point that I make, and on which Mr Fox commented, is that it does not make sense to spend £700 million on a tram scheme that will not go where people want to be taken and will not serve the vast majority of the citizens of the city of Edinburgh when, for that amount of money, we could replace every bus in the Lothians with low-level-access buses and run Edinburgh's bus service free for the next seven years. Where should we spend our money?

The minister will accept that one way to tackle rising car use is to promote public transport. Rather than investing in a flawed tram scheme, would it not be better value to promote and support an excellent bus service here in the city of Edinburgh? Is he aware that, for the £700 million that is likely to be the cost of the city of Edinburgh tram scheme, every bus in the whole of the Lothians could be replaced with state-of-the-art, low-boarding, low-emissions vehicles, and the entire service in the city of Edinburgh could be run free for seven years? Would that not be a better investment of public funds?

There are two aspects to the debate. There is the substantive topic that we are debating—the principles and morality behind our having nuclear weapons—and the opportunity that the debate offers to portray a proper image of Parliament to the wider world. The arguments in the substantive debate—that there is no military, economic or moral case for Trident or for replacing it—have been well made by my colleagues and other members. The eye-for-an-eye principle that has come down through the centuries would simply make the whole world blind. That principle has been continued in the nonsense of mutually assured destruction—or MAD, to use the acronym. The principle has not worked in years gone by and will not work in the 21 st century. We must jettison it and move towards unilateral nuclear disarmament.

Not at the moment. The debate is an important opportunity for Parliament. We acknowledged that we had to raise our game when we moved into the new chamber. Members understood that Parliament had failed to deliver on the aspirations and hopes of the people of Scotland. As Maureen Macmillan correctly said, when it comes to foreign policy, never mind military matters, Parliament's powers are limited. However, it is the only elected chamber in Scotland in which we can come together and give the people of Scotland a democratic voice. The opportunities that this debate provides seldom come to institutions such as Parliament. We have an opportunity not only to reaffirm our opposition to nuclear weapons and to say that there is no military, moral or economic case for them, but to rise to the occasion and ensure that Scotland  speaks with one voice. Whether or not we can bring about legislative change, we have been elected to Parliament and we should make the moral case that there is no basis for nuclear weapons. I was rather gobsmacked by what Christine May said. She quoted what was said in the Financial Times —or somewhere else—about living in an immoral world, the logic of which would appear to be that, if you live in an immoral world, you should simply abandon morality.

I am not prepared to give way because of the shortage of time. We have fundamental values that we must adhere to—values that have in recent years been impinged upon by Blair. Over recent months, we have seen one of the values to which we adhere—that of not wishing to see destruction wreaked elsewhere—impinged upon through munitions flights to Israel that saw devastation taken to and levied on the Lebanon. We opposed that. In this debate, we have an opportunity to state our position on a bigger issue than the wrong that has been perpetrated by Israel in the Lebanon: we can speak as one on the whole concept of mutually assured destruction. The opportunity for Parliament is not just in the substance of the debate and what we say in opposing nuclear weapons, but in that we should rise to the occasion. To use the First Minister's words, we need to "raise our game." We need to speak for the values and beliefs of the people of Scotland, the crux of which is that they do not want Trident. The people of Scotland have expressed that view in opinion polls, demonstrations and at the ballot box. The duty of all those who adhere to those values is to vote for the non-replacement of Trident at decision time. We need no warmongering or backsliding; members must stand up for their values and principles and for those of the people of Scotland. If we do not do that, we will have let an historic opportunity for the Scottish Parliament pass us by. We will have forsaken the opportunity for Scotland, through its elected representatives, to say in the debate that we oppose Trident and we will not see its replacement brought to Scotland. We are at an important juncture: there must be no backsliding. At 5 o'clock, Parliament must speak as one and say no to Trident.

I pay tribute to the minister's endeavours today. I concur with the tribute that the minister paid to everyone in the bill team. The bill has been a long time coming. As the minister correctly pointed out, the issue was considered by the Justice 1 Committee at the start of the millennium. At that stage, the perception was that it would be a simple case of taking matters from the Law Society and creating an independent body. It has become clear that the issue is highly complex, for a variety of reasons. The issue is difficult, as we must balance various rights. We must consider not only the profession that we seek to have some regulation of—rather than its being self-regulated—but the requirement to balance rights within the profession and elsewhere. Also, the situation is fluid, which is perhaps shown by the fact that in addition to establishing the commission, we are addressing the provision of legal services. The legal profession is changing as we speak. It is important that we address that. Some aspects of the bill may not work out in practice because of issues that we have not foreseen. We will have to consider and return to them, but it is to the credit of the Law Society that it accepted, perhaps belatedly, that the situation could not go on as it was and that there had to be an independent, impartial body. It was no longer acceptable to the general public or to the body politic that it said that it was a well-run, well-regulated profession that could self-regulate. It may well be such a profession—I think that all members concede that the number of people who err and fall below the high standards that are set by the Law Society are few—but there have been instances when matters have not been dealt with appropriately. There are occasions when the conduct of solicitors and the service that they provide are not appropriate. Those matters must be considered. It is clear that there has been division on the issue, but we must regulate. I hope that the matters that have been raised today will be addressed. John Swinney was right to say that the provision of a right of appeal against a decision of the Scottish legal complaints  commission creates problems. We have acted correctly in trying to ensure that there is a focused approach, but we should warn the legal profession that it must not abuse the system. If complaints to the commission become just one part of the process because practitioners who do not like the decision will appeal, thereby dragging the process out and imposing financial constraints on people who complain about service, the Parliament will review the situation. It is not the Parliament's will or understanding that such an outcome is the intention of the amendment that was agreed to today. The Executive was correct to accept amendment 3 on the basis that appeals would be allowed in limited circumstances and that that approach would preserve rights rather than create a perverse situation that could be abused. It did not take the wisdom of Solomon to support amendment 1, which would have reduced the maximum compensation payable from £20,000 to £15,000, but the Executive did not support it. Although we regret that the amendment was not agreed to, it is disingenuous of people in the legal profession to suggest that the maximum fine will always be imposed. When I was a practising solicitor many years ago, people would come in to discuss an offence that might carry a level 5 fine, which could be a significant amount—£3,000, £5,000 or even £10,000. I would say, as would any sensible solicitor worth their salt, "Don't be silly. You will not be fined the maximum amount; you will be required to pay a fine that is reasonable given your circumstances and the offence you committed." I would prefer the maximum compensation to be £15,000, but the profession's fears should be allayed—practitioners will not pay a mandatory amount of £20,000. A balance will be struck and matters will be resolved. We must acknowledge that circumstances have changed. The profession was quite right to accept that the current system could not continue, although I still receive letters from solicitors who seem unaware that the body that represents them has acknowledged that there should be an independent commission. Those solicitors must deal with their representatives; we have addressed the matter today. We trust and hope that we have got the balance right but we acknowledge that the profession will change as society changes. If the new system does not work, we will review it. We welcome the changes to the legal aid system, which were vastly overdue. There are significant problems and I do not think that we have seen the last of changes to the system, but that is a matter for another day. In the meantime, we commend the bill and are happy to support it.

I welcome the minister's concluding remarks, which show why the ending of the Airborne Initiative was shameful and its restoration is imperative—a future Scottish National Party Administration will restore it.

My colleague John Swinney made some valid points about the difficulty that arises in balancing the interests of those with professional knowledge who are complained against and those who do not have such knowledge who make the complaint. The same difficulty arises whether one's complaint is against the medical or dental professions, psychiatrists, mechanics or plumbers, about whose professions we have little knowledge. It arises whenever someone provides specialist services while the person who complains about them does not have the same knowledge. I accept that the matter is complicated in the legal profession because of the court system. Two points follow from that. First, the idea that there is a cosy consensus between lawyers does not apply in my experience. Many of the complaints that are made are against not court solicitors but conveyancing lawyers. There is no real warmth or support among lawyers in such situations. Secondly, the ethos of the profession is that a lawyer is an officer of court and carries out actions irrespective of whether they oppose a friend. To the credit of the legal profession, that ethos remains and I am not aware of instances in which it has been breached. I do not think that we can avoid the situation. It is a conundrum that we simply cannot address, although we have tried in the context of the medical profession. Ultimately, imbalance remains and always will do. We must ensure that we have the appropriate checks in place. Maureen Macmillan's points have been addressed by others' comments.  The two fundamental points are the principle and the practicality. The principle is whether there should be a right of appeal. We are told that we have signed up for the ECHR, and there may be complaints about it. We have accepted in other matters that there should be a right of appeal, and that not to have such a right would be manifestly unjust. It would be perverse simply to say to a section of society, "You are lawyers. You're not getting an appeal that everybody else can have." We have to accept that that would be fundamentally perverse. The practicality is that, even if we do not establish a right, there will be appeals, as Jeremy Purvis and other members have said. If we think that having a commission and not encompassing a law of appeal, taking on Lord Lester's judgment, or doing all the things concerning principle, will mean that there will never be an appeal, we are wrong. There will be appeals; they will come about by judicial review, in a piecemeal fashion and in a rather disorderly manner. It is much better that we get ahead of the game, that we set the rules, and that we say that people can appeal only on cause shown and only if they come under certain criteria. We must address the matter of imbalance, so that if somebody makes a complaint that is upheld by the commission, an appeal is brought in. Maureen Macmillan referred to that. Anybody who has tried complaining against lawyers should try complaining against the medical and dental professions. The Medical and Dental Defence Union of Scotland steps in and says, "We're going to fight this all the way." That is why the commission must become the party that says, "We got it right, and whether Mr or Mrs Smith wish to attend is a matter for them. That can be minuted in the proceedings, but we decided in their favour and we got it right. We will go to the Court of Session and say that they were dealt with badly and that we will fight their corner." That manifestly addresses the issue. We have no alternative but, on a point of principle and on the basis of practicality, to introduce an appeal. I recognise that questions are raised about rights and access, but that transcends a variety of occupations, from artisans through to the professional classes. It would be manifestly unjust if we did not have a right of appeal. I believe that the caveats that have been added will ensure that it is not simply a procedure that will allow people to go first to the commission and then to the court. That is not what it is about. People will go to the commission, but it would be perverse for the Parliament to pass legislation that maintains something that is perverse and wrong, by not allowing an appeal or, even worse, by allowing cases simply to be dealt with piecemeal through judicial review. That is why the amendments must be agreed to.

I am happy to support Jackie Baillie's amendment 1 and I agree with the points that David Davidson made. Such things are always a matter of balance. I accept that it has been difficult for the Executive to decide the figure. A balance has to be struck between the complainer and the complainee, and between the blue-chip firms that have substantial incomes and profit margins per partner and the small firms that are the backbone of the profession and of many communities, which would if we were to undermine them, be a loss to our society as a whole. Should the figure be £20,000, £15,000, £16,000 or £19,000? Such decisions are difficult, but there has been a lot of debate within the profession and many smaller firms feel that £20,000 is too much, so I am minded to accept the points that they have made. We have to remember that we are talking about compensation for inadequate professional services. Scotland has never gone down the road of imposing punitive damages. If serious errors are made, there are other mechanisms by which those who have suffered loss will be recompensed. We are talking about how we provide recompense in other circumstances. We are not looking to go down the American road whereby as well as compensating someone for their loss there is substantial punishment.  My colleague John Swinney is right that the level was suggested by the Law Society of Scotland, but that is a generic body into which falls a diverse profession. Today we heard about the launch of a Scottish bar association, which shows that although we have a broad profession and the Law  Society has done well for its members, there are those who do not feel that they are appropriately represented in some instances. We have to deal with all aspects of the profession and strike the right balance between ensuring that people who suffer loss because of inadequate professional service are protected, and ensuring that we sustain smaller firms that would go out of business if a punitive element of damages were introduced. Such firms are important to our communities.

I, too, pay tribute to Sarah Boyack not simply for lodging an important motion for debate but for making an excellent speech. I was taken by many of her comments. We have life's great circle and the fact that there never seems to be anything new. As she said, Scots have contributed to volunteering not simply at home, but abroad. That minded me that I was recently in Singapore and that it was not simply in Edinburgh that the Boys Brigade was formed by Scots. We might be ashamed of things in the British empire and Scotland's contribution to it, but we should be proud that we founded the Boys Brigade in Singapore, where I understand it lives on. Sarah Boyack's comments about the founding of Hearts and Hibs football clubs lead on to present problems with youth behaviour, on which Mike Pringle commented. It is important to recognise volunteering—that is why Sarah Boyack lodged the motion. For many good reasons, the Parliament has made it harder to volunteer. We have—correctly—legislated on some matters. In some instances, there is no alternative to that. Dennis Canavan and the First Minister have commented on that. Having recognised why we legislated and the consequences of that, we must take opportunities for review when we have to—the First Minister mentioned that. We must recognise the importance of volunteering and take time to pay tribute to and thank volunteers. We are occasionally remiss in doing that and that is why Sarah Boyack's motion and speech are welcome. Volunteering is part of our history. Yesterday, we debated trade unions. We must acknowledge that Edinburgh as a society has been built not only by businesses, soldiers or the labour movement and the trade unions, but by ordinary people. They might not have done acts of fantastic work such as building the castle, but they have done acts of great kindness that have been important to making the city and providing its fabric. What matters is not just great acts, but little individual bits that come together to make the city and to make it a community. That is the importance of volunteering—it is part of the basis of the community.  Sarah Boyack made the point that the world is much more complicated. The issue is not simply about always thanking people for volunteering; we must acknowledge that in the modern world, volunteering is much more complicated, not simply because of disclosure, but because of the 24/7 society in which we operate. In the past, people left the factory at 4 o'clock and took the boys club. Now, they may work split shifts or continental shifts. If they are not on continental shifts, they may be looking after the children. People who have separated from a spouse may see the children at the weekend. That has had a major impact on boys clubs and many clubs that involve girls. We must always acknowledge that life is much more complicated. The book called "Bowling Alone"—I do not remember its full title—comments on that. We must remember other aspects of a much more atomised society. I will not get into an inappropriate political debate, but we must remember that there is such a thing as society. We are members of the human race. Whether we come together in a boys club, a church or a chapel, we do that because we believe that a better way to operate exists. For politicians, it is easy to comment on people who have transgressed against society—I even had to leave earlier debates to comment on criminals and such matters. However, we are loth to take time to comment on people who have contributed substantially. That is a perverse rule of politics. When we have the opportunity to say thank you and well done and to say, "You have made the city as much as the politicians or the great and the good have," we should take it. I therefore feel privileged to have participated in the debate.

I, too, welcome the bill. As was mentioned by the minister and by Scott Barrie, the statute that has been in place until now was enacted in 1978. As a practising solicitor in this city many years ago, I had a great deal of involvement with that act, all too often in opposing freeing orders for adoption. When I was first involved in the law of adoption, I simply assumed that adoption was one of those things that had been with us since time immemorial, and that it was covered by one of those ancient Scottish acts that went back to the middle ages. Only when I was given lectures, free gratis, by Professor John Triseliotis, professor emeritus of social work at the University of Edinburgh, did I learn about the real history of adoption. In fact, adoption came into the law of Scotland only in the late 1920s. Prior to that, there had just been an assumption that if parents died someone would take in the children. Whether that was the uncle to whom James Douglas-Hamilton referred or a neighbour, they simply took in the child and the child's situation would be dealt with simply by the laws of inheritance, if need be, to cover their financial well-being. The children would simply take the name of the person who adopted them. We have never had the nonsense of deed poll in Scotland; people can call themselves what they want, so the children were called by the name of their adopted parents. Adoption was introduced in the late 1920s, because in the carnage of world war 1 we lost a whole generation and, as a result, many children lost their fathers. That coincided with the period of Edwardian values. At a time when illegitimacy was still a great stigma, many children were living with people who were not their parents. There was a great deal of angst and worry that the presumption would be that the child was illegitimate, rather than a child whose father had died in service in world war 1. A law of adoption was therefore created, and I understand that the same happened south of the border. Adoption law reflects the values and nature of society. We introduced the law because  there was a need to address the social mores and the issues that had arisen from the tragedy of the great war. However, our society has moved on. The Adoption (Scotland) Act 1978 is no longer fit for purpose and does not reflect our requirements in 21 st century Scotland. That is why the legislation must be changed. The debate has been good so far, although some comments that were made earlier were unedifying. As the minister said, everybody is aware that, tragically, the vast majority of children who are freed for adoption in Scotland are not bouncing, cherubic babies: they are the children of parents who have an alcohol problem, a drug addiction or some other problem. They are often deeply troubled or disabled children, who people do not want to have in their home or are unable to cope with. Rather than impugn the intentions and integrity of individuals who offer them a home, we should be grateful that there are people, of whatever sexuality, who wish to take them in and provide them with that environment. The bill is not about driving forward an anti-homophobic position or a position on equalities. As all members, in particular Adam Ingram, have said, the issue is to retain the ethos of the law of Scotland that was introduced in 1930 and continued in 1978—the interests, care and welfare of the child are paramount and anything else is irrelevant. That is why I support the bill and will be glad to vote for it at decision time.

Given that the minister appears to think that one of the solutions is the creation of more private prisons, is she conscious of the comments made by Professor Alison Pollock about the cost of public-private partnership in the health service and the difficulties that might apply to the Scottish Prison Service? More important, given the recent report of the Scottish Consortium on Crime and Criminal Justice, is she appalled that it would appear that if Addiewell prison is built in the private sector, Scotland will have the highest percentage of prisoners in private prisons anywhere in the world? At a time when George Bush's United States of America and Arnold Schwarzenegger's California are rolling back and realising the folly of private prisons, is it not absurd that we should seek to be world leaders? Is it not time to recognise that prisons are too vital to leave to the vagaries of shareholders and that they must be a state responsibility?

Bill Aitken made some valid points about how important it is for the Parliament and the trade union movement to interact and engage with the business community. However, the purpose of the motion is partly to celebrate and pay tribute to the history of the trade union movement in Scotland, so it is rather regrettable that the Executive's motion is so partisan. Instead of adopting a self-congratulatory position, as the Executive is prone to do, it would have been much better simply to pay tribute to a movement that is an important part of Scottish society and to acknowledge its history, its present role and the engagement and good works that it will undertake in the future. We will not support Mr Aitken's amendment, and although we will be happy to support the Executive's motion, we think that its tone is somewhat inappropriate. However, it would have been churlish not to recognise that today's debate is about acknowledging the role of the trade union movement and its significance to Scotland. As the minister said, various dynamics exist in our society. There is a constant battle between capital and labour, which is not always manifested on industrial battlegrounds or in strikes. Whether one takes a Marxist perspective or the perspective of Adam Smith, there is always some sort of clash. If we are to protect the rights of workers and society more broadly, it is important that people should come together to protect themselves, not just on pay and conditions, but on broader matters. The Scottish National Party pays tribute to the trade union movement, not simply for the way in which it interacts to ensure that the best benefits are achieved for its members, but for its desire to participate, both with the body politic and with wider civic society, to ensure that Scotland is a much better society. We should be proud of the history of the trade union movement in Scotland, which Tom Johnston and others have written about at length. Sadly, that history is often not reflected in more contemporary historical accounts. Tragically, as is the case with many aspects of Scottish life, we do not know our own history. The minister was quite right to mention Tolpuddle and Peterloo, but those events took place south of the border. I accept that the labour movement is international and that  many of its struggles are international and do not relate just to happenings north and south of the border. For example, there was and continues to be a significant labour movement in the North American continent and elsewhere. However, the history of trade unionism in Scotland, which could be said to go back to the radical risings of 1820, is significant. We must accept that before trade unions came along in Scotland, weavers such as the Calton weavers were the first groups that came together because they recognised that they had to stand up against the interests of the people to whom they were selling or by whom they were being used, abused and whatever else. They also recognised that they had broader interests. We should pay tribute not just to the people who made sacrifices and, in some instances, gave their lives south of the border—although it is important that we do that—but to the Calton weavers and the people who were involved in the 1820 rising. Such events are fundamental to Scottish history and to the history of the trade union movement in Scotland. The minister was correct to pay tribute to the important role of women. We do not have to go back to the beginning of the STUC to find evidence of their role. Within our lifetimes, in the protests at Plessey and Lee Jeans, for example, it was ladies who showed commitment and courage in standing up to many of the challenges of Thatcherism. I do not wish to be churlish, but I have to say that in some cases they were advised by their trade union delegates and officials to get out, stop the occupation, cease the fight and instead fight on another front. Thankfully for the history of Scotland and the history of the trade union movement, the rank and file held the faith and managed to bring the leadership round to continuing to support and maintain the occupations. We pay tribute not only to those who hold positions in trade unions but to those who are involved in the broader labour movement. We must also accept that the trade union movement is part of not only our history but our present. The minister is right to say that the movement has evolved. The nature of trade unions has moved on in my lifetime, from the time when they operated in the shipyards, the steelworks and the coalfields and membership was predominantly male, manual labouring and working class, to the present situation in which, for example, in my household it is my wife rather than me who is a member of Unison. In many cases, women are the main members of societies in which white-collar workers predominate. That reflects economic and social changes. Whether we go back to the treatise of Marx or the treatise of Adam Smith, the role of the trade union movement is part of the society in which we live.  We recognise the role that the trade union movement has played in interacting with the body politic, but we must also pay tribute to the trade union movement as a whole. We must acknowledge what it has done for Scotland in the past, what it does at present and what it will continue to do to make Scotland a better place. Whether a person is a worker or a businessman, we are all in this together and have a shared interest in civic society.

When the bill started on its journey we were relatively sanguine. We were aware that there were matters of adjudication in Scotland that had reached desuetude, that there had not been a review of them for approximately 20 years and that the basis of our economy and nature of our society had changed. Accordingly, we decided at stage 1 not to vote against the bill because we were prepared to give it a fair wind. To an extent we were brought on board by Mr Stephen and Mr Wilson, who said that the purpose of the bill was to promote and support a culture of entrepreneurship, which we agree that Scotland should seek to promote. The Parliament should play its part in that. We are not necessarily convinced that the evidence shows that the proposed legislative changes will advance that culture one iota. There is clearly a problem to address. Only time will tell whether we address it by effecting a cultural change or through other legislation or education. However, we would not have voted against the bill on that basis alone; we were prepared to take the problem on board. We also accept that there is a significant problem with consumer debt in Scotland, which is of considerable concern to all parties in the Parliament and must be addressed. We are conscious that we—and the Executive—are hamstrung by only being able to tackle the consequences of debt. We cannot address the problems for those who operate businesses or who get in over their heads and face insolvency, the consequences of which can be alcoholism, depression or suicide. Until such time as the Parliament can address the reasons for the creation of debt as well as the consequences thereof, we will always have significant problems. Until such time as we have control over consumer credit and not simply over insolvency matters, there will be a significant problem in Scotland. The legislation that was passed recently at Westminster is inadequate and the problem of insolvency continues to grow. Many members commented on the escalation of the problem in England, although time will tell whether that is a result of the legislative changes or simply of societal changes, which are happening here as well as down there. As I said, we were prepared to give the bill a fair wind and to accept that, even if we cannot address consumer credit, changes are required to the insolvency system. Today, we proposed alternative measures in respect of sheriff officers, as we are not convinced that a civil enforcement commission is necessary. As Mr Brownlee and members from other parties said, the commission will be yet another unnecessary quango, at huge  cost, to replace a system that currently operates well at no cost to the taxpayer. We also took a different view of the nature of ownership of sheriff officers firms, although other members disagreed. We may come to rue that decision and have to readdress the issue. However, those matters would not necessarily have led us to vote no to the bill in the final vote. In some circumstances, we must accept that the Executive parties have a majority and that they won the election—not necessarily the overall popular mandate, but the overall numbers required to allow a Government to govern. We would have been prepared to allow the Executive to exercise its right to govern without our saying no. However, as Mr Gorrie said earlier, on some fundamental matters, we must draw a line in the sand and, although we accept that the Executive has a right to govern, we must exercise our right to say no. The continuation of the land attachment policy is one matter on which a line in the sand must be drawn—frankly, it is unacceptable. Nobody in our party disputes the point that many members made that the land attachment provisions are more about theory than practice. As with poindings and warrant sales, it is likely that relatively few land attachments will transpire. However, we are conscious that organisations in broader civic Scotland, including Shelter, Money Advice Scotland, Citizens Advice Scotland and the Law Society of Scotland, have made the point that the provision will be used not only by predatory lenders, but by predatory people who seek to recover debt to frighten and intimidate people who get into difficulties. There will be consequences for consolidated debt, compounding the agony that already exists. In those circumstances, we cannot and will not vote for the bill. At the outset of the process, we were prepared to give the bill a fair wind, but the failure to address the problems with the land attachment provisions makes it fundamentally unacceptable. We will vote against it and, when we return in May, we will do all in our power to ensure that the people of Scotland keep a roof above their heads, even if they get into debt.

Is the minister aware that, although Buckfast is a problem throughout Scotland, the problem is more concentrated in west-central Scotland? In the city of Edinburgh, for example, the main problem is not so much tonic wine such as Buckfast but high-alcohol-by-volume ciders, which are remarkably cheap and, as various newspapers have pointed out, sometimes cheaper than the available water. What action will the minister take on that, and will he lobby Westminster on the anomaly whereby high ABV beer is taxed at a higher rate but high ABV cider is not?

Points were made by Mr Fraser and the minister with which I have some sympathy. To be fair, the sheriff officers were not seeking to be luddite; they have advised me that they were prepared to consider certain percentages and so on. The problem was that the minister refused to negotiate or discuss the matter with them, which meant that, accordingly, they were left with no option but to pursue the route that was offered by my lodging of amendment 206, which is a take-it-or-leave-it approach. The tragedy is that there might have been room for some compromise, to which Mr Fraser alluded. That was not on offer, however, and the Executive is to blame in that regard. I want to make it clear that I am not referring to the existing sheriff officers firms that operate in Scotland as vultures. Having met those firms, I think that their ethos is different from that of other firms and that it is not particularly beneficial. However, when I say that the vultures are circling, they most certainly are. They are looking at the money that is made by existing firms, such as those that operate beyond the existing practices of commissioned officers only, and are aware of the money that can be made. We already have a problem with predatory lending practices in the area of consumer credit. If we create a situation in which predatory lending combines with the predatory recovery of debt, we will compound the problems of consumer credit, which is encouraged by those furth of our shores who have no interest whatsoever in the welfare of our people and who do not care about the consequences of debt, such as divorce, crime or suicide. We will have no control over judicial officers whose responsibility is not to the Court of Session, the sheriff principal or the people of Scotland but to people who want to maximise revenue and return. Just as those companies are predatory in their lending practices, they will be predatory in their recovery practices. Unless we support amendment 206, we, as a people, will rue the day.

The guffaws with which Jamie Stone's intervention was met say it all. There is no requirement to comment on that. I agreed with a great deal of what Mark Ballard said, and I am sympathetic to it, but he is in danger of perpetuating a myth about sheriff officers that has persisted since the days of the poll tax.

I have always felt that we should  in debates focus on fundamental principles, especially at stage 3. However, if Mr Stone wishes to get into gratuitous insults, what about parties that have flip-flopped and which gave commitments to the electorate but have reneged on them? We need go back only to the single transferable vote in local government and the abolition of tuition fees. On and on go the Lib Dem promises. I think Mr Ballard's comments on sheriff officers were made unintentionally. Sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms do an excellent job in Scotland. They impose interdicts upon husbands who are battering their wives and they get back children who have been abducted by errant fathers. There were difficulties during the time of poindings and warrant sales, but the sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms were simply imposing the law that legislators created. They implement what parliamentarians create and they do so effectively and efficiently.

Not at the moment. There may have been instances during enforcement of the poll tax in which sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms acted unacceptably but, in the main, they did so—

It would not have made any difference. As a practising agent who was involved in the poll tax campaign—along with Mr Sheridan—I remember doing what was appropriate, which was to write to the sheriff principal objecting to various methods. When we did that, the sheriff principal called the sheriff officers in and dealt with it. We did not need a civil enforcement commission with a start-up cost of £1 million and annual running costs of £650,000 thereafter; we had a sheriff principal who dealt with the problem as part of his job.

No—I have taken enough interventions for the moment. Mr Wilson made the legitimate point that there are problems in respect of the amendments' being lodged at a late stage. However, today's manuscript amendments are in Mr Wilson's name and were lodged as a result of understandable political pressure in respect of land attachment—which we will debate later—from broad areas of civic Scotland including, I think, an editorial in today's edition of The Herald that castigates what Mr Wilson seeks to impose on Scotland. He  lodged manuscript amendments because of Cabinet discussions yesterday lunchtime, so for him to criticise amendments that were lodged timeously is breathtaking and puts even Mr Stone to shame. The amendments in the group are not ideal, but that is because Mr Wilson has reneged on various undertakings that he gave when he met sheriff officers. Thereafter, the Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers sought to speak to Executive civil servants and to negotiate with them, but the civil servants refused to enter discussions. They refused to discuss and debate the matter, not with some outraged citizen who was acting errantly and abhorrently, but with an organised body that is part of the judicial process in Scotland. To be frank, they dealt with the Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers in a contemptuous manner that is unbecoming of an Executive. Thankfully, that will change next May. If there are consequential problems with the amendments in the group, they were brought about by the Executive's failing to listen, discuss and act reasonably, never mind its going back on clear commitments that the minister gave to sheriff officers.

We certainly have. The Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers has made freedom of information requests to see minutes of its meetings with the Executive. Perhaps the minister is not releasing them or perhaps, in civil service speak, notes were not kept. However, the evidence is clear and, if Mr Wilson feels that the people in the Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers who are advising me are telling lies, he should say so. The fact is that Mr Wilson gave commitments upon which he reneged and, thereafter, civil servants acting on his behalf failed even to meet the Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers to discuss the matter and negotiate on it. That is unacceptable and shameful and it is why we need to allow sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms to continue to do the good job that they have done to date and do away with the provisions for an unnecessary commission—a new quango that the Executive seeks to introduce at huge cost to the taxpayer.

The minister made some pejorative remarks about special pleading by sheriff officers. To put the matter in context, amendments 206 and 52 seek to introduce into the bill the rules that regulated sheriff officers previously. Back in 1991, when the rules were created—in secondary, not primary legislation—it was made clear that sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms should hold a commission  and that there is an ethos that goes with being a member of the profession, which is part of our judicial system. Members who have been solicitors or advocates—there are many of them—will be aware that people in the judicial system have a responsibility not only in how they operate, but to the court. That duty surpasses any duty that they as individuals have to their clients, partners or others with whom they work. People in the system understand that there is a higher ethos because of the responsibility of the job or office that they hold. That is why, back in 1991, the rules made it clear that people had to hold a commission and could not simply be a silent partner or a limited company that was based wherever. As I said, amendments 206 and 52 seek not to introduce new measures, but to restore the previous status quo, which was introduced in secondary legislation. What happened was that, in the wisdom of those elsewhere and perhaps even here, we acknowledged that, in the modern world, there was a need for solicitors firms to be able to become limited liability partnerships. We did not realise at the time that the consequence would be to open up an opportunity for access to be gained to sheriff officers firms. As far as I am aware, it was not envisaged or intended that firms of judicial officers, sheriff officers or messengers-at-arms would be able to become limited liability partnerships. The aim was to deal with the Law Society of Scotland and the legal profession. However, a loophole opened up, an opportunity was seen and various firms moved in. Some individuals have made substantial amounts of money and firms have acquired shares in or ownership of various other firms. That is not appropriate. As we made an error in the introduction of limited liability partnerships, we should seek to return to the principles for the operation of judicial officers that existed not just under the 1991 regulations, but from the outset in Scotland. If amendments 206 and 52 are rejected and we go with the minister's proposals, we will compound an error and open up the opportunity for debt collection agencies to move in. We will give an opportunity not simply to those who wish to have the protection of limited liability status in operating a sheriff officers practice in Scotland; we will give it to the vultures—the predatory practices and companies that seek only to maximise the money that they make. Those companies have no ethos of support for the Scottish judicial system, but simply want a return on their investment.  It would be a retrograde step if judicial officers in Scotland did not have a commission from and a responsibility to either the Scottish civil  enforcement commission or the court under the auspices of which they operate, but instead were convinced that their responsibility was to the shareholders and the head office, whether that is in Delaware, Detroit or south of the border here. Let us not forget that a great many vultures are circling various practices and judicial officers firms in Scotland, because debt collecting agencies can make a substantial amount of money by collecting council tax or whatever. Many of those firms seek to get a share of the pie. As I said, they do not seek to do the work responsibly and effectively, as happens under the current ethos of the judicial officer system in Scotland; instead, they simply want to make a fast buck. Amendments 206 and 52 would restore the previous status quo and would protect not only sheriff officers firms and individuals, but the ethos and integrity of the Scottish judicial system. As I said, people in the system have a responsibility to the court and not simply to shareholders, wherever they are located. I move amendment 206.

Amendment 93 is the principal amendment in the group—the others are consequential. I thank the clerks of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, who worked to ensure that the amendments were ready. The work was complicated by the number of amendments that were consequential on the principal amendment. It was not just that the clerks did their job; they worked long into the night to ensure that Parliament would be able to debate the amendments. Members will soon decide whether to agree to them. The principal question is this: do we wish to create yet another commission—a Scottish civil enforcement commission—to supplant what is currently a well-regulated and well-run profession? Why are we seeking to do that? If it ain't broke, why are we seeking to fix it? To be fair to the Executive, the proposal did have some logic at the outset. The intention behind creating the Scottish civil enforcement commission was to ensure that there would be regulation not only of sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms—or judicial officers, as they will be called—but of debt-collecting agencies. There is merit in that idea and I commend the Executive for it. However, difficulties came to light because many matters relating to debt collection are reserved; for example, matters relating to consumer credit cannot be dealt with by this Parliament. We were then left with the idea of the Scottish civil enforcement commission, but such a commission would not address the problem for which it was to be created at significant cost. All it would do was replicate what we already have. At that juncture, the Executive should have seen the error of its ways and, rather than press on, withdraw and leave the profession to run itself. If the amendments in the group are not accepted, we will be creating yet another commission—Mr Swinney is the man who usually comments on such things. According to the  Finance Committee, the set-up cost will be £1 million and the annual running cost will be £650,000. That money will be spent, even though we already have a self-regulated system that costs the state and the taxpayer not one penny. Will taxpayers get any added advantage? No—not unless we regulate additional debt-collecting agencies that currently come within the ambit and jurisdiction of Parliament. There will be a huge cost but no additional benefit. At the same time, the ethos and integrity of a group of individuals will be undermined. Those people will come together as judicial officers—or whatever name we will call them by. They have done a good job serving the people of Scotland and the judicial system of Scotland, of which they are a vital part. Those are those circumstances that led me to lodge amendment 93. We should not create yet another commission at huge cost and we should not seek to undermine the ethos and integrity of a profession that has served the people of Scotland well for centuries.

We welcome the Executive amendments. Concerns were raised about the minimum debt limit by members of many parties and people outwith the  chamber. We will debate land attachment at a later stage. There is some difficulty with the limit that we set. Do we need the wisdom of Solomon to decide whether it should be £15,000, £3,000 or £3,100? There was general acceptance that £1,500 was far too low. Whether someone has a household debt or has to take an emergency flight, a debt of £1,500 can easily be racked up on a credit card or elsewhere. Time will tell whether £3,000 is an appropriate threshold, which is why we welcome not only the increased threshold but the opportunity to vary it. The appropriate limit is a fluid matter: what is appropriate at this juncture might not be appropriate in a year or several years' time. However, amendment 19 is an advance on the threshold of £1,500, which is far too low.

The SPCB is well aware of Mr Ewing's great interest and concerns. Indeed, Mr Ewing asked a question on this matter at the last SPCB question time on 10 May. As indicated then, the SPCB agreed to meet Mr Ewing. It duly did so. I can assure members that the SPCB has taken note of Mr Ewing's submissions on these matters.

Mr Ewing raises several issues. On the quinquennium of prescription, the corporate body and the lawyers have looked at that matter. We are satisfied that the position of the Parliament and of the taxpayer is protected. On whether we will make a statement, we are not prepared to do that at this time. As members will recognise, completion of the final phases of such a project is not straightforward and takes time. I appreciate the member's frustration, but the  corporate body is still going through the final counts, which is a convoluted and complicated process. Any announcement at present would be premature as it is difficult to isolate Flour City from the overall package that we are addressing.

The minister will be aware of press speculation that post May the Executive might consider the electrification of the Edinburgh to Glasgow line to make it into a high-speed line. Will the minister tell us how that squares with the renewal of diesel-engine capacity in the Scottish fleet that would be brought about as a consequence of the Edinburgh airport rail link scheme, which would mean that city sprinter trains could not access the proposed incline in the tunnel on that route? Why are we to  have high-speed electric trains at the same time as we renew almost all of First ScotRail's fleet?

I, too, pay tribute to Mark Ballard for bringing an important motion to the Parliament. The motion is important for three reasons: first, because we often underestimate the important role that community health projects play in broader public health matters; secondly, because of the funding difficulties that Patrick Harvie and others have mentioned; and thirdly, because of the important role that volunteers and volunteering play in our society. I will touch on each of those issues.  To deal with the last one first, it was appropriate for Mark Ballard and other members to pay tribute to those who volunteer and give their time for nothing. The Parliament has made it more difficult to volunteer, although for the best of reasons. As a result of the provisions on disclosure for those who deal with children and a variety of other measures, we have introduced hurdles to volunteering. It is therefore appropriate for the Parliament to record its thanks to those who dedicate their time to volunteering. In the more complicated 21 st century world in which we live, with a 24/7 society of split shifts and split and dislocated families, finding time to volunteer is arguably harder than it has been previously, yet it is ever more necessary. The Parliament should therefore pay tribute to those who volunteer. They do not ask for much and the least that we can do, given the difficulties that we have imposed, is to thank them. Funding issues apply not only to community health projects, but to a variety of voluntary agencies. The Executive must, correctly, check against delivery, balance the books and ensure that funding is not given in perpetuity. However, that causes difficulties that result in many organisations being unable to continue—we have heard examples of that. The situation can also be fundamentally debilitating for organisations that are doing a difficult job in difficult circumstances, involving people who give their time voluntarily. They face not only the challenges and problems with which they are dealing, but the difficulties of managing and balancing the books. As a body politic, we must do more to address that. We must ensure that public funds are best used and not used wrongly, but we must also ensure that such organisations, which contribute immensely, can continue and are not undermined. As I said, organisations sometimes simply cease to exist or are undermined by the hassle and wear and tear and the anxiety that goes with that. We must address that. Community health projects play an important role in addressing the difficulties that Scottish society faces. Modern medicine has resulted in a huge swathe of changes that we clearly welcome. We do not now simply have heart transplants; we have face transplants and a plethora of other wonderful procedures. However, at the end of the day, we must realise that some of the most significant changes that the Parliament and the Scottish people can make will come as a result not of the wonders of modern science, but of measures at the basic grass-roots level. Part of the issue is about improving affordability and accessibility and making services available and part is about changing attitudes, for example, in tackling smoking. Other small nations reward and support those who volunteer by ensuring adequate funding. Des  McNulty mentioned Finland, which, as a consequence of such measures, has moved from being the sick man of Europe to being the country that most of us in Scotland would emulate. I congratulate Mark Ballard on the motion.

The Executive and all parties in the chamber are right to regard the issues that we are discussing as a major problem for Scotland. We are not talking simply about a drain on our economy or a loss to our society caused by people whose contribution, both economic and social, could be much more constructive. The problem impacts on a huge array of issues. It impacts on the health of those who are caught in the trap, and it impacts on criminality and justice, which is the area that I cover for the Scottish National Party. We all have to address the problem.  I agree with a great deal that has been said by members from all round the chamber. I agree with Duncan McNeil: some of the structural changes that started in the 1980s are fundamental to the problem. We have lost major employers and there has been mass unemployment. As a result, a generation was out of employment. Indeed, in many families, different generations have never been employed. That has had huge social consequences. We would ill serve the people of Scotland if we simply bandied about accusations over who was to blame or how the problem started. I am thankful that we have not done so. We have to address how we can solve the problem. As Alex Neil suggested, there will not be one simple solution, as the problem is multifaceted. To be fair, we are not the only country that faces such problems. We have lost major manufacturing industries and we have seen the start of a new industrial base for Scotland. Many people who were fit for the industries that we once had are not fit for the new industries. We have to address that and consider the people who are not in education, employment or training. It is not simply a question of cost; it is also a question of considering what the consequences will be if we do not address the problem. Indeed, the consequences can already be seen. I am happy to contribute to this debate as the SNP's justice spokesman, because there is a clear correlation between issues. I should make it clear at the outset that I am not suggesting for an instant that all young people who are not involved in education, employment or training are up to mischief or will embark on a life of delinquency or criminality, but it would be foolish of us not to recognise that there is a clear correlation between unemployment and recidivism. I see that David Davidson is not in the chamber but, as he will know, the Justice 2 Committee yesterday discussed how to tackle recidivism, which is a huge problem in Scotland. A stable family life and employment are essential if that problem is to be tackled. The same two factors are what matter to youngsters who are on the edge of delinquency. They might not have employment opportunities, and their parents—regardless of whether one or both of them are present—might not be providing a stable family life. We must address such situations. As Duncan McNeil was correct to say, dignity and discipline go with being employed and being in the workplace. A whole generation does not understand that, in many instances, it is necessary to get up, whether for work, a job interview or to attend a meeting with the social work department. When people do not receive the wraparound support of the family unit and the broader social  unit, there is a social cost to us. For example, it costs more than £30,000 to keep someone in prison. If we do not tackle the problem at the outset, we will have to provide a huge amount of resources for police officers and social workers to deal with repeat offending. If we do not address the social and economic requirements of young people who are not in education, employment or training, we will have to face the consequences. The loss to our economy and our society and the cost to our criminal justice system and to social work, health and education services will be far higher if we do not tackle the problem now, so that is what we must do. No one is beyond rehabilitation, although we should not underestimate the difficulties that we face. The fact that there are no longer providers of mass employment is not an issue only for Scotland. I am reminded of the article that I saw in a magazine that said that the biggest employer on a single site in the United States was not Boeing or the Pentagon, but Disneyworld. The manufacturing base that used to exist has gone. We face similar problems in Scotland. We must work out how we can get the youngsters in the NEET group into skilled employment that provides not only the discipline and dignity that go with labour, but a sense of value, purpose and self-worth. The possibility of engagement in criminality is not the only problem that those youngsters face. They risk feeling as if they have failed to achieve and to be all that they can be, the results of which can be drinking, taking drugs and so on. They might believe that they have no future and that their lives are worthless. That is why, rather than considering the costs of tackling the problem, we should be aware of the consequences of not doing anything. We must recognise that, tragically, the fact that some youngsters have lost interest in the three Rs of reading, writing and arithmetic results in their being sucked into drink, drugs and deprivation. We must break that cycle. Doing so will not be a cost to us, but will benefit us socially, economically and in areas such as health and justice.

It sometimes seemed that we were participating in a parallel debate. The Green party's benign motion and the equally benign speech by Mr Harper were met with some vehemence and vitriol from the Executive parties. I have to contrast the Tories' moderate amendment and speeches with the quite illiberal comments from both parties on the Executive benches. That is unusual and surprising, but is a sign of the times that we find ourselves in. I am aghast that there should be any suggestion that anyone in this chamber supports outrageous and bad behaviour. I disagree with many of the things that Mr Harvie and others have said about criminal justice, but I have never suggested that any member of this Parliament champions bad or outrageous behaviour. Frankly, it is wrong for political parties to suggest that that is the case, even if there is an election on the way. They should be addressing the debate, not making such suggestions. Listening to Mr Brown explain his position, I was reminded of Harold Macmillan's claim in the 1960s—I was not particularly conscious of it at the time but have since read about it—that we had never had it so good. According to Robert Brown, we are now living in an absolutely fantastic world in which Scottish youngsters have never had it so good. I have to say that Harold Macmillan did not manage to sell that message in the 1960s and Mr Brown will not manage to sell it in the 21 st century. We know that that is not the reality.  Youngsters are being stereotyped. That is unacceptable and it has to change. Nobody tolerates the bad behaviour that goes on in places such as Dennistoun, Bridgeton and so on. That is unacceptable and cannot be condoned—it must be condemned because it makes people's lives intolerable. However, we must remember that that behaviour is exhibited by a small minority of youngsters. The overwhelming majority of youngsters in this country are a credit to themselves, their communities and their families. We must support them, not run them down. Further evidence that we do not live in a fantastic utopia is the fact that the statistics on child poverty are shameful for a modern, progressive, oil-rich country in the 21 st century. To be patting ourselves on the back when a third of our kids are born into poverty is totally unacceptable. We have to accept that societal changes have made matters more complicated. We have seen kids lose their innocence, never mind their right to roam. Things are a lot more difficult for youngsters, even though material conditions might have greatly improved for the two thirds of our youngsters who are not born into poverty. There has been a loss of an element of latitude. When I was a child, my elders adopted a "boys will be boys" attitude to behaviour that was, frankly, quite often outrageous and unacceptable. Certain behaviour was viewed as a rite of passage but that is no longer the case. It is immediately met by police intervention, a report to the children's panel or a referral to court. We live in a car-owning democracy in which many people object to children playing football on the street. Blow me; some people even view it as a crime. Often, police have to intervene because the children are endangering themselves by playing football in the street, but there are individuals who believe that their right to use their prized possession outweighs the right of any child to play. That has to be addressed, although the issue of the provision of facilities is more appropriately dealt with elsewhere. The fact is that, although there might be more material benefits for children, there is also a great deal more hardship. We need to have respect. I accept that and am on record as saying so. However, I believe that we are much better off thinking about encouraging responsibility. Our society needs people to take personal responsibility. People must accept that they have obligations as well as rights and that unacceptable behaviour will be challenged and punished. Equally, our society and Government must recognise that we have a social responsibility to our communities. Frankly, too many of our children are born to fail. The world of "Cathy Come  Home" exists today, as it existed 30 or more years ago. We need to praise our youngsters and encourage good behaviour rather than simply tackling bad behaviour. The attitude of the Executive parties today was shameful.

I apologise for missing the opening speeches. I was attending a media engagement, which unfortunately ran on. The debate has been wide ranging, but I want to focus on the Scottish diaspora. Members of the Scottish Parliament should remember that the Parliament is not just for Scots who live in Scotland but for Scots outwith Scotland. Indeed, we have a responsibility to people who might never have lived in Scotland but who claim some form of Scottish identity—perhaps it has been passed down through their genes or perhaps they just want to be identified with Scotland in some way. There is a huge opportunity for us in that regard. We live in a strange world. In the global economy, people have never been closer to one another. When we travel around the world, we find a Starbucks coffee shop in every major city. We are struck by the uniformity of much of the culture across the globe. We can watch episodes of "Prison Break" or "Law and Order" whether we are in the United States of America, Europe or Australia. We live on a shrinking planet, but the  irony is that more and more people want an individual identity. The more the world shrinks and people become the same as one another, the more people want to identify themselves as being unique and distinct. That ties in with Des McNulty's comments about a multilayered identity. People want to be identified with Scotland. There is a cachet in being Scottish, which is felt not just by people who originate from Scotland and are proud of that but by people in many parts of the world, such as Australia or the USA, who seek an identity that is deeper than that of the modern society in which they live. Being Scottish has a bit of kudos, which is a great advantage for us and provides opportunities. We are but a small nation of 5 million people on the periphery of Europe, as we discussed earlier in the debate on freight transport, but we can lay claim to the 40 million to 80 million people around the globe who identify with us, many of whom wish to contribute to our country. A few years ago, I travelled with other parliamentarians to a meeting in Ireland, where I spoke to Irish politicians. Many TDs talked about how they envied Scotland because we were so much better connected than Ireland was in the United States and Australia. I was extremely sceptical about that; given the plethora of Irish bars in the world and the size of the Irish diaspora, which is bigger than ours, I could not believe that Ireland would view itself as less well connected than we are. However, an investigation of the Scottish diaspora shows that we are better connected than the Irish are, certainly in the United States and Australia. Many people from Scotland who went there were literate and educated and, whether Protestant or Catholic, were driven by a Protestant work ethic. They are now embedded in those countries and present a huge opportunity. Scotland has always had a schizophrenic view of emigration and the diaspora. As members have emphasised, we take great pride in the achievements of our countrymen and compatriots. We correctly acclaim people such as Carnegie and Pinkerton, although Pinkerton has an unsung history. He was born where the Glasgow mosque is now situated and in his latter years was involved in anti-union activity, although he was earlier involved in the underground railway that brought Negro prisoners from the south of the States. Many people in Scotland are disparaging about our expatriate community and think, "Who are they to comment on what is happening here?" We have a love-hate relationship with that community, which is often demonstrated in the attacks on Sean Connery. People ask, "Who is he to comment on Scotland?", but why should he not comment on Scotland? He is Scottish and is entitled to contribute.  We cannot have it both ways. We cannot claim that all expatriate Scots are wonderful and that we are proud of people such as Andrew Carnegie and then, when somebody who has left Scotland expresses a view about it, say that they have no right to comment. We must get over that problem, which is ours, not theirs. We must acknowledge that Scotland is their country, too, even if they choose not to live here. We have the privilege of voting in elections, the dubious privilege of paying taxation and the benefit of living here, but we have no right to say that we are Scottish and they are not. They are equally Scottish, even though they may not live here. The phenomenon is relevant, because one of the great features of the world today is migration. As members have said, people are coming to Scotland today, as they have come over the years, from Poland, Lithuania, Afghanistan and Iraq, and we will make them welcome. Equally, Scots are going from here south of the border, to the United States and to other countries. They move on because that is the way of the modern world. There is a great likelihood that my children and those of other parliamentarians will move abroad for employment or out of some other interest. We hope that they will return and we must ensure that they have the opportunity to do so, but we must see those who remain abroad as an asset. We must get rid of the chip on our shoulder and acknowledge that this is their Parliament, too. They have a right to comment and we should take pride in them.

We must encourage participation at all levels. The story of Simon Fraser reminds us that people do not have to be born in Scotland to have a perception of being Scottish. Simon Fraser is lauded in Canada as being the man who discovered the mighty Fraser river. He travelled from Ontario, where he grew up, down it to the Pacific, before Lewis and Clark had gone down the Columbia river to the Pacific, south of the 49 th parallel. He is seen as an intrepid Scottish explorer. The irony is that he was not born in Scotland, but was born to Scottish parents in Vermont in what was then British North America. As many Scots did, his parents took the losing side in the American revolution and then moved north of the 49 th parallel. He was brought up in a Scottish family and with the perception that he was Scottish. When he came down through the mighty mountains in northern British Columbia, he actually thought that that was what Scotland  looked like. He had never visited Scotland, but he had been told about a land of mighty rivers and majestic mountains. That is why northern British Columbia was called New Caledonia, which gave a synergy with Nova Scotia, which had already been discovered. That shows that someone does not have to be born in Scotland to have a perception that this is their homeland or of shared identity with it. Sandra White made a good point about values. Soon I will be speaking in Chicago at a conference of expat Scottish communities. They ask, "When you get to the fourth or fifth generation, how do you retain a Scottish identity? How, when you're married to an Hispanic or a Filipino, do you retain that identity, apart from the blood link?" What they are focusing on is values. Whether they went to Canada, North America or Australia, the Scottish communities were driven by values: a belief in education that saw us contribute to the enlightenment; a belief in decency and integrity that made us hard-working, honest people; and a Protestant work ethic that even in Australia, I have discovered, applied as much to those who arrived in the convict ships as to those who went as free-travelling labourers or farmers. There is not just a Scottish identity or a Scottish ethnicity; there is such a thing as Scottish values, to which we should lay claim. There is a huge opportunity out there for us to turn ourselves from a nation of 5 million to a nation of 40 million to 80 million people who claim some identity and will offer some support. It is up to us to give those people respect and to recognise that they do not speak with funny accents. We should not laugh at them or knock their perceptions of us as being dressed garishly in kilts. They are our people, and we should recognise and respect them.

The committee inquiry was initiated at the request of the Road Haulage Association. I will comment on the road haulage sector in due course. The investigation was wide ranging and much of it is very welcome, but it is inadequate for us to say simply that some matters are reserved to Westminster and that there is little that can be done. That is not a union dividend but an on-going problem that compounds the agony for our freight sector. Some important issues emerged tangentially from the inquiry. We must address port policy, which has been touched on. As Mr Arbuckle indicated, consideration of the matter is long overdue and we must pick up and run with it here in Scotland. We are a nation that is almost surrounded by water and that includes islands and archipelago communities. We have a history of seafaring, never mind shipbuilding. It is somewhat perverse that we are concentrating on marine national parks and possibly fossilising many of our communities rather than on a port policy and strategy that will allow our society and economy to motor. When we hear evidence from the likes of Bill Burns at Clydeport about what can be done at  Hunterston or Scapa, we realise that there is an opportunity for Scotland to change from a peripheral country at the very extremity of Europe to a port of entry and embarkation. We must use that opportunity to our advantage, for example by turning Hunterston into the access port for Ireland and elsewhere. We have to pick up and run with that strategy. The strategy could be applied to other sectors, such as air freight. When we think about the tragedy of the Pan-Am bombing that brought down a plane over Lockerbie, it is sometimes forgotten that it neither took off from nor was due to land at a Scottish airport. It flew over Scottish territory because the natural route from North America to Europe is the great northern circle, which takes planes over Scotland. Iceland has used that to its benefit and Scotland has a huge air freight opportunity at Prestwick. I remember being told by Tom Wilson, the past chief executive of Prestwick airport, that it was faster to get freight to Slough by landing it at Prestwick rather than Heathrow because of the congestion and problems there. There is a clear advantage in developing not only our port policy but our air freight strategy to turn to our advantage our geography, which we have viewed as a disadvantage, and to take it from there. The Forth road bridge has been mentioned and will be again. It is of fundamental importance to the Scottish economy and to the road haulage sector. There is no discernible alternative. We have to be clear about the current situation. I have always supported the idea of a second bridge to carry westbound traffic, on the basis that the original bridge is salvageable, sustainable and capable of operating if we reduce the volume of traffic on it. I believe that that is possible, but we need to be certain that a second bridge will not be a replacement for the first—if it is, it will need to be a parallel bridge—but additional, to allow the first bridge to operate under the 100-year strategy that Mr Ballard mentioned. We would be neglecting our duty to the road haulage sector if we said that foreign drivers are only a slight problem, just because they contribute to our economy. As other members have said, clear evidence about the problems of road safety was presented on television and radio today. When I inquired about the use of speed cameras, I was told that more than 50 per cent of tickets issued on the A7 and the A1 are given to foreign drivers, who seem able to speed with impunity. We are not simply trying to cut down speed; we are trying to stop the carnage. I do not agree with the Confederation of British Industry that foreign drivers are adding to our economy; in fact, they undermine a vital part of it. The transport sector in Scotland is a huge  success story. Politicians in all parts of the chamber stand up to say how wonderful it is about the Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS, and so it is—we should be proud of them. Equally, in public transport, we have a worldwide success story in Stagecoach and FirstGroup plc. They not only provide transport infrastructure in Scotland, which we sometimes criticise—correctly; they punch well above their weight globally. We should praise that.

I am not going to get into deregulation. Of course we support those companies' successes, but we do not support deregulation. The haulage sector is a great success story for Scotland and haulage companies try hard in difficult circumstances. Drivers are sometimes perceived as actors in a Yorkie advert, but they do a difficult job in difficult circumstances, often on roads that leave a lot to be desired. They face unfair competition from abroad because of the difference in wage levels, the fuel that they are able to buy, the rates that they tender and the business that they can take. If we allow foreign competition to undermine Scottish haulage companies, we will lose good Scottish companies and replace them with a Trojan horse. In years to come, we will have to face the social and economic consequences on our roads and in our businesses. That is why we cannot simply say that these matters are reserved to Westminster. We have to act against unfair competition and support a Scottish success story.

Whether he was speaking from a sedentary position or not, Alex Johnstone is to be congratulated not simply on securing this debate but on giving a forceful exposition of the problems that arise from the carrying of knives, and of the tragedies that afflict not only those who suffer at the hands of the perpetrators of offences but the families whose lives are ruined. The perpetrators of the offences also face ruin, as Alex Johnstone pointed out.  It is useful that the debate has been secured by somebody who is not one of the usual suspects—either on account of his constituency or on account of speaking about his justice portfolio. For too long, many of us have lived under the delusion that knife crime is a west of Scotland phenomenon that grew up with the razor gangs and has never quite been shaken off. It is a problem that afflicts all Scotland. Gone are the days when people in the city of Edinburgh could look rather disparagingly along the M8 and say that knife crime is their problem, not ours. In recent weeks, tragedies in the city of Edinburgh have revealed the problems that Alex Johnstone and Mr Davies described. Not only the central belt is affected. As Alex Johnstone and Richard Baker said, there is an all-Scotland culture in which people—whether out of bravado or out of feeling that they need to defend themselves—feel that they have to carry a knife. Not only the cities and towns of the central belt are affected: rural areas are affected too. Knife offences now take place in Highland idylls where we thought such crimes would not be perpetrated, and where we thought people were safe to leave their doors unlocked and to walk the streets. We have to address that. This Parliament has shown consensus in fully supporting the efforts of the minister and the Executive to stamp out knife crime, which is a crime problem and a culture problem. As Alex Johnstone said, it affects us all. The Parliament has taken appropriate steps and the minister is to be congratulated on giving a clear and vociferous lead. We need strict enforcement by the police, and that is clearly happening: there is the detection of weapons using metal detectors, the work of the violence reduction unit, and the progress that has been made by Detective Chief Superintendent Carnochan and others. There has to be strict implementation by our sheriffs. This legislature is entitled to expect our sheriffs to show no mercy. It should be certain, unless there are exceptional circumstances, that if a person carries a knife they will go to jail—and that if they use a knife or weapon it is likely they will go to jail for a very long time. We expect our sheriffs to get that message and to implement it. This is a cultural problem, and education will be required. I was able only to read the handout that followed Mark Davies's lecture, but Alex Johnstone has reiterated the points today. A section of our youth are used to seeing how video games show the consequences of actions—if a knife is stuck in, it just comes out again and there is no real problem for the victim. That is not what happens. We have to make it clear that there will be real injuries and that people will suffer.  All society—not just politicians, policemen and sheriffs—has to deal with this problem. People have to report when others are carrying knives. Parents have to tell their children that it is simply unacceptable to carry knives. Neighbours have to be prepared to phone the authorities. As has been said in the chamber, that can be difficult in some areas, but the authorities can deal with reports on an anonymous and confidential basis. We have a major cultural problem. Strict enforcement is required, but education is required too. As Alex Johnstone correctly said, action from us all is required.

An independent judiciary is one of the pillars of our democracy. However, does the minister agree that members of the judiciary are also public servants who are paid out of public funds and are subject to the relevant legislative processes? No one would seek to impinge on their ultimate right to determine a sentence, but surely the Scottish Parliament also has the right to expect members of the judiciary to adhere to the broad sentencing guidelines that it has laid down for particular crimes? Does the minister also agree that the general behaviour of members of the judiciary should be subject to scrutiny without recourse to the nuclear option, which is the only option that is available to us at present?

The report is short, as is the debate, but it is focused. Dennis Canavan and all those who were involved in producing the report are to be commended for it. The debate has been consensual, which shows the level of support and the opportunities for us. To an extent, it is tragic that a variety of circumstances in recent and more distant history have resulted in our being where we are. Seeking to create a bilateral or tripartite situation is taken for granted in the nordic countries, the Benelux countries and the Baltic states. We are dealing with the issue belatedly. All those countries have had significant problems in the past. The  relationship between the Danes and the Swedes, never mind that between the Lithuanians and the Livonians, has been equally problematic, never mind the Dutch Republic and elsewhere. However, it is to our credit that we address the issue. As many members have said, co-operation is not simply about addressing our past and learning from it through social integration and supporting the peace process in Northern Ireland, but about the present and the future, because huge opportunities exist. We cannot change our geography—we are where we are. It is up to us to work with our neighbours. With the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland, we have not just the shared family histories on which many members have commented, but shared interests and similar community sizes and rural peripheralities. We must work at addressing those matters, so it is heartening that members throughout the chamber have supported the idea and that the minister is prepared to pick it up and run with it. Transport links are key. We should not underestimate the problems. To an extent, we in this country have taken for granted the North channel. We must realise what competition is coming. Anybody who has travelled via Holyhead or Swansea in recent years will be aware of the huge improvement in the infrastructure there. Unless we take steps to address the infrastructure in south-west Scotland, we may wake up one morning to find that transport goes through Holyhead and the M62 corridor rather than the more difficult but shorter sea journey across the North channel. We must take that on board and not take the North channel for granted. We must address the peace process. There is much ignorance in Scotland about our history, which we must examine. Huge opportunities exist. Given the constituency that he represents, the minister will be aware of discussions—I remember being involved with people who were participating in them—about the opportunities that would come from having a deep-sea port terminal at Hunterston. I was told that 70 per cent of containers to the Irish Republic—we envy the manufacturing base there and its exports—went through Rotterdam. Ports in Scotland should seek to access some of those opportunities. Another issue is marketing and how we promote ourselves, which I have come across recently. A huge marketing opportunity in the United States involves what is described as the Scots-Irish community there. To whom do those people belong? Are they Irish, Northern Irish or Scots? Rather than becoming involved in a turf war about who has the greatest claim to those people, we should co-operate.  The market in America is huge, because the Scots Irish are significant in American history. They include not just Presidents Andrew Jackson and Ulysses S Grant, but people who fell at the battle of the Alamo, such as Sam Houston from Armagh, Davy Crockett and Jim Bowie. Many such people were born in the north of Ireland or elsewhere on the island of Ireland, but they came ultimately from people who had left Scotland. We have a huge opportunity to co-operate on selling Scotland and, indeed, on selling visits to the Ulster American folk park, for example. We have our share in the Scots Irish. They started to depart from Northern Ireland after they had left Scotland, in the 17 th century. They started to leave when, shortly after his accession to the throne, King William III reneged on his commitment to the Presbyterian faith. Whatever people such as those with some sectarian predilections in Scotland may think, they had left and gone to the America before the Orange order was established. The Scots Irish offer another subject for co-operation on marketing. We wholly support the report and will work with the Executive and the minister in any way that we can to have it implemented.

The minister and other members were correct to point out the promotional opportunities that are offered by the celebration of St Andrew's day as a day for Scotland. As the First Minister commented when he spoke at the globalscot conference, it comes back to Scotland having self-confidence. It is about taking pride in our identity. Whatever Jamie Stone may say about St Andrew and our patron saint, let us remember that we live in a secular Scotland. The day may be built around our patron saint, but it is a celebration not so much of St Andrew but of what the day does to  identify Scottishness. There are good arguments for our patron saint to be Columba or Ninian, but it is St Andrew and we should celebrate him. Celebrating St Andrew's day, in Scotland or abroad, is done on a secular basis and to promote, support and maintain that Scottish identity. If we Scots do not take confidence in the day and celebrate it, how can we justify promoting it and using it as an opportunity to sell Scotland abroad? Indeed, considerable opportunities are open to the Irish diaspora in the celebration of St Pat's day. St Andrew's day is and has been celebrated. I believe that the Presiding Officer will be heading off to the 250 th anniversary dinner of the St Andrew's Society of the State of New York in November. That society is by no means the oldest St Andrew's society—the St Andrew's Society of Charleston was formed in 1729. Celebrations take place not just in Scotland, but around the globe. We are a small nation of 5 million people, yet there are 40 million to 80 million people around the world who claim some Scottish identity. We have an opportunity to bond with them and to get some benefits out of that global Scots identity, as was mentioned by Shiona Baird. The St Andrew's day opportunity has to be built upon. The Irish do the same thing successfully. We have to work at it and take it seriously here. We need to use the day as an opportunity not just to celebrate in whatever fashion we choose—many of the ideas that members from all round the chamber have expressed are perfectly sensible—but to go forth and speak with the Scottish diaspora. There are some problems in the United States, as the minister and others know. The proximity of St Andrew's day to thanksgiving day causes problems in the US, but that is not insurmountable, as the St Andrew's Society of the State of New York and organisations elsewhere have shown. It is certainly not an impediment in Sydney, where not only is St Andrew's day celebrated but the Scottish Australian Heritage Council builds a whole Scottish week around it. When the Irish reach St Patrick's day, they ensure that a minister speaks to the Irish community, and indeed to every community in Australia, about the benefits of Irishness and the things that modern Ireland has, as well as making the link with what went on in the past. St Andrew's day is an opportunity for us in Scotland to do the same. It is not simply about celebrating the day at home; it should be about taking confidence in being Scottish, rather than defining ourselves as not being English or anything else. It gives us the opportunity to go forth and sell Scotland as a modern, contemporary society and to link up with Scottish communities abroad, many of which have held on to a strong  Scottish identity despite Scotland having given them remarkably little. I fully support what Dennis Canavan has done—and, to its credit, what the Executive has done, albeit belatedly—to reach this stage. We need to celebrate St Andrew's day at home, but it is also a huge opportunity abroad.

The minister is correct to say that immediate action needs to be taken to protect communities from appalling behaviour. However, we need to ensure that there is a long-term solution, rather than simply a short-term fix. What steps are taken at roadshows and elsewhere to ensure that, after an antisocial behaviour order has been granted, steps are taken to tackle hard-core youth unemployment, poor facilities and a lack of opportunities for personal and social development?

This has been a wide-ranging debate, as is understandable given the breadth of provisions in the bill and the number of different matters that it deals with. That has been demonstrated by the variety of members' speeches. It is important to remember just what we are debating. After all, stage 1 is about the general principles of the bill. There might be matters on which we have slight disagreements, but they can be addressed with amendments. We need to examine the bill in the round. We are dealing with the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill, which seeks not to turn Scottish justice on its head but to fine-tune and improve it. I do not believe that we are undermining any of the fundamental principles or tenets of Scots law, which remain sacrosanct. We often knock the legal system, but the general principles of the law of Scotland have served, and continue to serve, us well. In the 21 st century, our society, economy and judiciary have all changed and we must address those changes. That is why, as Stewart Stevenson said, we will be constructively critical. Our view is that the bill is to be supported. It would be to the  detriment of the legal system and Scottish society if we were to make the bill a political football. We should seek to work out the details; the bill's provisions will be important not just for one term of Government, but for the next 10 or 15 years—or probably the next 20 to 25 years—so we should try to get them right. The minister and other members have mentioned issues concerning bail. Phil Gallie's mention of the ECHR was spurious, because all that the ECHR did was to give people the right to make applications for bail; its adoption did not mean that bail would always be granted. Even in the past, when bail was precluded for offences such as murder, there were instances when people who had been charged with murder got bail. I was a lawyer in private practice and I remember appearing for people who had been charged with murder, some of whom had got bail. We are addressing serious concerns among the public that bail is being granted far too easily to people who have committed serious offences. The necessary changes that are provided for in the bill, as well as those that the Minister for Justice said will be contained in amendments, are to be welcomed. The minister is quite correct about fines. The public are fed up with a fine being imposed only for individuals to cock a snook at society. Bill Aitken's points on that have some justification. If people cannot afford a certain monetary penalty, we must ensure that they do not have that monetary penalty imposed upon them. However, even if people are on benefits or are poor, there are methods by which they can pay at a very low rate. If a fine is imposed upon someone in those circumstances, I would say that they have breached the rules that our society expects, that their behaviour has been unacceptable and that it is simply unacceptable for them to think that they can get away without paying their fine. We therefore fully support the steps that are being taken in that respect. That is not simply to satisfy the public, but because it is frankly barking that resources, in terms of police and court time, are taken up in that way. We have only one caveat. Our view is that the sheriff officer system works well—Tommy Sheridan is not in the chamber, but I know that he takes a different view of that profession. I can understand the concerns that the Minister for Justice might have about costs, but my view is that the matter must be capable of negotiation. Sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms already have a system up and running. We would not always expect them to operate according to the same table of fees that they use for other charges. Sheriff officers have served Scottish justice well and, whatever Mr Sheridan's view of them is,  when they have sought to get children back from a father who has taken them without the mother's consent, or when they have served interdicts because somebody has been knocking nine bells out of the wife, they are doing a good job and they should not be vilified. The Executive's position in that regard is to be supported, although I ask ministers to reconsider how we might avoid reinventing the wheel by creating a new institution when one already exists and works—we can take it from there. We fully support the powers for fiscal fines, fiscal compensation orders and work orders. One member—I think that it was Bill Aitken, although I am not sure whether I am misquoting him—expressed concern about the Procurator Fiscal Service. We must remember that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is not simply a prosecution service. That is why it deals with fatal accident inquiries and a variety of other matters. There is certainly a problem in the United States, where the way in which the district attorney operates makes him judge and jury; that can be an abuse of rights. There are circumstances in which that could happen in Scotland, unless we ensure that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service acts not simply as a prosecutor, but in the public interest. Obviously, there are clear paradoxes, to which Mr Fox alluded, in terms of whether it would act as judge and jury. However, we should accept the Procurator Fiscal Service as it is and maintain its ethos that it is there not simply to prosecute, but to act in the public interest. My experience of procurators fiscal is that if they are aware that an officer has lied, they immediately move that there be no further proceedings and seek to take steps. If they believe that something untoward has happened, they do not simply take the adversarial approach that they must win at all costs, but acknowledge that they have a duty to the court and the Scottish public. We will have to monitor the situation. My only political point would be that, if we are going to go down this route, the Solicitor General for Scotland and the Lord Advocate should not really be political figures. The Lord Advocate, as Scotland's senior law officer, should not be in the Cabinet, but should be entirely distinct and should represent the legal system. The issue of intermediate diets has to be dealt with. To some extent, that is not a matter for the Executive. The Parliament is seeking to create the framework for better proceedings and a simplified system. Intermediate diets and the other proposed court changes will not work unless they are implemented properly in practice. The theory and the legislative process that we are laying down are correct, but sheriffs have an obligation to start  making intermediate diets and other such things work. The same point applies in relation to agreeing uncontroversial evidence. There must come a time when a sheriff takes a hands-on approach. They cannot simply ask whether the parties are ready and then proceed to trial, but should ask why parties want to call certain witnesses. Valuable police time is being taken up by officers being cited to appear at court because the defence agent might or might not want to challenge their evidence. The challenge is likely to be, "I put it to you, officer, that what you said is not true." The officer then replies, "No, sir. It is correct." He then sits down and is asked no further questions. The sheriff must be able to work that out by taking a much more hands-on approach at the intermediate diet. In the bill, as in previous legislation, we are giving sheriffs the power to be a bit more directive. We pay them substantially. We will retain their independence; every member, of whatever political colour, recognises that that is important. Sheriffs must be more hands-on and must start trying to drive cases forward. Earlier this week, Lord Cullen made valid points on that, with which I agree. There has to be a quid pro quo. If sheriffs want their independence to be preserved, which we accept, they have to start delivering under the new procedure that we are introducing. The new criminal procedure will be there for them; we hope that they will implement it.

Does the minister not accept that culpable homicide and manslaughter are not simply different names north and south of the border but are fundamentally different in many ways? In those circumstances, while it may be better than nothing for the matter to be addressed through Westminster, it would be far better to support Ms Gillon. Will the minister not  commit to supporting Ms Gillon's bill, particularly in the light of Ms Gillon's remark about the cross-party support for a specific Scottish act, which is long overdue, to deal with the matter?

I concur with a great deal of what the minister has said. It is important to put on record at the outset that Scotland has been well served by its legal system and its legal profession. This is the 21 st century and we need to deal with the changed society that now exists, but we must recognise that our legal system has served us well for hundreds of years. It has had its faults and it still has its quirks, but in the main it has been good for us and we should take pride in it. The legal profession is often disparaged and an influx of comedy from the United States seems to have made it the butt of all jokes, but it is a profession in which I was happy to serve for many years. The legal profession in Scotland has had a few rogues and has made mistakes on occasion, but in the main it has served us well. People in the profession do a good job, regardless of the capacity in which they are operating, and Scotland benefits from them. That should not be forgotten. However, the minister is correct to say that we live in a changed society. People have different expectations and we must change with the times. The question of complaints, in particular, has caused a great deal of angst. Previous committees, as well as the Justice 2 Committee, which is considering the bill, have addressed that issue. At one stage, the Law Society resisted change in the handling of complaints, but it now correctly accepts that that is required. I accept that in most instances the Law Society acted fairly and that people received good treatment, but there was a perception that that was not the case. Justice not only needs to be done, it needs to be seen to be done. The general public did not believe that they were well served when making complaints against solicitors, so change had to  take place, irrespective of what was happening. We should welcome the fact that the Scottish Legal Aid Board has decided to deal with the issue in conjunction with the Executive, instead of being dragged along kicking and screaming. We must work together. I return to some points that were made yesterday about the role of the Opposition in the chamber. The Parliament is obliged to get the law right in this area. The minister is correct to say that we are trying to update the organisation of the legal profession. There are aspects of legal aid, both civil and criminal, that need to be addressed in the 21 st century, and we intend to work with the Executive on those. We support the general principles of the bill. Some matters have been raised with us by the Law Society and other organisations, all of which will doubtless have lobbied the minister in the first instance before turning to us. The minister has addressed some of those points and we welcome the fact that he has taken them on board. There are other matters on which we think action needs to be taken. The minister is correct to pay tribute to the Justice 2 Committee for its work, because it has given a great deal of consideration to those matters. It is important that we try to get right legislation that is not simply for the next four years or for the term of the Lib-Lab Executive but which creates a framework for the handling of complaints and for aspects of the operation of legal aid that will serve us for some time. There are some matters of concern. We hope that the issue of the independence of members of the commission will be addressed to some extent by the concessions that the Executive has made and the amendments that it intends to lodge. Doubtless we will receive responses from others if they do not think that the changes are adequate. We can deal with those responses at that time. It was appropriate for the Justice 2 Committee to raise the issue of who pays, as it has been of great concern to firms and members of the profession. It is iniquitous that if a complaint against an individual is not upheld, they should be required to pay. That is a sword of Damocles hanging over people. Solicitors will have problems paying for the operation and administration of the system and there will be no alternative for the profession but to meet the cost. However, what has been proposed is iniquitous and we hope that it will be addressed. Distinguishing between service, conduct and negligence complaints is difficult and the subject was scrutinised intensely by the committee. In instances of overlap there will be times when the wisdom of Solomon will be required. Our position is that conduct, service and negligence complaints should be separated and we are glad that the  Executive accepts that principle. However, there will be times when we will be required to leave it up to those who are entrusted with operating the system to use their common sense to try to work out some practicalities. We cannot provide for every scenario in legislation. We welcome the announcements about the provision of legal aid both in the bill and in the minister's speech today because it is a growing problem that we must address. We in Scotland must try to reach a consensual view on the matter; otherwise we will sleepwalk into disaster. We already have problems with the availability of dentists in this country, not simply in rural areas but in housing schemes and other areas in urban Scotland. There is a danger that we will wake up one day to find that there are no criminal or civil lawyers in rural parts of Scotland or in other areas, unless we make some changes. That is not to say that the changes will be easy or simple and we have a great deal of sympathy with the Executive. The proposal to transfer of legal aid in solemn proceedings to the Scottish Legal Aid Board is appropriate. The current system causes a great deal of angst among the general public because of the almost automatic provision of full legal aid to someone facing a serious criminal charge; there is no scrutiny of their income and they do not have to make any contribution. At the same time, the lady separated from her husband after a lifetime of domestic violence, trying to keep the children warm, clothed, fed and housed, faces a substantial bill. That is manifestly unjust and needs to be addressed. There is no simple way of charging and we need to provide for those who currently lose out. That problem cannot be addressed in the bill alone, however—at some stage, we have to consider the provision of services, although the minister is correctly tackling the issue by extending the scope of the bill to civil assistance. The final thing that we must do was the subject of a written answer that I received yesterday. Although I appreciate how such a situation has occurred, those who do important work that can be dealt with only by qualified solicitors must be properly paid and not have to make up their complaints levy by doing marginal work such as photocopying and taking statements. When the Executive instructs a private firm of solicitors and a trainee or paralegal is paid at a higher rate than a legal aid lawyer defending in a terrorism or murder trial, there is something wrong. That must be tackled and cannot be addressed in the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill alone. However, we support the general principles of the bill and will work happily with the Executive to try to get things right for the 21 st century.

This has been a wide-ranging debate, in which there have been many excellent speeches from individuals on the front and back benches and in particular, as Robin Harper mentioned, from Susan Deacon. I agree with a lot of what she said. As she knows, I agree with her that many matters need to be dealt with on a much more consensual basis. Like my colleague Shona Robison—our opposition to the Tories is quite clear—I do not believe that we should subscribe to opposition for opposition's sake. Perhaps the Tory front bench in Holyrood disagrees with David Cameron and subscribes to the Tories' irredentist tendency that regrets the apology for opposing the African National Congress and perhaps even opposes Nelson Mandela's liberation. However, we believe that there are times when Opposition parties need to be constructive. Where I differ from Susan Deacon is that I believe that there are debates in the Parliament that are not just procedural but are about where we come from. Just as we have an official opening, there are times in the political calendar when we need to consider not simply the practicalities and the individual sections and subsections that are before us but the bigger picture. This is one of those debates. As this debate is about Scotland's future, it must move on from the consensus politics that is sometimes required and return to politics as a contact sport, which politics remains in some instances. It is important that we have set-piece debates such as this, because we are at that juncture in our parliamentary session when we are looking towards the next election and parties are beginning to finalise matters. That has a downside, but it also has an important aspect and it is part of democracy, because the elections next year will be fundamental for what will happen in the four years after that. The debate gives the Government and the First Minister an opportunity to lay out their stall and it gives the Opposition the opportunity to do likewise. It is a matter of saying not only where we are going but where we have come from. It is not just about what the Government is pledging to deliver but about what it has in fact delivered while in office. That is where we believe that the Liberal-Labour Executive has been found wanting, because it has failed on many accounts in its ambitions and in practice. Despite the First Minister's mantra of doing less better, to some extent the Government  has failed to do less and it has most certainly not done better. As we have just come back to Parliament, it is also important for us to make reference to village Holyrood and to the fact that the Parliament cannot live in isolation. There is a bigger picture out there and it is absurd that the First Minister is not prepared to put on record what his position is vis-à-vis the Prime Minister. Even as today's debate has gone on, newsletters and news items have been released about further resignations of parliamentary private secretaries and ministers in the Labour Government down south. The future of Blair will not only have an impact on the election in Scotland next year; it is having an impact on Scotland at this very moment. We expect the First Minister to say whether he supports Tony Blair and whether he will be siding with Gordon Brown when he comes up to Scotland looking for support in his challenge for the leadership, the nuclear option for the resignation apparently having been set by him and his cronies. We need to know, otherwise there will be a hiatus in Scottish politics because we will be trying to get on with the work rate here while having no control over the huge impact of the destabilisation caused by the civil war and fratricide in the Labour Government. What of the future laid out by the First Minister? He majored on child poverty. Of course it is important that we address child poverty, which scars and blights Scotland and which is fundamentally wrong. Those in my age group can remember signing up for the SNP when we saw poverty in a land that had newly discovered oil and thought that it was a tragedy. If that is the First Minister's future, let us get real. I am not a betting man, but I wager that not one political party will go into the election next year calling for an increase in child poverty or to make it worse. I also hazard a guess that there has never been a political party, or indeed a parliamentary candidate in any country in the world, that has stood on a mantra or an election platform of making child poverty worse. If that is the height of the First Minister's ambition, he is simply giving us more rhetoric with little action, when what we need to do is address the matter.

Not at the moment. By next May, Labour will have been in power for 10 years and, as Margo MacDonald pointed out, we will have had the union for 300 years. It is time for a change, because Labour has failed and the union, as she pointed out, is not working in Scotland's interest. She capably answered Bristow Muldoon's question, "What about Ireland?" The fact is that Ireland is a member of the European  Union. That changes everything in terms of the Irish economy and in terms of our opportunity.

The Irish Free State was not a member of the European Union, as Bristow Muldoon would know if he had listened to Ms MacDonald. She will view this as the political black spot from me but, in her excellent speech, which was roundly applauded by SNP members, she pointed out the significant change that has occurred in international alliances and international trade. We signed up in 1707 because we needed access to the North American colonies; otherwise, Glasgow would not have become the city that it became. We are now in the World Trade Organisation and the European Union, in a world where we are moving towards fewer currencies, not more. We do not need to be part of Great Britain. We can get better benefits by being an independent nation, as Ireland and other nations have proved.

The First Minister is well aware that we support membership of the euro. We believe that if Scotland goes in at the right rate, it will be beneficial. That is something that is supported overwhelmingly by the business community—[ Interruption. ]

I am baffled as to why the First Minister had to ask that question, but his position—[ Interruption. ]

Doubtless the Deputy First Minister can talk about his position. The First Minister trumpeted the number of visitors as a success. I will highlight why we need constitutional change. Edinburgh has done remarkably well and I am immensely proud to live in this city, but we should be doing much better. We should be competing with the likes of Ireland, which outperforms us in tourism and in the economy. We should be allowing other areas to prosper in addition to the Condé Nast celebrity areas of Edinburgh and Glasgow. Why do they not do so? That is because of the high pound, high VAT and high fuel taxes. We are struggling on almost every one of those issues and must address them. The First Minister mentioned the security challenge. He is right to say that we live in  troubled times. I acknowledge that there are restrictions on the Parliament but, as Robin Harper and others mentioned, over the summer the Parliament and the country had to put up with weapons being landed on our soil on their way to the crisis in the middle east. We regret bitterly what is happening in the middle east. Nobody is suggesting that Scotland can intercede and stop the war between Lebanon and Israel, but we should not be fuelling one side by allowing our airports to be used as munition-ways to one particular side. The Government of the Republic of Ireland, whose economy and outlook Mr McConnell denigrates, took a stand that the Irish people signed up to. Mr McConnell not only allowed our laws to be broken by allowing those weapons to be brought in, but went against the very values that the people of Scotland sign up to, which is that we oppose fuelling war and allowing devastation and destruction to take place. That is why the future of Scotland is not with Mr McConnell but with the Scottish National Party. We look forward to the next election. [ Applause. ]

I am grateful to the minister for outlining matters fully. He can rest assured that the Scottish National Party will give him full support in seeking to address the manifest injustice that has arisen. We are grateful for the Executive's prompt and speedy actions. It sometimes baffles members of the public that law is not necessarily justice. In the main, we hope that our law serves justice but, unfortunately, there are instances when the law is simply the interpretation of rules and the implementation of decisions and manifest injustices arise. In those instances, it is necessary for the legislator to change the law to ensure that justice is served. I believe that the decision in Barker v Corus was a wrong judgment. The argument over a supreme court is a matter for another day, but I note that the Scottish law lord took a distinctive view. However, the Barker decision was wrong and that has to be addressed by legislating. In these circumstances, we will fully support the Executive in whatever action is easiest, whether it is through Westminster or through a special damages bill. What matters is that we remedy the wrong. The number of people affected is not substantial, which is something to be thankful for. However, what they are afflicted with is, as the  minister said, a dreadful, life-taking disease. Those who suffer from the disease face an invidious choice. Should they seek to obtain some quick recompense so that they can enjoy the last part of their shortened lives, or should they await death restricted in their ability to work and to earn income, so that their families can obtain greater benefit when they have passed? That is an invidious and dreadful choice and we must ensure that that situation is addressed. The minister also mentioned the difficulties of pursuing compensation. Although many of the situations that caused the disease arose through ignorance rather than any wilful act on the part of an employer, it is quite clear that some companies were, frankly, at it. Anybody who has been involved in compensation claims, as I was when I practised many years ago, will know how difficult it is to pursue companies for compensation. A company called Cape Contracts, for example, used various nomenclatures, such as Cape Contracts Ltd and Cape Contracts (UK) Ltd. Those companies knew what they were doing. They were deliberately trying to avoid the liabilities that they knew were being garnered. It may be that the instances of asbestosis that arose were not deliberately created, but the companies knew later that liability was going to befall them and, whether on the advice of their lawyers, their accountants or their company secretaries, they took steps to try to ensure that they would not have to meet their lawful obligations. It is important that we, as the legislature in Scotland, ensure not only that sufferers do not face the invidious choice whether to claim compensation to benefit them in their last days or to wait so that their families will get a greater benefit when they have passed on, but that we address the issue of companies that are liable and of insurers that were happy to take the premiums when they were being paid but thereafter sought to avoid the consequent liabilities. SNP members are grateful to the minister and to the UK Government; we recognise its actions and we do not care who sorts it out as long as it is sorted. We are also grateful to those who have pursued the matter with tenacity: Clydeside Action on Asbestos; Frank Maguire and all at Thompsons Solicitors; Des McNulty, who picked up the matter when the difficulty arose; and the minister and his colleagues, who have acted speedily and effectively. I know that other members who have been involved with the issue will want to speak about local matters, so I will not say anything further, other than that we are grateful that the Executive has dealt with the matter with due alacrity and that the minister can rest assured that he has our full support.

This has been a wide-ranging debate. It is on a narrow issue, but one that is part of a wider generic topic. Many members gave credit to the industry and put that on the record. As we approach the recess and people, including me, prepare to depart on their travels, we sometimes forget what we have in Scotland. We have the unparalleled beauty and the amenities that many members mentioned, but we also have remarkably good service. As many members said, the Scottish tourism industry has improved remarkably. There is a self-deprecating aspect to the Scottish character that can be charming and endearing, but sometimes it can go too far. We often hear apocryphal tales about bad service, such as somebody being refused tea at 7.30 pm in Aviemore or wherever. In fact, whether in a chip shop in Gourock or a five-star establishment in Edinburgh or Glasgow, remarkably good service is the norm. There are instances of poor service, but they happen worldwide. We should praise the industry, not just for what it contributes to the Scottish economy, but for the fact that it has improved remarkably and is still improving. Jim Wallace's comments were appropriate. There are career opportunities and career paths in tourism. There has to be a change of attitude in Scotland that service is not servility. Whether that is being changed by the attitudes of those in the industry or by Aussie backpackers working in bars here, who have created a sense of glamour and a sense that such careers are things that people can  go into and enjoy, things have changed remarkably and we should pay tribute to that. It could be argued that today's debate is almost a debate on subordinate legislation, but we understand why primary legislation is required. The changes that are made by the bill might be part of a tidying-up process, as my colleague Brian Adam said, but they have to be made. Not all debates in the chamber can be on strategic matters; some have to deal with the minutiae and address structural matters. We are happy to support the bill. There was considerable delay with the ATBs going through. We sometimes look back at the halcyon days, but let us not delude ourselves. Many ATBs worked remarkably well—we in Edinburgh and the Lothians were well served—but other ATBs had difficulties that were not simply financial and they did not manage to achieve everything that they needed to. There were difficulties with getting people to sign up for what they perceived to be a state responsibility, and I had a great deal of sympathy with that. There were also difficulties when we expected people—whether they were electricians or hoteliers—to join together. There was not necessarily a configuration of interests. It is important that we tidy things up. To some extent, the question of the name is a tautological matter. I have never been particularly sold on the name "VisitScotland", but it is the name that we have and I see no point in seeking to rebrand the body. I have debated that point with others in my party. Whether the body is called "VisitScotland", "Welcome to Scotland" or "Come to Scotland", what matters is what it does.

Absolutely. The tourism industry in Scotland needs to be supported and assisted in how it trains staff and provides services, but it is doing a remarkably good job itself and the private sector is delivering those things, aided and abetted by colleges, the Executive and the civil service at both national and local level. Fundamentally, we have to make Scotland affordable and accessible. To give credit where it is due, the work on opening up new air links has been appropriate. We have a problem with the exchange rate, which makes this country outrageously expensive for most tourists from other countries. Until that can be addressed, we will have a problem, although concentrating on niche markets is important.  We must remember that it is not VisitScotland's role to compete within Scotland. It is up to individual areas to sell their wares as they can, whether it is Christine Grahame promoting the outdoor facilities that are available in the Borders or Charlie Gordon orating the benefits of the city of Glasgow, with its marvellous architecture. At the end of the day, VisitScotland's job is to get people to come to Scotland. Where they go thereafter depends on the attempts to persuade them of the benefits of each area and on what type of holiday they want. We live in a globalised world, so we have to tailor things to suit people. We cannot simply say, "Come to Edinburgh because of its wonderful castle." People can pick and choose from a variety of castles throughout the world, including those in the Czech Republic and the Baltic states. We have to give people a specific reason to go to the destination.

Scotland offers good value for many of the golfers who come here and I welcome the fact that they come in on the Ryanair flights and other new flights. However, we remain a remarkably high-cost destination, whether that is due to the high pound, high VAT or high fuel costs. The cost of a hotel room in the city of Edinburgh—and indeed in Ayrshire—is significantly higher than one would pay in the United States or mainland Europe. That factor is beyond our control, but it impinges on Scottish tourism. Mr Gallie shakes his head, but if he speaks to those in the sector, they will tell him that they have to try to sell a high-cost product. They are selling it well and, correctly, they are going up-market to try to make sure that they get the best value, but the cost is an impediment. People can get the same product in some areas in Ireland at a considerably lower cost. As I say, that is beyond our control but the issue must be addressed. An element of local accountability is required—other members, including Mr Gallie, have touched on that—but the nature of the beast is that some centralisation is also required if we want VisitScotland to sell Scotland in the international market. However, we must take cognisance of individuals' views and of the relationships and rapport that existed with many local tourist boards. VisitScotland must do better at that; in the areas in which I am involved, the rapport that existed with the then Edinburgh and Lothians Tourist Board has not been created with VisitScotland's regional office in the city of Edinburgh. That may be down to personalities, but it must be addressed.  As for niche markets, it might not have been best for some tourist boards to take responsibility for cruise liners and others to take responsibility for teaching English as a foreign language, which is important in Edinburgh, but we must ensure that those markets are picked up, although it is accepted that they are non-core. VisitScotland has a responsibility to promote Scotland as a cruise-liner destination and as a place in which to learn the English language, because those features add value to simply targeting the core market in the low countries, France, Germany and North America. That must be addressed. Perhaps that is being done, although I am not aware that it is and elements of the sector have complained to me about that. The issue can be overcome. As I and others have said, we in this country too often see the glass as half empty rather than half full. We have a fantastic product and our industry is doing well and can do better, despite the difficulties with matters that are beyond its control. However, as I said, this debate is about tidying up that must be done. Wider-ranging debates are for the future.

I thank Margaret Smith for lodging her motion. The Royal Victoria hospital site is an important issue not simply because of the services that are provided there but because of the site itself. The member was right to say that it is appropriate not to be too prescriptive. It is fair to say that, although we are not dealing with a moving situation, matters have still to be resolved. To an extent, all that we can do is lay down parameters. The latter part of the motion causes the Scottish National Party no concern and we fully support it. However, we think that much of the first part concerns changes that we wish to see or is perhaps a simple wish list. We hope that parking issues and other arrangements will be resolved; only time will tell whether that works out. Similarly, we require to be assured that the Western general hospital can cope with the changes. I will make two points at the outset about the Royal Victoria hospital. As Margaret Smith said, it is to an extent an institution in Edinburgh. I do not recollect the time when it was a TB hospital, either, but I have visited relatives who were in-patients at the hospital. Whatever the problems with bricks and mortar—to which Margaret Smith was correct to testify—which mean that the buildings are rather dilapidated and lack fitness for purpose, the hospital has served the community well. The hospital's staff have given great support and sterling service to many elderly people in Edinburgh. The hospital's location in Edinburgh is helpful for many who go there. It is in an area that has been easy to access by bus, which is important when we are dealing with elderly patients whose spouses want to visit them or whose friends want to maintain contact. Edinburgh royal infirmary was relocated to a site for which transport is a significant problem, but the Royal Victoria site does not suffer that problem, as it is slap-bang in the heart of not only the north, but the west of Edinburgh. It is exceedingly central; that must be maintained. The Royal Victoria site is extremely sensitive. Great pressures exist for housing in Edinburgh and great pressures are on the health board. It is not rocket science to join the dots and realise that some sites can be viewed as cash assets. However, the site should be used first and foremost for the benefit of patients and not simply as a way to obtain ready cash. As I said, the situation is developing. Margaret Smith was correct to lay down parameters on where we wish the health board to go. The matter will have to be debated in the city of Edinburgh and its environs and not simply in the pages of the  Edinburgh Evening News . We must make some clear commitments. The first is that the site should be maintained as a hospital site because of the sterling service that has been given, its location and the fact that other options are not necessarily beneficial. However, we accept that some change is required and that the bricks and mortar are unfit. Secondly, the site and its facilities should remain pivotal to the city. Changes that would move away from that would be detrimental to the area. I pay tribute to Margaret Smith for lodging her motion. The situation will require to be monitored. We must give those in the health board and elsewhere some parameters, but we should remember that the site has served us well in years gone by—patients and staff will testify to that. We must ensure that it will continue to serve Edinburgh and its citizens in years to come.

The debate has been consensual, which is appropriate in the circumstances. The minister and her team are to be commended for acting expeditiously, as numerous members mentioned in the stage 1 proceedings. We had hoped that we would not have to do this and it is a matter of regret, not simply for those of us who have had to deal with the emergency bill but, doubtless, for Lord Hamilton, who has been unable to exercise the office that might have been the pinnacle of his career. It can only be hoped that he will, at some stage, be able to serve out some tenure as Lord President. The civil service teams are to be congratulated. They are sometimes the butt of criticism—not simply from me, but from other members—but they have acted expeditiously to ensure that the administration of Scottish justice continues. The need not only for an emergency bill, but for a broader discussion on the importance of the judiciary has been recognised. The judiciary is another section of our society that is sometimes the butt of criticism, but all parties have acknowledged the importance not only of judicial impartiality and independence, but of the judiciary as individuals. We require a sound legal system. Scotland's legal system and its law have served us well throughout the centuries and will continue to do so. I am grateful for the minister's forbearance in  some of the earlier discussions. We have had an opportunity to air matters and debate them, although not all bases can be covered in emergency legislation, nor should they be. The bill constitutes recognition of the importance to Scotland not only of the judiciary but of the Parliament; we would have had difficulty in dealing with the situation had we simply been legislating at Westminster without a Scottish Parliament to deal with such matters. I commend the bill to the Parliament and thank the minister and her team for dealing with the matter expeditiously and appropriately.

The debate has been consensual, which shows that members realise the importance of having an independent judiciary. We may disagree on aspects of our society or on how we operate our economy, but we accept that the independence of the judiciary transcends party politics. Bill Aitken and Gordon Jackson made significant comments on that. The minister has clearly made certain that that independence will not be altered, as her speech, on which Gordon Jackson commented, and the bill show. We will have on-going debates in the Parliament about more specific matters, but the bill does not impinge on those issues. I was struck by Gordon Jackson's comment about the requirement for the civil servants who deal with the judiciary to be independent. His comment about the Parliament's situation was apposite. We would be appalled if our parliamentary staff were simply an adjunct to the civil service in Victoria Quay. I recall meeting one of the founding fathers of the Republic of Estonia and asking what advice he could give Scotland. He said that we should get control of our civil service because, if the civil service in the former Soviet republic of Estonia had not been prepared to stand independently, Estonia would now be part of the Russian Federation. An independent civil service is important for any body or country. Gordon Jackson's comments about the civil service for the judiciary are important—it should be given the flexibility to look after what we all acknowledge is a body that must be separate from and above politics. We commend the Executive for moving swiftly on the issue since the First Minister addressed the matter in a statement to the Parliament. The unforeseen circumstance that we are in is to be regretted, most of all by Lord Hamilton, who was promoted to an office to which he had doubtless aspired for some time but in which he has regrettably been unable to serve in recent times. I hope that he will be able to return to his office, but we must ensure that the administration of justice continues. The Executive is correct to use the opportunity that the bill provides to cover a few other circumstances that may occur. As I said earlier, we cannot legislate for all unforeseen circumstances, but when some arise, it is appropriate to take cognisance of other circumstances that may occur. We give our full support to the Executive on the bill.

I thank the minister for her eloquent explanation of the bill. The Scottish National Party fully supports the action that the Executive has taken. Some things in life and in legislation cannot be foreseen; they simply happen. Some situations could be surmised, but if that were always done, we would legislate daily for issues that might never arise and the Parliament would be unable to get on with its day-to-day business. The situation is rather unfortunate. Perhaps we have simply been fortunate in the past. Given the history of the office of Lord President and the actions of some of their lordships in years gone by, perhaps it is simply by the grace of God that such a situation has not arisen before. However, it has now arisen, which is unfortunate for Lord Hamilton and his family and for the administration of justice, and we require to address it. Legislation is needed expeditiously, so we fully support the Executive's action to take the appropriate steps. The consultation that would normally happen on a bill could not take place, but full consultation has taken place and no suggestion is made that any political party or, more appropriately, anybody who is on or involved in the judicial bench feels aggrieved or has had no opportunity to participate. As I said, speed is of the essence. The circumstances have arisen and it is important to keep the show on the road. To an extent, we have had a similar experience in our day-to-day lives in the Parliament with the beam incident and the problems that arose from that. It is essential that the administration of justice continues, just as the administration of the Parliament and the functioning of the legislature continued because expeditious action was taken. In the circumstances, we are more than happy fully to support the Executive's action and the bill.

I thank the Solicitor General for the prior briefing and the courtesy copy of her statement. On the Scottish National Party's behalf, I welcome the efforts of her, the Lord Advocate and others in the Executive to address this most serious issue. As she said, rape and sexual offences are a considerable  concern, not simply because they are vile offences, but because of the difficulties that are narrated in the conviction rates. Those rates do not tell the whole story, but they testify and perhaps point to an underlying problem. The changes to the methods of prosecution are welcome but, as the Solicitor General was right to say, difficulties will require to be dealt with through legislative changes that will need to take place and by addressing cultural attitudes that have shifted but which the law and those who require to enforce it have not recognised. Will the Solicitor General say where we stand on matters that she or any of her colleagues is dealing with in relation to proposed legislative changes, although they are not part of her remit? What information is being sought on societal or psychological issues? We welcome the enhanced role for specialist procurator fiscals in dealing directly with the police at the outset of cases. Will that involve a synergy with existing specialist units in the police or will contact be broadened in some cases to deal with other elements of criminal investigation departments or uniformed branches?

I thank the minister for that and I thank the bill team and the Deputy Minister for Justice for taking the bill through Parliament. I do not wish to rehearse earlier arguments, on DNA retention, which was introduced into the bill by Mr Martin's amendments, because our position is clear—we oppose it. However, we recognise that there is a great deal more in the bill that unites us, so I will concentrate not on matters about which we made our point during stage 3 and to which we will no doubt return as the election approaches, but on matters that unite us, on which there has been a great deal of consensus. As Bill Butler and others said, we must address changing circumstances and problems. To some extent, the bill is consolidating legislation. It provides for a variety of measures, some of which are new and some of which add to or amend existing provisions. We welcome and are happy to support most of the bill's provisions, apart from the  few matters about which we disagree. For example, the establishment of the Scottish police services authority seems to be sensible. Jackie Baillie and John Swinney commented on the fact that, for a small country, Scotland seems to have a lot of organisations, and it seems sensible to review the organisations that we have. We must balance local accountability for the police, which people want, with the economies of scale that go with living in a small country, and it is sensible to strike that balance by developing shared and joint services, if that is possible. The days when police officers in Whitburn and Harthill wore different uniforms and were dealt with by separate departments are gone. That situation was ridiculous, and we must move on. The Executive is to be credited with addressing the problem. The Scottish crime and drug enforcement agency is necessary. We live in a global economy, which brings with it global crime. The amounts of money that are at stake mean that criminals are much more sophisticated. The new methods and technologies that benefit the forces of law and order are being used by violent criminals to undermine the law, and we must address new and sophisticated criminal gangs. That is not an indictment of our current police service, which serves us well, but a recognition that some criminal activity is highly sophisticated and must be tackled by professional resources using different skills from those of the beat bobbies and community officers who are essential for our society. We therefore support the SCDEA. Similarly, we welcome the establishment of the police complaints commissioner for Scotland. Although I would not go as far as to say that the police complaints system has been a running sore, it has generated discontent. The approach does not go as far as some people would like, but it has won the support of people who opposed it when it was first proposed, so we should support and welcome it. We welcome the approach to banning orders. Many members, from all parties, query why people want to take part in marches in the 21 st century. Although people have the right to march, communities have a right not to have marches and all the baggage that goes with them thrust down their throats. We fully support the bill's sensible measures in that regard. Weapons were mentioned. There is a culture problem and we need to take legislative action. I do not remember whether Bill Butler or Charlie Gordon made the point that we must try to reach a consensus on the matter, but knife crime is a gargantuan problem in Scotland and it must be addressed. In a civilised society it is appalling that there is one stabbing homicide per week. We cannot tolerate such a situation.  We support other aspects of the bill. We have put on the record our opposition to Paul Martin's amendments, but that matter is for another day. Not only will the bill advance the interests of law and order in the judicial service and the police, it will make Scotland a better society. We are happy to support it.

Mr Rumbles has shown yet again that the Liberals are prepared to put the partnership before their principles. The Tories commented on the importance of convictions. We have supported the risk of sexual harm orders. In our society, there is a small minority of people who have not been convicted of a crime but who we know have a propensity to commit serious and dangerous actions against individuals. We would be neglecting our duty if we did not seek to take action against them. We have to balance their rights with the protection of our society. Thankfully, we are talking about a small minority of people, but they do not conform to the normal rules of engagement to which other members of society conform. Whether that is because they are  sociopathic or psychopathic, we have to deal with them as a different and separate category. We fully support Bill Butler and his amendments. The minister and Jeremy Purvis bandied about the point that they have the support of GeneWatch but, in fact, they quoted Miss Wallace's letter selectively. When I spoke to her earlier this week, she made it clear that GeneWatch does not support Paul Martin's amendments. Those members should have spoken to Miss Wallace before they claimed to have her support. I turn to Paul Martin's amendments 206 and 207, which we believe would undermine fundamentally the relationship between the citizen and the state. We, as a legislature, have an obligation to punish the guilty, but we also have a responsibility to protect the innocent, which is where the amendments go awry. Of course victims have rights, but so do ordinary citizens who do not commit offences. We have to balance those rights.

I do not believe that DNA retention exculpates people in that manner. If someone who has neither been convicted of an offence nor had imposed on them a risk of sexual harm order—which would disclose that they had a propensity to commit such an offence—does not have the right to challenge a position or to put their viewpoint, the system is fundamentally undemocratic. The Liberal Democrats might be prepared to lie supine before the authoritarian Big Brother tendencies of new Labour, but the Scottish National Party is not. The approach to identity cards and the drive by the Home Office towards an almost totalitarian state are fundamentally wrong. We get the policing that we deserve. We have to have co-operation and the good citizen has to be encouraged to co-operate. Law and order cannot be dealt with simply by the professionals, whether sheriffs, the judiciary or the police. If people will not report crime or testify in court, our democratic and judicial systems will break down. We have to maintain the fundamental balance between the citizen and the state. The individual citizen gives rights to the state. I say to Mr McConnell that the fundamental difference between the Scottish National Party and new Labour is that we believe that the citizen has rights and cedes powers to the state. Unlike the Conservatives, we believe that there is such a thing as society, but we do not believe that the state has in every instance the right to dictate what individuals do. The Executive's view of where it seeks to take Scotland is fundamentally undemocratic and will  damage the innocent people in our society, as well as everybody else.

I say to Colin Fox that I believe that sentencing policy matters. I accept that knife carrying is a cultural malaise in Scotland, but it would be remiss of us if we did not use all the powers that are available to us to send out a message that it is unacceptable—not just to politicians, but to the people of Scotland—to carry a knife and that someone who does so is likely to face a jail term. Charlie Gordon was correct to point out the cultural problems that exist. I accept that, under the proposal in amendment 159, custodial sentences would not be mandatory, but would be handed out except in exceptional circumstances. Although I oppose mandatory custodial sentences—I will explain why—I think that it is unnecessary to legislate for the imposition of custodial sentences except in exceptional circumstances because, frankly, that is how we should expect our courts to deal with the matter. As Charlie Gordon said, the Lord Advocate has handled the issue correctly. Sentencing matters. Charlie Gordon highlighted its effectiveness in dealing with razor gangs. It was also effective in the 1980s when there was a specific problem with armed robberies of bank vehicles. Quite draconian sentences were suddenly brought in, which caused a disparity between the sentences that people would have received in 1979 and those that they received for the same crime in 1980. That was a necessary measure to address a specific problem in society.  I do not believe that mandatory custodial sentences are necessary. Such an approach is wrong. We have the right to expect that custodial sentences should be rule rather than the exception because we have a problem and stiffer sentences are necessary to resolve it. However, that does not mean that custodial sentences should be mandatory. We should expect more from our judiciary and our sheriffs, who we are paying more and training better than ever before. They should reflect what is wanted not simply by MSPs, but by the people of Scotland. However, the older I get, the more I believe that we are well served by the judiciary—although perhaps that is just part of the aging process and a result of the fact that friends with whom I used to practice are now on the bench. The final reason why I think that custodial sentences should not be mandatory is that the Lord Advocate has emphasised that discretion will be used. Most members will have been contacted by constituents who have been worried about wearing a sgian-dubh at weddings or carrying a Swiss army knife for occupational purposes. The police will use their common sense. However, we all know of instances when common sense goes out of the window. We cannot have here the United States of America's "three strikes and you're out" policy, which means that someone could go to prison for life for stealing a piece of pizza. We cannot have the situation where somebody who should have known better but, for whatever reason—an act of stupidity, perhaps—ends up in court and a mandatory sentence is imposed by the sheriff. We should have a greater trust in our judiciary. We should accept that the Lord Advocate has expressed the desire to tackle this through the forces and systems that we have available and that there is a general consensus in Scottish society on the issue. Those words and that consensus should mean that the end result of carrying a knife will be that the person will face a custodial sentence as the rule rather than the exception. It is unnecessary to state that in the bill, as Charlie Gordon proposes.

I sympathise with the debate on the size of government, on which Jackie Baillie commented. We have debated the issue before: members of all parties have discussed the proposed Scottish commissioner for human rights and the possible superfluity of tsars in this country, for example. However, the proposed police complaints commissioner is a distinct case. That there has been no opportunity for the specific matter to be dealt with has been a gap and a long-running sore in Scotland, if I can put things in that way. The SPSO has served us well. There are other issues that we must address in that respect, but that debate is for another day. If we did not go with the police complaints commissioner, as detailed in the bill, we would not serve well the current SPSO or any person who holds that post in the future; we would also not stick to the agreement that has been made. Let us be clear: numerous parties have signed up to the police complaints commissioner proposals. There is consensus not only among people within the body politic in the chamber, but among the police and other parties that that is the way to go. The proposals that have been made have not satisfied the desires of some people and may not work out, but consensus has been reached about where to go. I have sympathy for the broader ethos of Jackie Baillie's proposals, but we should not seek to try to create smaller government in this case. That battle  is for another day. A distinct position is needed. We should stick to the agreement that has been signed up to not only by members of the committee, but by other organisations and members of the police service.

At no stage did I say what Mr Sheridan said that I did. Does Murdo Fraser accept that I endorsed the Enterprise and Culture Committee's position, which is that land attachment should not apply to a principal dwelling-house, except in the most exceptional circumstances, when creditors should have a right of appeal to the court?

I welcome the minister's speech, his view that the bill should be dealt with consensually and his statement that he will deal with it inclusively. I am also grateful for his commitment to address a variety of matters at stage 2. The Parliament must reach a consensus on the bill. It is not the most exciting of bills, but it is important that we address bankruptcy and diligence. We are in the 21 st century and the ground has changed under our feet. We must make Scotland more entrepreneurial and ensure that those who try and sometimes fail in business are supported in their efforts to try and try again until such time as they succeed. We need to strike a balance. That important point has already been made. Society has changed: debt and credit are much more readily available and are used much more. We need to be extremely sympathetic to those who get into debt and towards the problems that affect them and their families, but we must also be aware that creditors suffer. If a bill is not paid to a small joinery firm it can go out of business, jobs can be lost and people can lose their livelihoods. We must strike a balance between debtors' needs and the needs of those who, through no fault of their own, have lost out because of the debts that others have incurred. The Scottish National Party broadly welcomes the bill's thrust and ethos. A great deal of credit must go to the Enterprise and Culture Committee, which has identified many of the fault lines. I hope that the minister will take those on board, as he has said he will, and that we will be able to discuss them and reach a consensus on how to deal with them. The committee correctly flagged up issues of significant concern where change must take place. We hope to work not only with it but with the minister to reach a consensus that will enable us—as the Government has set out to do—to deal with bankruptcy, diligence and other matters not for five or 10 years but for the early part of this century. That is important for all—debtors and businesses alike. We must accept that circumstances have changed. We have a property-owning democracy,  as Mrs Thatcher wanted. Whether or not we like it, that is the circumstance that we face and we must address it. In our world, not only is credit more available but consumption is much more possible. Rather than condemn people for seeking more in this materialistic society we must try to protect them. We are where we are whether or not we like it and we must ensure that the law acknowledges that. The SNP adds the caveat that it is important to address the consequences of debt, which are severe in Scotland. The Parliament and the Executive have to pick up the pieces of not only the problems that go with debt or the bankruptcies and sequestrations that follow but the personal hardships—broken marriages, depression and alcoholism—that can be fuelled by the debt into which people fall. The difficulty is that we are able to address the consequences of debt but we are unable to address its causes. Until such time as those who represent the people of Scotland in this Parliament have the opportunity to address consumer credit as well as deal with the consequences of consumer debt, we will be hidebound. The Enterprise Act 2002 did not go far enough in protecting our people from outrageous interest rates or advertisements that are designed to lure them in and sucker them. We must have the powers to address that. That will be a battle for another day but, if we are to address debt in Scotland, we must be able to tackle its causes every bit as much as its consequences. Although it is important that we legislate, people must take personal responsibility. That has to be brought home to them. In Scotland, we perhaps dine out on the image of the thrifty Scot. That image certainly used to apply, but more and more people are getting into personal debt. It ill behoves people in my generation and those who are older to be too condemnatory, because we created the society in which credit is readily available and consumer goods are punted in television advertisements and an array of other media. However, people must acknowledge that, if they borrow or use credit, they have a responsibility to pay it back. Perhaps we have to consider not only education, which falls within the Executive's and the Parliament's domain, but greater cultural change to achieve an element of individual responsibility. We have not quite reached a pandemic in this respect, but we should consider what is being added to the fuel that already exists. On gambling, we are only at the beginning of how things might develop with casinos and internet access. We do not know how the situation will develop, but there are extraneous factors that will fuel consumer debt further.  We are happy to go along with the general principles of the bill, subject to the points that were correctly identified by the Enterprise and Culture Committee. There is a significant problem with bankruptcy. There has clearly been an issue around the proposed reduction in the discharge period from three years to one year. Our view is that the balance is probably right. The courts will have the opportunity to become involved, and we should bear in mind the desire to support entrepreneurs. I add the caveat that the entrepreneurial spirit that we seek to engender cannot simply be brought in by legislation, as is the case with changes relating to debt and responsibility. The Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning was quite right about that. Floating charges might be viewed with incredulity by the vast majority of our electorate, but they are important for businesses. Although they might be viewed with some scepticism, they are necessary if we wish Scottish businesses to be able to compete not just in the United Kingdom but on a pan-European and global basis. We need to give support in that regard. Other matters have been highlighted by the Law Society of Scotland, which doubtless have been intimated to the minister. Despite what I said about the need to have our own distinctive consumer credit legislation, there are areas where we will now have to work with the Westminster Government. I will happily give the Executive my full support in any representations that it requires to make to the Department of Trade and Industry in England to ensure that there is some harmony on the matters that the Law Society and others have raised. It would be counterproductive not to act in that way. Turning to enforcement, our view is that the nomenclature for sheriff officers should be whatever makes them happy. Whatever they wish to be called, it is fine by us. [ Laughter. ] We should not laugh or be too jocular about it—sheriff officers do a significant job. I was commenting to somebody from a citizens advice bureau earlier that there has been a great deal of condemnation of the sheriff officer profession, in particular with respect to what happened when the poll tax was in force. However, as an instructing lawyer, I remember how happy people were when they sought to return kids who had been abducted by errant fathers or other people. They do good work as well as sometimes having to do jobs that the rest of us might view as unhelpful.

Not at the moment.  We have commented on land attachment in various contexts, including outwith the chamber. We think that the proposed threshold of £1,500 for the recoverable sum is too low. I have sympathy with the minister on this matter. I will not necessarily say what I think the level should be. This is not quite the wisdom of Solomon, but I think that £1,500 is too low and we need to review it. It could be too simplistic to propose that we take a percentage of someone's debt. How would that be calculated? What would we include and exclude? I ask the minister to review that provision and to speak to the interested parties, including CABx, to establish whether a consensus can be reached, not just among political parties but in the body politic, on what we think is a fair threshold. The Enterprise and Culture Committee got it right with respect to land attachment. It would be inappropriate to use land attachment against principal or main dwelling-houses. We accept that there are some situations—albeit very few—in which people have significant equity, live in large houses and are flagrantly at it. Aggrieved creditors should have the opportunity to go to court in such instances. We should not, however, allow land attachment to be used as a threat at that stage. That could undermine—

I think that I am out of time.

That could compound the problems of debt with the ignominy of homelessness. As well as asking the minister to review the £1,500 threshold, we ask him to ensure that land attachment is not used against principal dwelling-houses.

I happily concur with a great deal of what Scott Barrie has said, but I want to make three points. First, I agree with what the minister said about needing to put child protection at the heart of things. Clearly that needs to happen. Child protection is at the heart of various matters in Scotland, including in disputes between parents when they are getting divorced. In such situations, it is not a matter of choosing between mum and dad, but of what is in the child's best interests. The same applies when we are talking about drugs. Scott Barrie testified to the fact that it is not a matter of choosing between a drug-free environment and an environment in which there may be drugs, albeit that they are monitored and controlled; the issue is what is in the best interests of the child. Secondly, it is important to consider the point that Fiona Hyslop correctly made. The problem is a social problem that requires social solutions—it is not simply a criminal justice problem. Thirdly, in looking for solutions, we must ensure that we do not create scapegoats. In many tragedies, the agenda is not so much political as driven by tabloid headlines and a desire simply to find someone to blame. We must recognise that if judgment calls must be made, they can sometimes go wrong. We cannot get into a position in which nobody is prepared to make a decision because they are afraid that it might be wrong. I am not saying that we should allow people to make mistakes willy-nilly or that we should not consider mistakes that have been made in the past and how problems can be solved to ensure that they are not replicated; I am saying that we must recognise that mistakes will sometimes be made, that wrong judgment calls will be made and that, rather than stigmatise a social worker who is to blame—

By all means.

I heartily concur with that. When a mistake is made, we must review, but an inquiry is clearly not needed or beneficial in every instance. If an incident happens, there might be a public inquiry, but in many instances that will not be necessary. It is a matter of balance. On the general point, I agree with Hugh Henry that politicians should take cognisance of the fact that we have access to the media and can either dampen the situation down or inflame it. Other members have made the point that the state has not been a good parent. Mistakes have been made in the past and there was a perception—which transcended political parties and went across the view of the social work service—that we should ensure that kids were dealt with at home. Clearly, we went too far. That is not to say that those decisions were made wrongly; nobody deliberately set out to create a situation in which people would be harmed. Nevertheless, we recognise that we got it wrong and went too far. We must ensure that we do not simply bounce back, have a knee-jerk reaction and go entirely the other way. We must recognise that, as in many instances, the truth lies somewhere in the middle. We must consider what is in the best interests of the child. In some instances, we may have to take them out of the parental home irrespective of how their relationship is, but in other instances that would be inappropriate, because—as other members, in particular Fiona Hyslop, said—the state has not been a good parent. It is not that the state set out deliberately to harm the children, but there have been problems because of the nature of the environment in which the children live and we must address that. We need legislation to ensure that access to information is changed. We have a problem in that people can be—perhaps correctly—hung up on the fact that it is not within their ability or their rights to disclose information. We must also recognise that some of the issues come down to personalities. We cannot make the health visitor speak to the police officer and the general practitioner. We can put the structures in place, but we must also try to ensure that people work together within those structures. It comes back to the point that, at some stage, decisions will have to be made. As Scott Barrie said, we will have to make a decision about what is in the best interests of a child, and we must give some slack to those in the front line who have to make those decisions. They will be social workers not at the senior level in the  ADSW, but at the rank-and-file level, and we will have to allow them to make some mistakes without being pilloried.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in respect of providing full-size indoor football facilities. (S2O-9760)

I thank the minister for that progress. However, because many projects are public-private partnerships, some concern is felt that national and league teams that do not have access to much cash might be restricted in obtaining the playing times that they seek. Will criteria be set to ensure that, for example, the Scottish youth team or the Scottish women's team will have access at critical times when they require it and will not lose out to a corporate baron who has more cash to spend?

I am happy to put on record the corporate body's recognition of the huge contribution to the delivery of the Parliament building that was made by all members of the Holyrood project team, past and present, and by many other parliamentary staff.

I assume that the opportunities that the member refers to relate to contracts of employment. Some staff of the HPT are on secondment from the Scottish Executive. They are able to compete for jobs that are advertised internally on an equal footing with SPCB staff, and we are happy to allow them to do so, but it would be improper either to create jobs for them or to give them preferential treatment. We sympathise with them, given the position in which many of them find themselves but, unfortunately, the situation is outwith our control, as they are not contracted by us.

Absolutely. The issue that the member raises is subject to constant review, in relation both to recent incidents and to the general progression of the building.

As its name indicates, the post-completion advisory group has been advisory; decisions about any possible claims are not for it to make. The SPCB makes any such decisions on the basis of appropriate advice. On Flour City, I understand that the member has written to the SPCB to ask to meet us. He has been advised verbally—he will receive a letter to confirm it—that we will be delighted to meet him. We look forward to discussing the matter with him on a suitable occasion.

I know that the member has taken a considerable interest in this matter, and I thank him for his question. We and our advisers are aware of possible prescription. However, it is probably better to discuss this complicated issue at the corporate body's next meeting, at which we will be delighted to listen to and consider any further comments that the member has to make.

Like the convener of the committee, I welcome the minister's assurances. My colleague, Stewart Maxwell, made it quite clear that our criticism is not so much of the Executive as it is of the British Government. Blame lies not so much with the beleaguered office of the Home Secretary as with the supine attitude of the Foreign Secretary—if not the Prime Minister—which has allowed this matter to reach the situation that we face today. It is quite clear that the principal duty of any state is to look after the safety and security of its citizens. That applies to imposing rules and rights for law and order. It applies equally to how citizens are treated when they are abroad or if another nation seeks to treat them unfairly and against the interests of their society. That is clearly something that the UK and Scotland accept; it is narrated on peoples' passports, whether they be maroon or  EU blue. It is the duty of the state not simply to look after law and order but to protect its citizens from any abuse abroad. Of course, as a society and as a state, we have to ensure that we do not allow ourselves to harbour refugees who are not fleeing maltreatment elsewhere, but who are trying to escape crimes that they have committed or to perpetrate crime here. That is accepted, and it is why we have extradition treaties and reciprocity. It might surprise Jeremy Purvis to know it, but of course there would be extradition treaties and reciprocity in an independent Scotland. The Scottish legal system has signed up to it, and we view it as part of the ethos and core of our society. What we disagree with is the supine attitude of the United Kingdom Government. That attitude has not been replicated by the Government of Ireland or the Governments of other countries, because they have sought some reciprocity.

I do not have time. As Stewart Maxwell and Colin Fox said, we are dealing with an issue that has been driven by the USA's so-called war on terror. We know that, as in Iraq, we face a situation where non-combatants get the flak. Stewart Maxwell pointed out that it is not simply those who are involved in the war on terror, but those who are accused of white-collar crime or any other activity that the United States of America perceives as a crime—it might not be perceived as a crime in our country—who are affected. Citizens of Scotland could be extradited to the United States when we do not believe they have done anything wrong. We would be failing in our duty and our Government would be neglecting the interests of our citizens if we allowed that to happen. The tragedy is that it has happened under Jack Straw, with Tony Blair's connivance. We should not be going along with it: we have a duty to look after the rights of our citizens. When our citizens commit a crime elsewhere, we have a duty to return them so that they face punishment, but we should not hand over our people simply because the Government of the United States of America thinks something might have happened and it suits its agenda, whether political or military, to have them handed over. We cannot support the motion, unless it is amended; we support the amendment. We welcome the minister's assurances and are grateful for his efforts. The blame lies with Westminster. If the motion is not amended, it is entirely unacceptable.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to protect Scottish literature, given the decision of the Competition Commission in respect of the proposed takeover of Ottakar's book stores by HMV. (S2O-9714)

Does a decision that is predicated on the position that there is no distinctive geographic market for books in Scotland not call into question the ethos of a Parliament for the people of Scotland, never mind the legitimacy of having a distinct minister for culture? Is it not time that we had power over books and culture, as well as a ministerial title?

The debate has been excellent. A great number of excellent speeches have been made from all parts of the chamber. Indeed, I found myself agreeing with members with whom I would not normally be bracketed.  We have, however, to remind ourselves what we are dealing with today. As with any of our stage 1 debates, we are looking at the general principles of a bill. At some points, a parallel debate seemed to emerge. Indeed, it was kicked off by the minister, who focused, to some extent, on the general principles of human rights. I am not against the general principles of human rights—I see that Conservative members are nodding—but we have to address the general principles of what we are asked to address, and today that is the general principles of the Scottish Commissioner for Human Rights Bill. I found myself agreeing with Jackie Baillie when she said that a member could oppose the detail of the bill without necessarily disagreeing with its wider aspects. The SNP disagrees with the bill as it currently stands, but we have no doubt about our support for the principles of human rights and for the principle of a commission to address human rights. We need one because of the society in which we live. Human rights is an evolving concept. Phil Gallie and Jim Wallace mentioned that. The latter said, correctly, that we have to address responsibilities.

We would start off by saying that the bill that is before us is entitled the Scottish Commissioner for Human Rights Bill. The nomenclature of the bill does not matter to the minister, but we have to get some of the fundamentals right. We heard the points that Mike Pringle made. If we are to allay legitimate concerns that the bill is no more than advertising blurb, the proposed commission must be given powers. The Scottish legal system has a tradition of amicus curiae and I have no difficulty in supporting an approach in which a commission would have the right to participate in certain circumstances. Such participation would be perfectly legitimate, but the bill provides for no powers in that regard. The bill lacks detail in a variety of ways. We have debated not the general principles of the bill but the general principle of human rights, which we fully support. The minister tended to take such a line in his speech. We tend to agree with Pauline McNeill and others. Stewart Stevenson clearly set out our position. Mary Mulligan made the valid point that we must educate people about human rights. As Gordon Jackson and other members said, there is a perception that human rights is a field for do-gooders and is politically  correct nonsense run wild. Patrick Harvie mentioned such attitudes. It should be possible to regard human rights as a matter not just for the prisoner who must endure the indignity of slopping out but for the old biddy who is entitled to dignity and respect in their old age and who is often not treated with such respect. Human rights are about not just the cases that Tony Kelly and other such solicitors take on—good luck to them—but the daily lives of individuals. Understanding of human rights is evolving. We should acknowledge that responsibilities are a corollary of rights and vice versa. During recent years the perception has grown that we have rights but others have responsibilities. Society is much more complicated than it used to be and although in some ways the state is receding, in others our interaction with the state is increasing and ever present. We live in a world in which people travel to other countries, communicate through the internet and have identity cards, for example. I support the establishment of a commission that would decide what constitutes human rights and how far such rights extend. Some matters are self-evidently human rights: the right to life; the right to liberty; the right to education; and the right to water and sanitation.

A strategic plan is important. The person or organisation should have two functions: first, to react to and address instances of injustice that arise; secondly, to peruse our evolving society so that such matters can be addressed. An approach that is appropriate in 2006 will not necessarily be appropriate in 2016. We must build the organisation round what we want and not simply round a soundbite or slogan.

The roles would not be mutually exclusive. The Parliament has a specific role, but parliamentarians cannot attend to every issue at all times. It could be argued that a commission of the great and the good could take time over the matter, because the Parliament is not the fount of  all wisdom, even though we hope to get things right every time. We must address the concerns that Mr McNulty and Mr Morgan expressed. The focus of the bill is wrong and we must ensure that we find the right focus. We cannot simply build a bill round a wish list; we must decide what we want and give a commission the remit and powers that will enable it to deliver those objectives. The bill does not do that, which opens it to criticism from members such as Mr Morgan and Mr McNulty. Such criticism will become a cacophony from the public if the bill is passed unamended—we ain't seen nothing yet. Our position is simple. We accept absolutely the general principles of human rights, but we absolutely do not think that the bill as it stands is the best vehicle for delivering human rights. We will not support the general principles of the bill but, if the minister amends the bill appropriately, our position will be reviewed.

A retired lawyer.

I thank the minister both for her comments and for accepting my amendment. It should be said—and put on the record—that we have been well served by the legal system in Scotland. That is not to say that there have not been difficulties and injustices or that they do not continue to arise. Sylvia Jackson's point was well made and I will return to it if I have time, but in civil matters the legal system has served us well. However, we are now in the 21 st century and our society is much more complicated than it was, so we need to address matters and to change. The six areas of concern that the minister mentioned are all aspects that need to be examined. I will not be able to go through them all, but there are some aspects, which I have discussed with the minister before, that should be mentioned. The purpose of our amendment was to add to, rather than detract from, the basis of the debate that the Executive has introduced. Difficulties relate to the affordability and accessibility of justice. We are well aware of the difficulties that victims of domestic violence face in finding a legal aid lawyer in some areas; I am told anecdotally that a legal aid lawyer is not available in Galloway or Peebles except to established clients. That is not necessarily a criticism of changes that have occurred. Some of that is part of the natural evolution of our high streets. Sadly, many lawyers and accountants are disappearing, as are greengrocers and bakers. We must address that and how we provide services. That is not simply a case of increasing the legal aid budget, because only so much can be provided. We must examine accessibility while bearing in mind affordability. As legislators, we want to ensure that citizens have access to justice, but we must recognise that what we spend must be  limited, so we must ask how we obtain best value and take it from there. We must consider why we are in the current situation. It is easy and flippant to say that the cause is that society is much more litigious. That is a knee-jerk reaction, although all members sometimes wonder why some people take recourse to law—if that is available and they have the wherewithal—when they would be better served in other ways. Fundamentally, we are where we are because society is much more complicated. We have moved on from a generation ago or perhaps even less. The minister referred to the fact that changes have not been made for some time. In the past, the ordinary citizen's interface with the law was almost non-existent and was rare. People who behaved themselves and did not commit a crime would be unlikely to have any involvement with the criminal justice system. Few people owned property—most of our people were tenants and they did not own cars. That was a time before the property-owning, car-owning democracy. People did not have access to the consumer goods that we have today. As a result, people had little need to rush to complain about things that had happened. We did not have the accompanying obligations, the provision of private health services or the difficulties that I am having in securing a car repair under a so-called warranty that might or might not be enforceable. The individual citizen did not face such issues. We must recognise what has happened and that the situation will not change. However we address greenhouse gases, we will have to deal with mass car ownership for some time to come. There will be bumps and scrapes and we as legislators must provide a system that allows people to address them. We are grateful for the changes that have occurred in our health service, for the opportunities to treat illnesses and for individuals' right to seek treatment. None of that was available before. Now we must ensure that we have a legal forum, to provide balance when the health service refuses to make provision. We have access to consumer goods, material wealth and individual possessions that were not within our conception many years ago, such as mobile phones. Such items go wrong and have warranties and people will seek redress, which we must deal with. Access to justice cannot be simply for those who have the wherewithal or who can afford it. As legislators, how do we provide access to justice at an affordable price without signing a blank cheque for an ever-burgeoning and more complicated system? The minister is correct: specialisation is required. I welcome what has happened at the commercial court at Glasgow sheriff court. However, if we make the system far too  complicated, the danger is that the ordinary citizen will not have access. Does an individual really require to go to a lawyer to deal with a simple bump or scrape that happened because a driver went too fast or failed to indicate? Should the individual citizen have direct access or should that be removed, to be replaced by lawyers who specialise? We must get things correct and review the situation. I want particularly to discuss the summary cause and small-claims procedures that were introduced, which I welcomed. However, they have not worked as well as we hoped they would. The procedures are still unduly complicated and they require individuals to make several trips to court, which can outweigh the cost or benefit of a claim. The theory that individuals should be able to access courts without going through lawyers is right. We must not only consider increasing the thresholds. It is not simply a matter of whether a threshold is to be £750 or £1,500—we must consider not only whether to extend the limits, but how to access and deal with the process. I add the caveat that I am persuaded that personal injury cases must be viewed as being distinctive. However, if we pay a sheriff £115,000 plus and give them pension rights and so on, is it appropriate for them to decide on a claim that involves whether a person went too fast or failed to indicate, causing £250 worth of damage to someone's rear bumper? Should they preside over a case involving a claim of £750 in which I say that the wallpapering that I asked to be done was plum-duff but somebody else says that it was absolutely what I asked for? Is that what we should pay somebody to investigate such things? I do not wish to be flippant about access to law and what is on television, but why can we not extend the operation of a court system beyond the 10-to-4 timescale in which it currently operates? Why do we not consider getting in people who are legally qualified and can act in an investigatory magistrate-type position? They could say to people, "What do you have to say?" and then "We've heard your case. The fact of the matter is that you were 75 per cent to blame because you were going too fast and you didn't indicate. Therefore, we're going to award £275." If a case became legally complicated, it could be remitted to the sheriff. We must allow access. That means opening the buildings for which we pay rates and heating and security bills; it does not mean paying somebody the substantial sum of £115,000 that we currently pay. As well as addressing thresholds, we must consider how we can allow ordinary citizens to participate. We cannot do that simply by increasing the legal aid budget. We may have to increase it, but all of us would say if we are going  to increase the legal aid budget, the money should go to the victims of domestic violence—to those who have a crying need for it and whom we are not protecting. We should allow individuals to participate because the civil justice system is their system. We welcome the debate and thank the minister for taking on board my amendment. I move amendment S2M-4255.1, to insert at end: "and further notes that such a system, whilst being quick, efficient and just, must also be affordable and accessible to the ordinary citizen."

Bill Aitken said that this was a depressing debate, not in its tenor but in its subject. Depressing it may be, but it is vital that we address it. We face a pandemic—if not globally, at least in the western world. It is not avian flu; it is drug abuse—and I accept the point made by others that drug abuse includes alcohol abuse. This has been a remarkably good debate. Both Stewart Stevenson and Hugh Henry, the minister, said that there was little disagreement with the generalities of Rosemary Byrne's opening speech, although there was some disagreement with the specifics. We accept that this is not simply a criminal justice matter; there are health and social implications too. Stewart Stevenson said that the criminal justice system may be the first interface, but we must also consider health and social justice. Hugh Henry said that there was no quick fix, and we agree. The opening speakers in the debate set  the tone and they were followed by two excellent speeches from Maureen Watt and Susan Deacon. They made it clear that we must reach a consensus. If we allow the issue to become a political football, we will not serve the parties well and we will certainly not serve the people of Scotland well. We have to find solutions, not simply score points. Maureen Watt's points and anecdotes were clearly ones that we must address. I accept the premise in the SSP's motion that this is not only a criminal justice issue but a social and a health issue. However, the criminal justice system is where people first become involved. We cannot ignore that—although if we consider only the criminal justice element, we will simply be firefighting rather than looking for solutions. We must consider criminal justice, health and social issues, but we must also consider demand as well as supply. We have to ask why people take drugs and not simply ask how we can get them off drugs or how we can stop them taking drugs in the first place. This is not simply about enforcement or powers and laws. Anybody who has read Chomsky will know that the United States is a global superpower the likes of which the world has never known. It has resources for the military, for the police, for anti-terrorist force SWAT teams—you name it, they have it. Despite that, the United States cannot deal with the control and supply of drugs. If we read Chomsky, we realise that, of the ingredients of cocaine, around 97 per cent are manufactured in the United States, exported to Colombia, integrated with the principal subject and then imported back into the United States. The United States cannot close its borders—not to Hispanic migrants and not to imported drugs. As I say, we must consider not only the supply of drugs but the demand. That does not mean that we should take our eyes off the ball and not take any action. Stewart Stevenson was correct to talk about the need to target dealers, but we must examine why people take drugs. I accept that we are living in a society in which there are social causes of drug taking, such as deprivation. It is clear that there is a correlation between the onset of mass unemployment in an area and the arrival of heroin. As well as being taken by yuppies as part of their lifestyle, drugs are taken by people who have no focus in their lives and who see no reason for living. Why is it that when we have never had more material wealth, people feel that their lives are worthless? The members who mock Dr Carol Craig—who come from all parties—should acknowledge that we are talking not just about material well-being. We must address people's moral values and give them a sense of self-worth. People do not take  drugs purely out of poverty; they inject smack or heroin into their veins because they believe that there is little place for them in society. We must address demand as well as supply, which means not just providing people with material benefits, but giving them a sense of value and self-worth. I am not sure what the solution is or how we can legislate for it, but Dr Carol Craig must be listened to.

Yes!

In the previous debate, mention was made of divided views on the monarchy. The situation is the same, to some extent, in relation to views on Europe. With regard to the monarch, my own view tends to be rather sanguine, but we have to recognise that she is the head of state, and anybody who reaches their 80 th birthday should see that as a cause for celebration. Indeed, as the First Minister and other members said, significant changes have been made in the monarchy, and the same is true of the European Union. There is a great deal of division in the Parliament as to how Scotland should be represented and, some would argue, whether it should be represented within such an institution. I find myself on the Europhile wing of my party, which is committed to independent representation for Scotland. The monarch remains the head of state. That is the situation that we face, and that is why I believe it is correct and appropriate for us to celebrate her birthday. Similarly, the European Union is here, and whatever view people take on it, it is clearly an institution that has a huge effect on, and significant ramifications for, the lives of legislators and citizens. As Linda Fabiani, convener of the European and External Relations Committee, pointed out, many of the daily aspects of the European Union's activities are not noted or appreciated by the general public. It is much easier for the press corps in Scotland to comment on straight bananas or regulations emanating from Europe that will allegedly limit and restrict bagpipe playing than consider what is actually happening day to day. The Scottish Parliament has, quite correctly, upped its game in relation to representation in the European Parliament. With regard to the Commission, I believe that that must go further and faster, and must ultimately include representation. Even aside from that, we must ensure that we are better engaged. I do not usually try to be too critical of the press corps in Scotland, but it is a tragedy that Scotland does not have press representation in Europe. There is something really rather shameful about that. It is sad that Murray Ritchie has retired not simply from being a Brussels correspondent but from being a correspondent at all. He was welcomed there as he was welcomed here. The lack of press representation in Europe has to be addressed. We cannot, as a country with our own daily papers, not have some representation in European institutions, given the points made by the convener and the minister about the daily relevance of what is done there. The press corps has to up its game, no matter the current difficulties.  Everybody accepts that the European Union project has stalled to some extent. The referenda that were held in the Netherlands and France should perhaps have been foreseen. Perhaps the political elite went too far, too fast, and individuals had understandable concerns. However, as the convener of the European and External Relations Committee said, we now have an opportunity to address the question of the sort of union that we want in Europe. I subscribe to the aim of a social union as well as an economic trading zone. We do not know how things will evolve and where they will go, but there is an opportunity for people in sub-national states to consider how they wish to be involved, and we must grasp that opportunity. Irrespective of whether we ultimately have independent Scottish representation, we need to ensure that we are represented far more keenly so that the good points are pursued and the bad points avoided. Ms Fabiani and the minister mentioned other current issues that illustrate why the European Union matters, not simply in terms of what the constitution will ultimately be or the impact that it will have on our lives, because there are matters that can be dealt with only on a transnational basis. Two examples spring to mind when we consider issues that present problems not only in Scotland but elsewhere in the European Union: energy and the environment. We are not only celebrating the Queen's 80 th birthday; we are commemorating the anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster. We must recognise that incidents such as Chernobyl cannot be dealt with by one country, whether that country is the Ukraine or Scotland. How we produce energy will have a wide impact. It has had an impact, and continues to do so, on Scandinavian countries, and what happened in the Ukraine has had an impact not only on us and on other European Union states but on the United States of America and other countries. We have to address the environment, which is, after all, perhaps the greatest issue that faces humanity now. The matter cannot be dealt with by an individual nation state; it must be dealt with on a transnational basis. It is essential that there is an element of EU harmonisation in relation to the global Kyoto negotiations. We must come together to have a European view. That also applies to energy. Brent oil is now $72 a barrel and we face the possibility of it being $100 a barrel. In the EU this winter we faced problems with access to gas from Russia. In Scotland we are blessed with opportunities in renewables and with our natural gas and petroleum resources, but the fact of the matter is that energy will have to be dealt with on a transnational basis rather than as a single nation state. That does not mean that there are not matters that must be kept sacrosanct. Ultimately, that is  the logic of the nation state. We are the largest oil producer in the EU and it would be foolish to hand over control of our assets to a centralised Brussels state. However, as I have said, that does not mean that we should not seek to co-operate on a common environmental policy and on how we work towards a common energy policy. Those two issues are fundamental, not only for the citizens of Scotland and the EU, but for people elsewhere. For example, the current difficulties on the River Danube affect not only a nation that may be a member of the EU, but nations further down the river that hope to be members in due course. I am happy to support the European and External Relations Committee and the minister in what they are trying to do to achieve better Scottish representation. There will be continuing disputes about the ultimate basis of our representation, but we ignore Europe at our peril. We have come a long way and have improved the Scottish Parliament's and the Scottish Executive's representation in Europe. We should consider the glass to be half full rather than half empty, but there is a significant way to go. Fundamentally, I subscribe to the view that is represented to some extent by the Government of Finland: we should move towards fields of responsibility. Some matters must ultimately be dealt with on a transnational basis and, given our location, the most sensible way to do that is through the EU. Such matters should include energy policy, the environment, trading areas and macroeconomics. However, other matters must be sacrosanct and dealt with by the nation state. Those include whether we go to war and whether we are prepared to sacrifice some of our economic resources, be it in respect of fishing or energy policy. A fundamental issue that must be sacrosanct—bearing in mind the latitude that must be given because of VAT and cross-border crime—is whom we tax, what we tax and what we spend tax on. Those powers should not be held centrally, but should be held by the individual nation state. We welcome the debate. We support the EU as a concept and welcome the advances that have been made in representation, but a lot more work must be done. We will support the committee in its work and we will also support the Executive in its efforts to ensure that Scottish citizens and Scotland as a nation achieve all that they can from the EU.

I concur fully with David McLetchie's point that, to some extent, we are not voting on tramline 1. Rather, we are voting for a void—for what may be presumed to be going to happen and for whatever spin TIE is giving us at the moment. It was kind of Sarah Boyack to quote my words, and I am happy to stand by them. Ultimately, a tram scheme probably would benefit Edinburgh. Reference has been made to European competitors and capitals. However, the difference is that they tend to build up a pyramid structure by getting the basis right and moving forward from there. They have tram systems that are regulated and rail networks that have local provision, like the south suburban line. They have a bus network that is not increasing its fares as a result of spending going in other directions. Having delivered the other aspects of transport that are necessary, they add to those by building a tram system that can provide significant benefits. They do not seek to have an unregulated transport network. The front page of today's edition of the Edinburgh Evening News states: "The wheels on the bus fall off and off". The reference is to the poor-quality service that is being provided. As Mr Fox, who is not present today, mentioned, the price that Lothian Buses charges for fares is increasing.

I do not have time to give way. The problems that I have mentioned are not acceptable in a European context and should not  be acceptable here. We do not know what we are voting for. The other matter of great concern is that we do not know the final cost of the scheme. The minister has made the final commitment that he is prepared to see made by the Scottish Executive, but those of us who have a duty to look after the interests of the capital and to consider the costs that will have to be borne by council tax payers must look at other issues. It is disingenuous of Ms Deacon to refer to congestion charging; we were told at one stage that congestion charging had nothing to do with tramline 3. Apparently, the tramline was not predicated on that.

I do not have time, as I said to the member's colleague. The fact is that congestion charging was related and the council was seeking to introduce tramline 3 in that way. That shows how out of touch the City of Edinburgh Council is with the mood of the city. It got it wrong on congestion charging and housing stock transfer and it is getting it wrong on trams.

I do not have time. The trams represent not just a significant capital cost. They will have on-going revenue implications that will have to be borne. If we cannot increase fare-box charging, we will have to find another method of funding the scheme. That will not come from congestion charging and it will have to be borne by the council tax payer. We will be left with a system that simply will not operate and we face being left with a pig in a poke. Instead of looking at what I said six years ago, Ms Boyack should look at the words of her party colleague, the Secretary of State for Scotland who is also the Secretary of State for Transport south of the border. He decided that the tram schemes in Leeds, Portsmouth and Liverpool are not best value. He was reported in the Yorkshire Post as saying that "the tram was not 'value for money' with a price tag now of £486m compared with the approved figure of £355m in 2001, and that a 'showcase' bus scheme would deliver benefits at half the cost." We also note Mr Darling's views in the Edinburgh Evening News on Monday 7 November 2005: "In September, it emerged that the cost of re-introducing trams to Edinburgh had soared by almost £340m to £714m after initial estimates did not take inflation into account." Much as I am glad that Ms Boyack is glad to take advice from me, at some stage she should perhaps look to her colleague in the Labour Party and realise that the tram scheme is wrong, it is the  wrong time for it and it is not Scotland's priority; Waverley station is.

We will support Margaret Smith's amendment and will not be able to support the motion if it remains unamended. To some extent, the debate is a rerun of last week's debate on the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill. As with last week, I thank those who served on the committee. However, this is not how legislation should be made and it is certainly not how major infrastructure projects should be taken forward. I believe that there is consensus on that view in the chamber. The tragedy is that committees have already been created to deal with the rail links to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports. We support those projects, but we must change the way in which such matters are dealt with, because it does not serve committee members well and it is not the best way of making legislation. We concur heartily with Margaret Smith's comments. We oppose the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill for the same reasons that we opposed the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill last week. We have no objection in principle to trams. After all, why should not Edinburgh aspire to having a tram scheme at some stage? However, is such a scheme the immediate priority? Is it the right scheme? The short answer to both questions is most certainly no. This is the wrong scheme at the wrong time. Jackie Baillie was being disingenuous when she tried to make light of the distance from the tram stop to the Western general hospital. We are not talking about a small distance or even a small amount of money. Half a billion pounds is being spent on what is supposed to be a state-of-the-art tram scheme, but in order to serve one of our major hospitals, we will have to lay on a shuttle bus from the tram stop. That is utterly insane and is certainly not a feature of a state-of-the-art scheme. Indeed, the point that I made about tramline 2's service to the Royal Bank of Scotland applies to tramline 1 and its ability to serve the Western general hospital. This scheme will not  deliver what it should deliver for the amount of money that is being invested in it. Moreover, this scheme is not the most important transport priority in Scotland. The minister is correct to say that the transport budget has many calls on it, but there appears to have been no call on it to ensure that we have the flagship station at Waverley that he mentioned last week and which we fully support. Waverley station is vital not just to the interests of Edinburgh as a capital city that aspires to compete with European competitors, but to public transport movements in east, central and indeed all of Scotland. After all, trains come into the city from east, west, north and south. We must ensure that there is adequate access to the city; because that access does not exist at the moment, our first priority for investment must be Waverley station. However, the Executive has not committed to that project as yet.

The Executive might have committed to phase 1, but it has not committed itself to phase 2.

It is quite clear that phase 1 does not go far enough with regard to access. It is also disingenuous to suggest that phase 2 is simply about property development—it most certainly is not. Everyone who is involved in the rail sector has made it clear that phase 1, although welcome, is a stop-gap scheme and does not go far enough. We need phase 2, not simply because it addresses certain aesthetic considerations of a major part of the city of Edinburgh but because of what we must deliver. People have talked about hypocrisy. I point out that someone said, with regard to another scheme: "Clearly it does not represent the best value for money ... or the best use of public money—particularly when compared to alternative proposals put forward ... for top of the range rapid bus scheme ... This would deliver significant transport benefits locally and be an opportunity to develop a first of its kind, showcase bus system". That was Alastair Darling—Secretary of State for Transport and one of the MPs for this wonderful city. He has repudiated tram schemes not only in Leeds but in Portsmouth and Liverpool, because he has realised that they do not provide best value. That is why we oppose this tram proposal.

I cannot—I am in my final minute.  This is the wrong scheme. It fails to deliver what is necessary for the city of Edinburgh and it is not the major strategic priority for Scotland. That priority must be Waverley station. Spending £0.5 billion to lay on a shuttle bus from a tram stop to the Western general is an insane use of public money.

The fact of the matter is that not only is there an outrageous funding shortfall, but there is outrageous expenditure at the moment. As we are well aware, £1.2 million has been spent so far, without even a track laid, simply to subsidise Weber Shandwick, the publicists for the campaign to promote trams. We view that as thoroughly unacceptable and a waste of valuable public money. The priority has to be Waverley station and the Edinburgh airport rail link—we concur with Mr McLetchie about that—because of the advantage that that project offers the whole of Scotland. We have to look at prioritisation. This Executive has been characterised by the making of countless promises on which it has failed to deliver. We have  seen numerous projects being put back and further delayed—into the yonder. We need to deliver. Waverley stage 1 does not adequately address the requirements not just of the city of Edinburgh, but of public transport expansion for the whole of Scotland. If we are to aspire to high-speed rail links, we need to deliver on that. We do not trust the judgment of the City of Edinburgh Council. I have some sympathy with the point that was made by Mr Fox. First, on congestion charging and, secondly, on the housing stock transfer scheme, the City of Edinburgh Council's judgment of the support of the electorate and the citizens of Edinburgh has been shown to be wrong. The tramline that is being put forward is Donald Anderson and Andrew Burns's folly. They wish to impose it, irrespective of whether they are still in the council's administration next May, which looks exceedingly unlikely. However, they are seeking to railroad the tramline through—if I may mix my transport metaphors—to ensure that it is delivered. That is entirely unacceptable. We think that the council has got it wrong and that the public's money would be best used for the flagship station on which the minister commented last week. There is no money or commitment from the City of Edinburgh Council, so our decision on priorities is that we should invest in the Waverley option.

I, too, pay tribute to the work of the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill Committee. I have said that the current system for dealing with private bills is wrong and I acknowledge that the system will be changed. The bill is fundamentally flawed and to some extent the hard work and endeavour that the committee was required to put into consideration of the bill has been brought to nought by changes that have occurred. The Parliament is asked to consider tramline 2 today and we will be asked to consider tramline 1 next week, although we are aware that what is proposed is neither tramline 2 nor tramline 1 but a hybrid scheme. The hard work of many individuals was therefore to no avail. We are asked to support a scheme for which there is no business plan. The minister said that work would start in the autumn, but we do not know whether work will start before there is a business plan that indicates whether the project stacks up financially. We should not legislate in such a way and the tramline 2 scheme is not one that we can support. We do not, of course, object to trams in principle and we can aspire to have a tramline. However,  tramline 2 is certainly not the most pressing requirement for Edinburgh and nor is it a priority for Scotland. Tramline 2 is the wrong scheme at the wrong time. If we are to spend £450 million of public money, we should expect to get a scheme that runs from where people live to where they want to go. However, tramline 2 would not even take people to the door of the global headquarters of the Royal Bank of Scotland; the line would be some 750m from the building, across a busy dual carriageway, which is unacceptable.

No, I do not have enough time. The tramline would run in parallel with a railway line and undermine an excellent, flagship bus service for Lothian Buses. We agree that politics is about priorities, as a previous minister said. If we are to invest substantial amounts of public money, we must ensure that we get the best value and the best return for that money. When we consider that the proposed investment—not counting index-linked increases to take account of inflation—would be sufficient to enable us to replace every bus in Lothian with a state-of-the-art bus and to run free bus services for seven years, we must wonder whether the tramline represents the best use of public money. More important, when the minister made his statement on public transport projects last week, he refused to confirm that phase 2 of the Waverley station project will go ahead. The minister rightly described the project as a flagship project not just for the capital city but for Scotland. It is vital that we deliver not just phase 1 but phase 2. The project is about not just rejigging the station and providing shopping concourses, but providing the facilities to allow expansion. If we do not deliver phase 2 many other schemes will not come to fruition, because projects such as the Bathgate to Airdrie rail link, the Borders railway and the high-speed rail links between Edinburgh and Glasgow that we are all starting to champion require there to be capacity at Waverley. Our priority should be to provide the funding that is needed to deliver the capital project at Waverley station. We should not put money into a tram scheme until we are certain that we have delivered the main priority for Scotland and for Edinburgh, which is not a tram scheme on the periphery or to the west of the city, which would run in parallel with a railway line in several places and which would compete with a flagship bus service and the proposed heavy rail link. The priority for Scotland and for Edinburgh is the delivery of phases 1 and 2 of the Waverley station project. Tramline 2 would be the wrong use of public money and we oppose it.

The Scottish National Party welcomes the report. I would not go as far as John Home Robertson and say that the fresh talent initiative is an excellent scheme, because it has flaws, but we welcome the Executive's recognition of the demographic problem that Scotland faces and the requirement for innovative solutions to address it. Charlie Gordon is correct that we are in a fluid situation. In recent years there has been a change in the demography to our benefit, but a substantial problem remains. However, in recent months, there has been a change at UK level—Charles Clarke's proposals will to an extent trump whatever significant advantage we have gained through the fresh talent scheme, as will the proposals for a UK green card scheme. We must catch up with that underlying movement. The European and External Relations Committee report raises valid points and numerous points have been made in the debate with which we agree. We agree that we must not seek our nation's advantage to the great danger of nations in the third world and that we should not ignore the skilled indigenous people who currently languish in the west of Scotland and elsewhere. We have far too many people who are economically inactive. They are a loss to the nation and are not achieving all that they can. The committee correctly pointed out that asylum seekers have a contribution to make but are restricted in making it. That must be addressed. When I considered my comments for the debate, I had not thought that there would be a great deal of synergy between the two committee debates this afternoon. One was initiated by the Justice 1 Committee, on the European Union, and the other was from the European and External Relations Committee, on the fresh talent initiative. However, there is a synergy, because both involve a recognition that we live in a global economy. Our opposition to the European Union proposals in the first debate was based on the argument that they will undermine what is best for Scotland. The present debate is about allowing Scotland the best economic and social advantages. We live in a global economy in which capital and labour are mobile. If people choose to go and work elsewhere, we cannot keep them. If a person  graduates from university and prefers the bright lights of Barcelona to the joys and delights of Bathgate, we cannot hold them back. We have to give our indigenous talent a reason to stay, but we must also compete on a global basis for other talent. We must have the opportunity to encourage others to come and work here. For generations, Scotland has been denuded of skilled men and women. We had trade fairs the length and breadth of our country that encouraged people from the Clyde, Leith and wherever else to take their skills to the new world, whether New Zealand, the United States or elsewhere. We could not stop those people seeking to better themselves. We have an opportunity to build upon the fresh talent initiative to create an indigenous green card scheme. I welcome the First Minister's trip to Australia. I hope that he recognised, in signing a concordat with the state of Victoria, that that state has a system under which it can specify and pursue individuals whom it wants to come to the state. Victoria can get the advantages that it needs. Such a system could be added to the current fresh talent initiative, which will clearly have to change as a result of events south of the border. Perhaps we could morph that system into a green card scheme. It is not only Victoria that has such opportunities—other states, such as New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania, Western Australia and South Australia are firing ahead. Scotland must have the opportunity not only to have a fresh talent scheme, but to go out and locate the skilled workers who are necessary if our society is to compete in a global economy.

I fully support the position that Ms McNeill and the Justice 1 Committee have taken. I see that Mr Gallie is present, so I put on record that although I condemn the European Union's position on applicable law in divorce and succession and wills, I remain a supporter of the concept and the principle of the EU. However, it seems to me that the proposals in the green papers are not what the EU is meant to be about. I have supported the EU's enlargement and will support the assimilation of other nations, and I believe that we must ensure that we can address the EU's social needs as well as its economic needs. However, it is one thing to try to harmonise social welfare legislation and quite another to impinge on an area that has reflected the basis of our society for generations. I oppose the EU's positions as adopted in the green papers, but I do not believe that I am, by setting out my opposition to where the green papers are coming from, going against the concept of the EU; I am merely taking part in a continuing debate about what that Union is meant to be about. For almost 1,000 years, we have had a distinctive legal system in Scotland. Notwithstanding that we live on the island of  Britain, where there is a distinctive jurisdiction south of the border, we have for 300 years maintained a separate legal system while we have operated within the union of the United Kingdom,. I argue that that state of affairs has been beneficial to Scotland because it has allowed the country to go its own way on legal decisions, even before the re-establishment of the Scottish Parliament. We have been able to decide how to run our society and the EU should recognise that.

Absolutely. I have written and spoken about that subject, so I think that Mr Purvis's intervention is an irrelevancy. He may have been attempting to make a party-political point, but I am addressing proposals that would have a fundamental effect on the law of Scotland. I fully support the position of Ms McNeill and the Justice 1 Committee and I have no doubt that the minister will be sympathetic to it. We can by all means discuss the proposals in a wider context, but Mr Purvis's point is a side issue. Society—both in Scotland and in the European Union—has become much more complicated. People have flats in Benidorm and villas in Tuscany; they move to Frankfurt to work; sadly, they die abroad; divorces happen and people marry people from other countries. Many of those developments are good and we should support them. They make the law more complicated, but I believe that our legal system is perfectly capable of addressing such matters because it has always been able to address complicated situations. As someone who has dealt with numerous matrimonial cases—although not in the same context as my colleague, Stewart Stevenson—I know that there are devices, such as the Hague convention, for addressing situations in which disputes arise over which jurisdiction is responsible for, for example, the domicile of a child. Such cases are often complicated and that is an area of the law that requires to be refined because sometimes different interpretations are made in different jurisdictions. Measures exist to allow individual nations' to interpret laws in their own way. Matters such as how a property that is owned in Tuscany or Benidorm should be dealt with can be addressed in the context of the current Scottish legal system. Developments are afoot in  the EU, but our legal system is capable of recognising that. Turning to broader matters for a moment, I say to Mr Purvis that one reason why I support further progress in the EU is so that we have a bulwark against the United States. That said, there are legal differences even within the USA—the state of Louisiana operates differently from the state of Alaska and the set-up in the state of Texas is different to that in the state of Massachusetts—but the system manages to operate. There is no need for the EU to dragoon us into going down its preferred route. There are many apocryphal tales that would bring the EU into contempt, such as those to do with the banning of bagpipes or the placing of restrictions on haggis, most of which are not true. Many of us who support the ethos of the institution must argue against the proposals in the green papers because they are fundamentally wrong. Some areas of law are complicated, but the lawyers in our legal system are adequately trained to deal with them. We should therefore go down the European Union route that the Government and peoples of Finland support, which is the fields-of-responsibility route. For some areas of the law, it is appropriate that we come together on a broader European Union basis, but other matters need to be addressed on a more regional or geographic-area basis—whether that involves an area such as Scandinavia or a part of the British isles. Some matters should be decided by individual nation states; the subjects of the debate fall into that category. Scotland has distinctive matrimonial law. That is why we have the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006. We also have distinctive law on succession. That is why we have introduced legislation on that and why we consider the Scottish Law Commission's views on a variety of such matters. There is no need for the European Union to impose or impinge upon us; we have shown that we are capable of working with other jurisdictions, whether in terms of the Hague, Warsaw or other conventions. The European Commission should leave Scotland well alone.

I welcome the minister's rhetoric about Waverley station being a flagship for Edinburgh and Scotland. However, as Fergus Ewing pointed out, the Waverley project has two stages and, as Murdo Fraser said, the plans have been in place since 1999-2000. In his statement, the minister made a commitment only to stage 1, which includes work on platforms and disabled access. The plan was available in 2000 and the work could have started then. Why do we need further consultations, given that we have been consulting on Waverley since 1999? Continual consultation appears to be a characteristic of the Executive.  Will the minister match his rhetoric to the reality and make a commitment to stage 2 of the Waverley project?

Great play has been made on all sides of the chamber of the legal maxim that justice must not only be done but be seen to be done. I agree, but there is another test of a judicial system, which is not only that should we try to get it right on all occasions, but that when we get it wrong we should be big enough to acknowledge it, to remedy that wrong and to try to learn from the mistakes that incurred it. What happened in this case was in all likelihood a minor matter and an honest mistake, but it snowballed into a massive injustice perpetrated against one individual. As Mr McNulty has commented, there have been side issues, but they pale into insignificance compared with the almost Kafkaesque situation that arose for Ms McKie. As has been put eloquently by Ms Sturgeon and those who have given their support to the motion, we must have an inquiry to remedy what went wrong. Another legal maxim says that it is better that 99 guilty men go free than that one innocent should be convicted. What we have here is an attempt to focus on the SCRO. That is an important aspect. Clearly, the matter of whether a minor error occurred derives from the SCRO's position. Whatever Mr Fox may say, fingerprinting is not an exact science, as Patrick Harvie said; it is an art form and, as a result of that, mistakes—honest or otherwise—are made. The minister is on the right track when she refers to remedying what has gone wrong in the SCRO. The SNP fully appreciates that. There is no dispute that good work is being done by the SCRO and that we are well served. However, that does not take away the need for an inquiry, because what happened to Ms McKie is fundamentally wrong. The £750,000 that was paid to Ms McKie may seem a gross amount to many of us, but it is a small sum to somebody whose life has been ruined in many respects and who has had a career to which she aspired taken away from her. As public servants, we have a duty to find out not just why we are paying out that much public money but why the matter went wrong in the first place. That cannot be dealt with by a committee inquiry; there needs to be a full judicial inquiry. Whatever Mr Macintosh or Mr McNulty may say, when two law officers from different political backgrounds agree—Lord Mackay of Clashfern was a Conservative law officer and Lord McCluskey was a Labour law officer—there is clearly some unanimity.  We need to work out why, when some information was available, a prosecution still went ahead. When I practised law many years ago, it was always my understanding that there were three criteria for a law officer to consider. First, had an offence occurred? Secondly, could that offence be proved in law? Thirdly, was it in the public interest to prosecute? Clearly there was an allegation that an offence had been committed by Ms McKie, but was there the evidence to prove it in law? To use another legal maxim, if a person knew or ought to have known that information existed that cast doubt on Ms McKie's involvement in the offence, that should lead them in another direction.

No. Mr Purvis has tried valiantly to get in on the debate—frankly, it has been pathetic. We must consider when that knowledge was available. Even if a senior law officer believed that an offence had occurred and that the offence could be proved, why was it in the public interest to prosecute, when a senior police officer, who had no axe to grind, was saying that something was significantly wrong? That is not justice. For those reasons, we need to work out not what went wrong at the SCRO but why what started off as a minor mistake became a cataclysmic error with huge effects, not just on the public purse but on an individual, who has been badly treated by the law of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers Scottish culture to be a distinct market from that of the rest of the United Kingdom. (S2O-9093)

Is the minister aware of the report from the Office of Fair Trading into the proposed merger of Waterstone's and Ottakar's book stores, in which it was stated there was "no evidence to suggest that Scotland should be looked at as a distinct geographic market"? Is it not entirely unacceptable that Scotland's unique culture should be treated as part of the UK market? What action does the minister propose to take to ensure that the position that was taken by the OFT does not threaten us with regard to booksellers and the publishing sector in future and with regard to other aspects of Scotland's distinct culture?

My question follows Mr Sheridan's question. The minister is to be supported in trying to create a political consensus, but as well as political consensus and co-operation, interagency involvement is required. Mr Sheridan mentioned resources for Disclosure Scotland, but there will be implications for other bodies, such as the police or social work departments. Will the minister assure Parliament that additional funding will be found instead of those bodies being expected to do more work with the same resources?

The debate has been wide ranging. That is understandable, given the wide range of measures that the bill encompasses. The debate is characterised by two words: consensus and balance. To her credit, the minister set the consensus at the outset. In an eloquent speech, she made clear what SNP members in particular have said—that some matters cannot be dealt with simply by legislation. There was a brief spat between the deputy minister and my colleague Stewart Maxwell. Our position is not that we oppose increasing sentences for crimes involving knives—indeed, we will not fail to support efforts to address sentences in summary cases—but we oppose the grandstanding that took place. Of course increasing the mandatory sentence will be beneficial, but we should be clear that the number of people involved is very limited number. However, a consensual tone was set by the minister. The minister made it clear that the problems are wide ranging and that we must address them through legislation, but the law on its own will not  solve the problems. Most members have mentioned at some stage the two issues that have taken up the major part of the debate: knife crime and drugs. Ken Macintosh in particular spoke about our having a knife culture, which is clear; indeed, the minister said that, too. Of course we must address our knife culture and clamp down firmly on people who carry and use knives and weapons, but we would be deluding ourselves if we thought that doing so provides the sole solution. We must accept that the problem is deeply ingrained and wide ranging and that a variety of issues must be addressed, from education to drink, drugs and deprivation, for example. It is obvious that problems relating to drugs affect the criminal law, but those problems are predicated on social problems. Of course we must clamp down hard on drug barons, as Stewart Stevenson said, but we would be deluding ourselves if we thought that we could address the drug problem simply by repression. There is a wide range of reasons behind the drug abuse that takes place in Scotland, some of which we should not sympathise with. I have no sympathy for yuppies and people from affluent backgrounds who use cocaine as a recreational drug. However, we should consider those from other backgrounds who take drugs because of a lack of hope or belief in or expectation from society and knowing that they will not simply reduce their lifespan but kill themselves. Members cannot address such matters simply by passing criminal legislation. The minister was correct to point out that we must address such problems in various ways. Obviously, the bill covers a wide range of issues; indeed, bills sometimes must cover an amalgam of issues. We await with interest the amendments that are lodged at stage 2 because we want to ensure that there is adequate scrutiny and that the bill is not too wide ranging. Perhaps it will need to be, especially with regard to sex offenders. Before the Parliament was established, there was a criticism that, as a result of the timescales to which the United Kingdom Parliament in London had to work, we ended up with miscellaneous provisions bills in which there was sometimes little relationship between the matters covered. Law that is made in haste can be bad. However, there might be no alternative. Having scrutinised the amendments at stage 2, we might accept the minister's proposals, but we should try to work against such an approach. Bill Butler and other members have said that, fundamentally, this is a matter of a balance. Ms Leckie disagrees with that, but I think that we live in a much more complicated society. When we are legislating on any aspect of the criminal law, we must balance the individual's rights against the state's rights. However, as I say, we live in a  changed society and we are right to reconfigure things for various reasons. First, we live in an atomised society in which people do not know their neighbours—often, they do not know the people who live across the road. Years ago, when a policeman asked for someone's name and address, he would probably then know who they were, but that does not happen in our society as a result of the movements that there have been, urbanisation and changes in where policemen stay—they do not necessarily live in the community in which they work. It is therefore important to address how we deal with the criminal law. Science has also moved on. Science now provides us with techniques that were not previously available to work out who an offender is. If new fingerprint technology and DNA-swabbing techniques are available, I cannot see why we cannot consider using them. Patrick Harvie said that the issue is what is done with information. We are not gathering information as Big Brother would in order to try to create a superstate. The issue is what we do with information. We should balance the rights of the individual with the rights of our community. That is where I fundamentally disagree with Ms Leckie. We are individuals and we must protect individuals' rights. She will recall that most of us in the chamber—apart from the Conservatives—agreed many years ago in Scotland that there is such a thing as society and that we do not live only as individuals. A person's individual rights must tie in with the rights of communities to march and so on.

I think that such measures have to be introduced, but the question is what one does with them. Are we opposed to the measure in principle? No, we think that it is sensible. The practice exists and it is important to protect society, the community and the individual from perpetrators of crime. However, we have to monitor how we use such powers. We welcome to some extent the clarification that has been provided. We need to work out how and when the police will exercise the powers. It is not fair to expect the police to give an immediate guarantee about how long they will retain fingerprint information—be it for two or seven days or whatever. Let us work such things out and as long as we bear that in mind, we will be able to address the matter. Bill Aitken, and Alasdair Morgan in particular,  spoke about resources. Jeremy Purvis might think that Alasdair Morgan's remarks were flippant, but I thought that he made a valid contribution. The issue is not so much the individual actions that we take but the compounding of what we are doing. We have to take cognisance of the effect that we have on our colleagues in local government from all political parties—complaints do not come from SNP councillors alone. We must recognise that the actions that we take in Parliament impact on what councillors have to do and must be viewed in total. That is why Alasdair Morgan's points were fundamental. We are happy with the bill and we will support it at stage 1.

Is there a proposal to improve the availability of access by public transport? Will steps be taken to provide financial support for that, given that many hospitals are now being built on out-of-town sites and are difficult to access without a car? As John Farquhar Munro clearly said, hospital car parking has an impact not only on staff and patients, but on visitors.

The corporate body takes legal advice on a wide variety of matters and is actively engaged in bringing all outstanding Holyrood building project matters to a conclusion.

I can assure Mr Ewing that that is not the case. The corporate body appreciates his long-standing interest in the matter. It has provided what information it can. It is alert to various legal issues, including the quinquennium that he has correctly flagged up—I refer to the more than four years that have passed to date. However, the project is extremely complex. Nothing can be considered in isolation and resolving such issues takes time. We can assure Mr Ewing that we are on the case. However, nothing more can be said without—as he and I know, as previously practising agents—disclosing information that would be prejudicial, not to the interests of the corporate body but to the interests of the Scottish Parliament in pursuing any matters that, legally, we will require to pursue in the interests of members.

Credit must go where credit is due. Although the Scottish National Party championed a route development fund, it has clearly been the Executive that has implemented it. I do not mean to disparage the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, but it is perhaps unfortunate that Lewis Macdonald is not here to take the plaudits. After all, he was the minister who initiated the fund and we fully support what it has achieved. Some matters require to be fine tuned and we must take further steps, but we welcome the fund. There is a consensus among members—apart from the Greens—for the fund. It is important to give credit where credit is due. It was not simply politicians who suggested or implemented the fund; civil servants put it in place. Scottish Enterprise is much maligned—I and other SNP members, as well as other members, have routinely given it a kicking, sometimes with justification. However, Mary McLaughlin and Scottish Enterprise's transport department have done a fantastic job of implementing the air route development fund. We should put on record what that organisation has done. It was also involved in the Rosyth ferry. Ms McLaughlin and her team deserve to be recognised for what they have done. Links are vital. The minister and others described the frankly shameful situation when Scotland had only 13 international routes but Ireland had numerous routes that connected the Irish economy, never mind Irish tourism, with the world. Many years ago, we had the ignominy that delegations from Scotland that were going to tartan day events required to hub through Amsterdam or Dublin. That was ridiculous and I am thankful that that no longer happens. The only problem that we now face is that unless people book early, they will not obtain a ticket for a flight from Glasgow or Edinburgh to New York, because the routes are so popular. However, I am thankful that we no longer require to go elsewhere. I fundamentally disagree with the Greens' position; I will deal later with their comments about the environment. The growth in route development is important for the economy and for tourism. It is no accident that the Royal Bank of Scotland is now located at Gogarburn. That is not simply because of its historical base in Scotland or the availability in Edinburgh of skilled staff in financial  matters, but because of the closeness to the airport and to connectivity. Mr Ballard goes on about Dubai. He may think that the importance of the flight from Glasgow to Dubai is about outbound tourism and allowing Scots to benefit from the sun in Dubai, but the benefit of the Dubai route is that it links Scotland with south-east Asia, the Indian sub-continent and Australasia. That is fundamental to our major business. The Royal Bank of Scotland is the biggest business in Scottish history. If we undermine it, we undermine Scotland's economy, so we require to support it. The situation is the same in tourism, which we must address. I heard Mr Ruskell and the gentleman from Friends of the Earth earlier today say that more went out than came in, which is patently absurd. If we did not have the air route development fund, the A1 would be clogged with people from the east coast of Scotland going to Newcastle airport and the M74 would be clogged with people going to Manchester airport. Not only would those airports rather than our airports benefit, but road traffic would increase to access flights. People would not choose to spend a fortnight going down the Clyde. We must address how we attract people here. To the Scottish tourism sector's credit, it recognises that it must change its product. Unless a niche market is involved, the days when people spent two weeks here are gone. The sector is developing shorter-stay breaks, which is why Mr Ewing's point is important. We need to be not just a seven-day-a-week destination but a 12-month-a-year destination, which is why we must go further. We have not done enough for Inverness, to which airlines want to fly—Ryanair has put on record its desire to fly there. If we look at the Ryanair website, we see the tragedy that a place such as Killarney, which is not noted for its major international air links, has Ryanair flights not only to London Stansted but to Frankfurt, whereas Inverness does not. If an airline can fly such routes into Killarney, it is equally capable of flying them into Inverness. We need to access that. Ryanair says that it sees a greater market in Inverness than in Killarney, because of Killarney's proximity to Dublin and other areas. There are other routes for our economy in addition to the Spanish tourism routes that we have—I have some sympathy with Mr Ruskell's points about that. We need to have flights to Madrid and Barcelona so that Scotland can access South America and elsewhere. Flying has environmental consequences and nobody suggests that it is cost free. However, we must recognise the benefits to our economy and the nature of our geography. Flying directly from Scotland is better because it means not two flights  but one, which reduces environmental damage. One of the most significant forms of environmental damage arises from the planes that circle round and round Heathrow airport because they cannot land. They burn up fuel and damage the environment. If travellers can take off from a Scottish airport and land directly at their destination airport, they save an additional flight and circling round greater London. We must improve the rail network. It has been shown on the continent that if good rail routes are created, there is no need to fly between, for example, Brussels and Paris—very few people do that. Flying from Edinburgh or Glasgow to Manchester should not be required. We must address that by improving internal links to negate the need to fly internally. However, external flights will always be required in an island nation such as Scotland.

I am perfectly happy with that, although I have some doubts about BAA's monopoly. However, I am curious to hear how Murdo Fraser explains the success of Manchester airport, which is owned by a local authority. The airports that have been successful operate in a variety of ways, but why has Manchester done spectacularly well when it has remained in council ownership?

At the outset, I pay tribute to my colleague, Andrew Welsh, who is standing down from the SPCB. Since the re-establishment of our Parliament, he has served as a member of the SPCB, which was an unglamorous position in difficult times. We owe a debt of gratitude to him and to all those who serve or have served on that body. Such service has always been viewed as non-party political. As a creature of statute, the SPCB is a vital part of the functioning and administration of this institution. Like others, Andrew Welsh forsook party loyalty and divisions when acting in that role; I will do likewise. The SPCB's purpose is to serve not party or sectional interests but those of the Scottish Parliament and the people that it serves. Members have my assurance that, if elected, I will act without fear of or favour for individuals or party.  I do not know what particular skills I bring, but I offer commitment, diligence, approachability and integrity. I have always considered it an honour and privilege to serve in this Parliament. Whatever views I may hold about Scotland's future constitutional arrangements, I view it as essential to uphold the integrity of this institution and to seek to nurture and cherish it. The role is about serving not just members but those who work here and those whom we are here to serve. In asking for members' support, I reaffirm my commitment to be diligent, accountable and approachable. I will serve the institution and all its members irrespective of any party affiliations and I will do so without fear or favour.

We will support the SSP's motion and the Liberal Democrat amendment, should that be reached. The debate is not about American foreign policy and I am thankful that the main speakers in the debate have kept off that issue, which is a matter for debate on another day. Like other members, I have criticised the war in Iraq, but the principle in the motion would apply irrespective of what country was carrying out these practices. Whether it was the People's Republic of China or the Federal Republic of Germany, what is at issue is not the actions of the individual country but the values that we uphold. Irrespective of who breaches them, Parliament has a duty to preserve and uphold those values. Our laws and values are the fundamental issue. They are laws and values that we have held dear over centuries; indeed, we have abided by them since the middle ages. Even under provocation, when in world wars we have faced the possibility of, and have seen, genocide and atrocities wreaked upon our people and our troops, we have refused to retaliate in like manner because to have done so would have gone against the very ethos of our society, so there have been incidents for which our own soldiers or others have been punished for transgressing the laws that we hold dear. The debate is about the dearly held laws and values of Scotland, which underpin our democratic society and have created the society in which we wish to live. At the outset of the debate, Frances Curran touched on the fact that this is not simply a police matter or a matter for law officers, but a political matter. It is disingenuous for anybody to suggest that it is inappropriate for the law officers to be here. We could not expect the chief constable of Lothian and Borders police or Strathclyde police on his own to risk criticism or his pension—or to risk a trade war embargo or whatever else with whatever country was doing it—by boarding a plane. This comes down to political will: fundamentally, that is what is lacking from the Executive. The Government and the Scottish Executive must stand up for the values to which the people of Scotland adhere and must maintain the laws that we have held dear for centuries. It is also disingenuous to say that there has been no instigation from the police or others. There was a time, in past years, when the Government of France complained bitterly about Algerians and Islamists who were living in London not being pursued or monitored by the UK police.  Nothing happened because the UK did not see a problem. After 9/11, when the matter was perceived differently—lo and behold!—the police could not move fast enough. Why did that come about? It was not because the chief constable of the Metropolitan police suddenly woke up one morning and said, "There is an issue." He was directed by the Government of the United Kingdom to the effect that the police had better clamp down on what was going on and start doing what the French were asking for. There is political involvement. Fundamentally, we have to look at what other Governments have done. Frances Curran and other members have mentioned what European governments big and small have been doing. There is another example in the international community of what can be done. Back in the early 1980s when New Zealand declared in its constitution that it would be nuclear free, the Government of New Zealand said to the United States that its ships could not enter New Zealand's harbours unless the US Government confirmed that no nuclear weapons were on board them. The United States refused to confirm or deny that, and on that basis the New Zealand Government—not the law officers or the police—said that the ships were not welcome. The Executive must make it quite clear to the Government of the United States that we have laws and values, that torture is unacceptable, and that if their planes are carrying people who are involved, they are unacceptable and we do not want them to land in Scotland. If they do, we expect our Government to fully back the police and law officers when they take appropriate action. This starts with the Executive. The tragedy is that even Tory governments in New Zealand have more backbone for preserving the values of their country than a Labour Administration in Scotland has.

It is difficult to sum up when there is no party line to follow—as the Scottish National Party has a free vote, I am speaking as an individual. I support the bill; indeed, long before it was published, I said to the minister that I would fully support it. We must respect that the issues that the bill raises clearly divide not only political parties but households and Scotland in general. I take cognisance of what my colleague Brian Adam  said. Although he opposes the bill, to his credit he correctly acknowledges that change has to occur and that he will respect the Parliament's decision. Marlyn Glen said that the bill should give us a great sense of achievement. I hope that she will not take this as a criticism, but I think that she meant to say that significant progress has been made. I accept that many aspects of the bill will make Scotland a better place. However, some aspects will make us vote with a heavy heart. Some members will vote against the bill, but it is likely that the majority will vote in favour of it. Some members mentioned their time as legal practitioners, which takes me back to the 20 years during which I practised family law. Apart from the odd instances of buffoonery and bluster, I do not remember anybody celebrating their divorce. Divorce was always tinged with sadness. No matter whether the divorce was clearly justified—perhaps there had been a fundamental breach or violence—there had always been something that had brought the couple together in the first instance. Aspects of the relationship could never be taken away. Although we normally celebrate stage 3 debates and the passing of legislation, we will do so today in the knowledge that there are some aspects of family law on which we would rather not legislate. However, we live in the real world, which is why I support the bill. The minister correctly said at the beginning of the debate that our society has changed. Indeed, Scotland has irrevocably changed. Many of those changes have been for the better, although much of our economic progress has come at a severe social price, which is paid in divorce and the dislocation of families. We cannot hide from, ignore or refuse to recognise that fact; we have to accept it and deal with the changes. Whether people prefer to cohabit is a matter for them; I do not judge them. I have been married for many years, but another type of relationship now exists. There have been clear cases of hardship when rights or moral obligations were not met. I do not see the two kinds of relationship as mutually irreconcilable, which is why I am happy to support the bill. In recognising a new situation, we do not seek to exclude the position of marriage; it is accepted that marriage has a position in society. Like others, I disagree with Patrick Harvie. I believe that it is important to recognise that marriage is the cornerstone and foundation—

I did not suggest that Patrick Harvie criticised marriage. However, the majority of parties recognise that marriage has a special position; it is a pinnacle and should be treated as such, although that does not mean that it is necessarily deified or sanctified. It is special when people come together. As I mentioned earlier, marriage is not something that one enters on a whim or a fancy in the same way as some American pop stars enter salons in Las Vegas. That kind of behaviour fundamentally detracts from what marriage means. We should recognise that, because marriage brings with it obligations, it should have a special position. That does not mean that people should not be allowed to choose not to enter into marriage and should not be given rights when they choose not to enter into marriage but to regulate their affairs in a different manner. However, we have to recognise that marriage is pivotal in our society and we should seek to protect it. Given those circumstances, I will be voting in favour of the bill. I recognise that progress has been made on a variety of other issues—those issues will not be touched on in tomorrow's press, but they represent a significant change for the better in our society. Progress had to be made. That has been difficult and it is to the Executive's credit that it chose to introduce the bill. With power comes responsibility. We had to recognise the change in our society and I will be supporting the Executive and the bill.

I am diametrically opposed to my colleague Fergus Ewing on this matter—I much prefer the substantive law. Pauline McNeill's point that we are in uncharted waters is clearly the case and matters will have to develop. As the minister correctly touched on earlier, we must recognise the new world in which we find ourselves in this 21 st century. People choose not to marry and that is a matter for them—some people disagree with that and others do not. It would be fundamentally wrong if money and access to legal rights that we think are important were available only on the basis of hardship—an agreement and obligations have been entered into and that would therefore be inappropriate. We are talking about creating rights. That takes us back to the corollary that with rights come responsibility and obligations, not simply when one party faces hardship, but when both parties have signed up to and entered into a relationship. If that relationship breaks down, the outcome should not simply be that someone should face economic hardship—they have broken the relationship that they made. They might not have taken marriage vows before a minister or a priest, but they entered into that arrangement so its breakdown must be dealt with. I disagree fundamentally that some funding should be required to protect a child's welfare. At the end of the day, the child was born of a relationship and whether or not it was born in wedlock, the parents have a responsibility. Simply to say that payment will be made only if there is some question of vulnerability or hardship on the part of either parent is entirely unacceptable. That applies especially to males, who must take responsibility for the child they have fathered. Whether or not the mother has a well-paid job, we expect the father to contribute financially to the child because it is their responsibility to do so—that touches on the points that were made about contact. Fathers have fatherly obligations that are not simply monetary and that is why we should leave the provisions as they are in the bill.

I am opposed to both amendment 42 and amendment 15. I accept the minister's point that these matters are best left to the court, but it is important that we bring home to people that court orders are not granted on a whim. I do not think that doing so is intimidatory. Of course there is a problem with instances of mothers not granting contact to an absent father, but there is a bigger problem with fathers who apply for contact and then do not take it up; that is why we should ram home the importance of orders. That is a far more complex situation and it arises far more often. We should tell people that if they apply for contact and the court grants it, it is important to take it up. We should say to them, "You should not be watching the football live on television; you should be undertaking the obligation to your child. You should not be seeking to go away with your new girlfriend; you should be undertaking the obligation that you applied for."

We require not simply to warn of the consequences, but to stress the importance of the order. Having contact is an obligation that should be treated responsibly and with respect—the buzzword that is flying around this chamber and others. If someone applies for contact, the order should be adhered to. There should be a warning to mothers, but equally, there should be a warning to fathers. They would have the opportunity to take legal advice on the matter. It is important that we maintain an opportunity to make it quite clear that the contact order is important, not simply in the legal process, but in how we view parents' obligations to their child.

It is clear that there is agreement in the chamber that wider family involvement is beneficial. However, I concur with the points made by Christine Grahame, Mary Mulligan and Margaret Mitchell. To enshrine contact between grandparents and grandchildren in law would be fundamentally wrong. What matters, and what must always be paramount, is the best interests of the child. There is no doubt that the involvement of a loving grandparent, aunt or uncle is beneficial and will add to a child's life, but to force the involvement of grandparents on the child would be counterproductive. As has been pointed out, there is already an opportunity for any interested party—regardless of whether they are a blood relative—to apply for a contact or residence order. Sometimes, tragedies occur when sons and daughters fall out with their parents, but they should work towards reconciliation. It would be fundamentally wrong to enshrine in law the opportunity to make an order for access to a grandson or granddaughter, except in the most unusual circumstances in which part of the family is deceased. We should accept what Mary Mulligan said. We must take cognisance of the grandparents charter, but fundamentally we must trust in the good sense of our judges and sheriffs, who, in the main, tend to get it right. These are difficult matters and decisions must be made on each individual case. We should not force the issue in any particular circumstance.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its estimate is of the total cost of the Edinburgh tram scheme and what proportion of such cost the Executive will fund. (S2O-8449)

Given that the total amount for the tram scheme would allow for the renewal of the entire bus fleet in the Lothians and for the current city bus service to be operated for free for seven years, does the minister agree with the Secretary of State for Transport, who is an MP for the city, that in many cases a well-designed and promoted bus-based system is likely to provide a more cost-effective solution? That is why the secretary of state rejected trams for Leeds. Would it not be better for us to do likewise for Edinburgh?

I speak as an individual, not as an SNP front-bench spokesman, as this is a matter on which the party is not whipped. I do not agree with my colleagues who have spoken before me; I concur with the views of the minister and—as we are talking about legal issues—I adopt the points that were made by Jim Wallace. Divorce is always a tragedy. Even if it is justified on moral or legal grounds, it is a tragedy for the individuals concerned, as there will always have been something that made them enter into a relationship. It also has a significant effect on others, especially dependent children and, as Margaret Jamieson has said, non-dependent children in due course. We must try to enable people to separate and go onwards, bearing in mind the good things that brought them into the relationship but allowing matters to proceed with as little acrimony as possible. In an ideal world, we would make it harder to enter into marriage, rather than harder to get out, but we do not live in that society. We need to counsel people and provide not just mediation but aspects of reconciliation. Like others, I welcome the minister's earlier pronouncements. As Jim Wallace mentioned, this is a cultural matter, which is why there are differences between societies—it is not so much the legislation as the counselling that is important. We need to get across to the people of Scotland that marriage is a significant and serious matter that should not be entered into lightly or discarded on a whim or a fancy—not that I believe that people do that. However, there is a growing perception that marriage is only a minor impediment that people can get out of. Obligations  and responsibilities go with marriage, but if it breaks down for whatever reason, our society will not be served well by a law that seeks to impose unnecessary impediments. It would take the wisdom of Solomon to work out whether the separation period should be 12 months, 18 months or two years. It is difficult to find any tangible evidence for those periods. However, I concur with the minister because the matter has been considered by the Scottish Law Commission, which has not made its recommendation on a whim or a fancy. It has given significant consideration to the matter by looking to those people on the front line who are regularly involved with divorce and separation, such as the judiciary, the shrieval bench and the Law Society of Scotland. It might be that in due course we will seek to change the separation period again. At present, however, we need to bring our legislative process into the 21 st century, we need to make changes, and we should have some trust in the Law Commission. We are not making it more difficult to get out of marriage, but we should simply remind the people of Scotland that marriage is to be valued—whether as a gold standard or whatever else—that it carries with it obligations and responsibilities and that the law is made to recognise that and to mediate.

Will the minister give way?

The minister's remarks on air weapons were flippant and, frankly, scandalous. Our position on the matter is quite clear. However, I will not waste any more words on that point. On rendition flights, I made it clear that a chief constable would need to be brave to investigate such incidents. However, if we are to uphold our values and legal system, we should say to the Americans that, if they do not assure us that American planes are not carrying those people when they come to Scotland, the Executive will fully support chief police officers in carrying out their lawful duty. At the same time, the Executive must tell the UK Government that we find the situation entirely unacceptable and that if American planes come here they will face boarding and investigation.

Will the member give way?

I am happy to accept that Ms McNeill is sincere in her opposition, as are others. However, there comes a time when it is the job of the Government, not just the law officers, to say that some things are unacceptable. I fully accept her sincerity, but does she agree that, ultimately, the Executive must make it clear to the UK Government that rendition flights are unacceptable and that the police will act on its behalf?

I thank the minister for her statement. The Scottish National Party concurs fully with much of what she said. No one who enters politics or who is given the privilege of appearing in the chamber seeks to make Scotland a more lawless place; we all seek to make Scotland a better place. A debate such as this gives us a better opportunity to review matters than does an adversarial debate that is focused on one aspect. The debate will be wide ranging—the minister's speech has been wide ranging. The SNP accepts that progress has been made—I am on record as saying that. I see the glass as half full, not half empty. It is a Scottish trait to consider the worst aspects. The SNP has welcomed the many legislative changes that have been made. We also appreciate the many procedural changes. There are difficulties on the way, and we have recently heard of miscarriages of justice. The system must be big enough to admit when it gets something wrong. I do not want to go into individual cases, but recently someone was released after a considerable period in prison. Is  he due an apology? Is the family of the victim due an apology? What are the circumstances? I am not seeking a comment from the minister, but that is a test not only of whether the system has got it right, but of whether it is big enough to admit that it has got it wrong.

Absolutely. I was not criticising the Executive, but pointing out how we should shape the justice system. The system must be prepared to admit its errors as well as to seek praise. Significant progress is being made on witnesses—the Solicitor General for Scotland is here to receive that accolade. Matters are still being raised; I am particularly thinking of one that was presented to the Public Petitions Committee yesterday, although it is not appropriate now to go into the tragedy that befell Mrs Reid. Ultimately, we will have to balance the operation of the system with the needs and wants of the victim. Until now we have ignored the rights of the victim, and it is to the credit of the Executive, and the Solicitor General in particular, that that has been dealt with. There is an opportunity to go further—just how far remains to be seen. There are areas in which the SNP considers that the Executive has not gone far enough, such as the changes on air weapons, although they are welcome. We need an all-encompassing system that must be dealt with by the Parliament, with the Executive taking responsibility for driving it forward. Progress has been made on knives, and the SNP recognises that the Executive has, quite correctly, been willing to drive further and faster to create a significantly different system in Scotland than has been the case south of the border. It would be logical to do likewise with air weapons, on which there is a significant and distinctive Scottish problem.

Our position is clear. New weapons should be licensed when they are first sold, and unless someone has them for the specific purpose of pest and vermin control, or because they are a member of a registered gun  club, there is no legally justifiable or ordinary commonsense reason for possessing them. Air-guns are not things of fun that people should get in their Christmas stockings to enable them to go out shooting. The situation is unacceptable: we have said that before and we say it again. It is important that the minister mentioned respect and responsibility. Those words have been bandied around, but they are fundamental to individuals accepting responsibility for their actions. Individuals have rights, but they must also recognise the rights of their neighbours. That is why we are happy for antisocial behaviour orders to be used in Mid Calder. We recognise that that cannot be the ultimate solution, as it might lead the offenders simply to congregate in East Calder, Pumpherston or West Calder. However, the residents of Mid Calder are entitled to have immediate action taken to protect them on a Friday or Saturday night or at any other time of the week. We must look for a solution that is based on acceptance of responsibility and respect. Some of the problems are cultural matters in which legislation has a role but cannot, ultimately, be the enforcer. It is important to recognise that the criminal justice system alone cannot solve all the problems that manifest themselves as criminal justice matters. It is impossible for the police to do anything other than firefight unless we drill down to the question of why kids are hanging around in Mid Calder. Some of the offences are committed out of badness and the offenders need to be dealt with through punishment; however, we must work out and address why certain areas are affected and why certain individuals are involved. I received a written answer from the minister on 1 December that makes it clear that there are social and economic issues involved and that drink, drugs and deprivation underpin much offending. The answer states that 77 per cent of people who are sent to prison have a drink or drug dependency problem. We have a problem that cannot be addressed simply by the criminal justice system; however, that does not mean that it should abdicate responsibility. The house owners and shop owners in Mid Calder want a solution, not an excuse. They want immediate action. We must remember that neither the police nor prisons alone can address these matters; they have to be addressed in different ways. If we are to get the society that we want, we must address the underlying problems of drink, drugs and deprivation. The percentage of people who are admitted to prison with a drink or drug dependency problem is shameful and reflects badly not so much on the Executive as on Scottish society. We have a problem in our midst and, if we are to address its manifestations in crime and antisocial behaviour, we must tackle it. We cannot simply  expect our police officers to rush from area to area, dishing out ASBOs, firefighting on a wet Friday night, or whatever. We need to drill down below that. Finally, I will address rendition flights. Professor Christopher Gain today seems to be suggesting—as an academic lawyer would—that those who fuel such planes are guilty of participation. However, it would be a brave chief constable who sought to access a plane that was operated by the Central Intelligence Agency or some other United States agency. It is a political matter that must be dealt with by the Executive and by number 10. We have values, which we have talked about before, and the system must be big enough to admit it when it gets things wrong. If we get something right, we should congratulate ourselves; if we get something wrong, we should recompense those whom we have mistreated.

The Executive should make it clear that we have laws and values in Scotland, which we have upheld through the centuries and which we adhere to. It should make it clear that we object to torture and do not wish to participate in flights that are linked to that. At a minimum, the Executive should state publicly that it is telling the Prime Minister that we do not want those flights here. The Executive may not have the power to redirect the planes, as airspace is a reserved matter, but it should state whether it is for or against such flights. Is the Executive prepared to tell Tony Blair that it does not want Scotland's hands to be sullied with the carting of those people from the middle east to eastern Europe, whether they are in nappies, whether they are drugged and wherever they are from? That is the least that the Executive should do, because it is fundamentally accountable for Scots law. We do not wish to participate. If Scots law is being flouted by anyone—by a ned in Mid Calder or by the largest superpower the world has ever known—and what is happening is contrary to the values of our society, we should make it clear that that is unacceptable. There is a historical precedent for that. Some 20-odd years ago, New Zealand amended its constitution to state that the country would be nuclear free. That was proposed by a Labour Government, to its credit. New Zealand then faced the problem of United States ships seeking to enter its ports to refuel. The Government of New Zealand said that, unless the US denied that the ships had nuclear weapons on board, the ships could not enter its ports; however, US policy on its ships is the same as that on its aeroplanes.

No. The US neither confirms nor denies that nuclear weapons are on board its ships, just as it neither confirms nor denies whether its planes are carrying prisoners from A to B. To its credit, the New Zealand Government said that unless the US denied that nuclear weapons were on board the ships—or if it confirmed that they were—the ships could not dock there. The New Zealand Government acted like a Labour Government. It acted to uphold the values and the constitution of New Zealand.

New Zealand's constitution has remained unchanged, although Conservative Governments have since taken over. The New Zealand Government recognised the law, the constitution and the values of the people. The Scottish Executive has failed to stand up for the laws and values of the people. It is the Executive's duty to make it clear that rendition flights are unacceptable and to tell Tony Blair that we do not want those flights in our airspace.

The minister is quite right to repeat on an annual basis that violence against women is entirely  unacceptable. There is no excuse for it—no one deserves a slap, let alone a serious physical or sexual assault—but sadly it is perceived by many as legitimate. However, we must place violence against women in a wider context. It is a cultural assault as well as a tangible physical assault and for that reason I am happy to support Christine Grahame's amendment. Two particular points apply to the cultural aspect that overarches the incidents of violence that are perpetrated, whether at a minor level or at an extremely serious level, against women. There is the aspect that demeans and degrades women and there is also a culture that celebrates machismo in Scotland. Both are equally pernicious. With regard to our amendment, it is clear that we have a culture that demeans and degrades women. In my view, pornography is the same situation as prostitution. I do not regard prostitution as a victimless crime; it is most certainly not that. I never subscribed to the position of some members on prostitution. I welcome the position that the Executive has taken, but I think that it should go further. Pornography is in the same category; my colleague Christine Grahame dealt eloquently with that matter. Pornography clearly views women as products. It undermines and degrades their position and views them almost as assets to be traded rather than as citizens to be respected. In Scotland, there is a culture of violence that must be addressed. To some extent, it is a culture of machismo. I noticed that the papers referred to a speech that the Solicitor General for Scotland made earlier in the week. Sadly, the Executive website does not deal with her comments on that matter, but it deals with other points that were equally laudable. She is correct to say that there is a culture in Scotland that, to some extent, venerates the hard man. As a result, there is an overarching culture of violence.

Absolutely. I do not dispute that some cultures have less machismo than ours but still have the problem of violence against women. Part of the root problem in Scotland is a perception that we are, to some extent, the Scottish hard man who participates in the extensive drinking that results in the knife culture and in going home and giving the wife a slap, or worse. I do not see the two aspects as mutually irreconcilable. If we are to address some aspects—if not all aspects—of violence against  women, we must address that culture of violence and machismo in which the hard man is venerated. Sadly, that happens in many instances, but there is an attempt to play it down. It is also part of common parlance and is viewed in television shows as something that is almost funny. We must address that. I accept the minister's point, but the two aspects are not necessarily irreconcilable. Until we recognise the wider cultural aspect, we must oppose those aspects of our culture that demean and degrade women, such as pornography, prostitution and trafficking. We must also recognise that we have a serious cultural problem with violence. The culture in which we view ourselves as harder than our neighbours south of the border or elsewhere results in knife carrying, binge drinking and violence against women. As well as taking legislative action, we must address that cultural problem. That is why we are happy to support the motion as well as our amendment.

In supporting Fiona Hyslop's amendment, I make it quite clear that the aim of having ambitious, excellent schools that nurture, foster and give life to the ambitions and talents of our young people is clearly laudable. That aim will be supported uniformly around the chamber, as it should be. However, the fundamental question is how to achieve that aim and what we do when we construct the schools and create the curriculum that has been mentioned. I believe that the precursor for achieving that aim is a population of young people who have hope, faith, vision and a fundamental belief in themselves. The basis of taking chances and opportunity is self-belief and confidence that we can be all that we seek to be, that we can fulfil all our hopes and dreams, and that we can be all we can be. The tragedy of Scotland is that many people do not believe that they can realise their talents, that they can fulfil their dreams and that they can achieve so much more of what they see on television and in the media. They have no faith or confidence in themselves and if we do not address that fundamental failing, the problem will continue throughout the generations. I agreed with many of the points that Mr McAveety made, apart from those about Scottish history. As a child of the 1960s, I feel eternally grateful for the health service into which I was born and which nurtured and cared for me, for the free education system and for the opportunity to go to university with a grant and without having to pay tuition fees. I and others were able to achieve our aspirations only through those facilities.  Over the past year, I have had the fortunate privilege of interviewing many expatriate Scots; when asked what Scotland gave them, they uniformly replied, "An education." That is the fundamental thing that we have given people who have left their native land and they are eternally grateful for it. We should be proud of that. Indeed, those people will testify to the benefits of the comprehensive system, although it could be argued that any such benefits were limited to them and a few others rather than to everyone. On the downside, it became apparent that Scotland did not give those expatriate Scots any self-confidence or knowledge of their own history. We must address that failure. I am not putting forward any conspiracy theories or suggesting that all that was done deliberately. The situation has simply arisen. However, it must be addressed. No one can deny that areas of Scotland suffer from a huge lack of self-worth and self-belief and from a culture of nihilism that manifests itself in antisocial behaviour, self-harm and other types of violence. In fact, I suggest that even more educated people in Scotland aspire to go only so far. Not only is there a glass ceiling for women in this country, but there is also a glass ceiling for Scots in general. We need a system that allows us to address the lack of self-confidence and to target the lack of understanding of Scottish history and who the Scots people are. To its credit, the Executive has acknowledged that there is a problem with people's confidence.

As I was about to say, the Executive has quite correctly supported Carol Craig's centre of confidence and well-being. Robert Brown might well think that what I have suggested is rubbish; indeed, I have argued with people in my own party who think that this lack of self-confidence is some alien manifestation and can be cured by independence. However, it exists. Robert Brown might be criticising the First Minister for supporting Carol Craig's approach. After all, if he feels that there is no problem because of Gordon Brown's position in the UK Government and the fact that Tony Blair attended Fettes College when Frank McAveety and I were attending state schools, he must also feel that there is clearly no requirement to take the direction that I believe Ms Craig is quite correctly taking.  However, I repeat that, notwithstanding Scots' individual successes in the UK Government or elsewhere, there is a problem that must be addressed. If the minister denies that, he nullifies Ms Craig's correct analysis of the current situation. As a result, his intervention was fatuous and is based on a false premise. On the teaching of Scottish history, Ms Hyslop was correct to focus on how we address certain external matters. However, we must also address Scotland's current social problems, including sectarianism and Anglophobia, by giving people knowledge of who they are. One could call it the braveheart effect—Dr Murray might well chortle at that—but people in Scotland fail to understand the effect of the 1745 rebellion or do not even know who fought at the battle of Culloden. If we took a vox pop on the question, many people would probably think that the battle of Culloden was not part of a civil war but a doing-down of the flower of Scotland by English forces. In fact, more people died in that battle at the hands of the Black Watch than died at the hands of the Duke of Cumberland. Again, we have to address that problem. Moreover, as west of Scotland members will certainly be aware, one element of the orange and green divide is the perception that the Catholic church in Scotland is some alien church that came from Ireland and that the natural church in Scotland is the reformed church. In fact, the Catholic church in Scotland predates the reformed church; to be more precise, the reformed church came from the Catholic church, whose unique history goes back to the declaration of Arbroath. That declaration and the papal bull made it quite clear that the Scottish Catholic church was to be a separate church in a separate nation. For that reason, the Scottish Catholic church is the only non-national church that the Vatican recognises. The Catholic church in Québec is recognised only as part of the Catholic church in Canada, just as the Catholic church in Bavaria is recognised only as part of the German Catholic church. All those aspects testify to the Scottish Catholic church's unique history. If we are to address the current problem of equating Catholicism with Irishness or whatever else manifests itself in trouble at old firm games, we need to give people a fundamental understanding of their history. It is not just how people act outwith—

For those reasons, we must support the SNP amendment and address the issue of the Scottish people's lack of self-confidence and knowledge of their own history.

To ask the Scottish Executive what funding is provided to assist the promoting of football as a means of reducing offending and antisocial behaviour. (S2O-8046)

I am none the wiser. Numerous officers—such as Police Constable Thomson, the community officer at Bingham in Edinburgh—have started youth football training and have consequently seen a significant decline in offending and disorder. PC Thomson could do more if more facilities and funding were provided. Given that the police force gives his time for free and that he gives up much of his own free time, is it not appropriate for the Executive to assist him by providing facilities and funding for his worthwhile project?

At the outset, I draw the chamber's attention to my declaration in the register of members' interests. Luath Press is publishing a book that I am writing in conjunction with Henry McLeish. Etched on the wall of the Parliament of the Scottish people are words and prose from Scots throughout the centuries. Why? They are there because they testify to who we are and to what we stand for. It was therefore appropriate that this chamber, restored after 300 years, should embody those words as a salutary reminder, not just of who we are, but of what those who have been elected are to represent. Why? Literature is a nation's soul. Giving the Nobel lecture in 1970, Alexander Solzhenitsyn stated that literature "becomes the living memory of the nation. Thus it preserves and kindles within itself the flame of her spent history, in a form which is safe from deformation and slander. In this way literature, together with language, protects the soul of the nation." A translation might be a masterpiece, but there are often ideas that can never be properly translated or explained except in the language in  which they were written. That is why, in learning a language, the study of literature and prose in the native tongue is essential to provide a clear insight into and understanding of language and people. Writers and poets are revered in nations and by peoples across the globe for reflecting who they are and the events that forged them and values that formed them. Literature and poetry run deep in the psyche as well as the soul of many nations, and help to pen a portrait of them and their people. Zola, Balzac and Voltaire in France; Goethe, Hesse and Grass in Germany, and Tolstoy, Chekhov and Pushkin in Russia all reflect the land of their birth. Closer to home, while Wordsworth, Shakespeare and Dickens are quintessentially English, Burns, Scott and Stevenson are irredeemably Scottish. Their words and prose define who we are and are reflected in the values that we uphold. It is for those reasons that we celebrate the words of our national bard on Burns night and on many other occasions. Similarly, Scott, Stevenson and others provide a backdrop for the Scottish people. They pen a picture of Scotland, not of "Braveheart". There was an age when it seemed that literature in Scotland was frozen in time by those greats and one or two others, such as the recently passed away and fondly remembered Robin Jenkins. That has changed recently, with a veritable explosion of works by new and not so new authors. Bookshelves in Scotland are now awash with the young and old, the experienced and inexperienced, trying their hand at writing their prose and reflecting their people. For that, some credit must be given to the Executive for actions and initiatives, but it is all threatened by the potential takeover of Ottakar's by Waterstone's. That is why this is not just a commercial debate that should rest with Westminster, but a cultural matter that goes to Scotland's very soul. It is not simply the encouragement of Scottish authors and poets in their work, but the ability of those writers to access the Scottish public and the availability of the fruits of their labour in our high street bookshops that matters. Writers require not just support to write their works, but the opportunity for the rest of us to read those works if the history that defines who we are is to be available in future years. That is why this takeover is not just bad news for the staff at Ottakar's but for Scottish writers, publishers, printers and ultimately readers. Ottakar's has a good name in promoting and supporting not just Scottish writers but local writers in what is, after all, a small land with distinctive communities. Alan Bissett's musings about Falkirk trigger memories for those of us who are from central Scotland, but not necessarily for people  who come from elsewhere in Scotland. What reflects Glasgow does not necessarily reflect the northern isles. That ethos is not shared by Waterstone's. Waterstone's is perceived as being highly centralised in the context not just of Scotland, but of the United Kingdom. For Waterstone's, sales matter more than taste and a book's value to the company's profit margin matters more than the intangible values that are deeply embedded in a nation's soul or psyche. If the takeover goes through without cast-iron guarantees being obtained, the consequences are potentially catastrophic. If our literature is not available to be read, writing will not flourish but wither and what remains of our publishing sector will follow. Ultimately, our people will be denied what Solzhenitsyn called the flame of their spent history. It will be the ultimate irony if such an event occurs when Edinburgh has just received the accolade of world city of literature. For sure, the award is merited, but if the city's literature is to have a future as well as a past, it needs a publishing, printing and bookselling sector that is vibrant, not historic. If our writers are not to join the litany of past greats such as Bartholomew or Collins, they need to be protected and nurtured. The Executive must make it clear that Scotland is unique, as displayed by its literature. We are not a region, but a nation with a soul. That means that we need to be treated distinctly by the Office of Fair Trading. Our needs and wants are unique, as they reflect our past and our desire for a future. In the event that a takeover proceeds, assurances must be obtained that works of Scottish authors and prints from Scottish publishers will continue to be stocked. Such stocks should not be limited to the greats, such as Ian Rankin and J K Rowling, whose works sell on a global scale, but should include those authors who cater to a Scottish market or to a specific area within our small nation. This is not a narrow commercial matter but a cultural necessity and potential economic catastrophe, so the Executive must become involved. A takeover by HMV would be bad for writers as well as readers; it would affect our culture as well as our commerce. At worst, it would deprive our writers and publishers of the oxygen that they need to live and breathe; at best, it would denude our high streets of the diversity of outlets that book lovers desire. Ottakar's might not be Scottish Power, but it is arguably just as vital. Anglophone—never mind Francophone—Canada protects its literature and prose as well as its indigenous publishing and  artistic sector. Ireland, too, offers protections and so must Scotland. To say that the issue is a commercial matter that is reserved to Westminster is to abdicate responsibility not just for supporting our country's writers and poets but for protecting our nation's very soul. I ask the minister to ensure that Scotland's voice on such matters is heard, that the points that I have made are put and that our nation's soul is protected.

We, too, are happy to commend the bill to the Parliament. We pay tribute to all those, including the minister, involved in bringing the bill forward. We accept that the bill will not provide an overarching solution to Scotland's criminal justice problems, but it will address the variety of areas that the minister was correct to mention. We recognise that there is no silver bullet to address the many problems that communities face. Despite the mantras that may be chanted by different political parties, the myriad problems require a multitude of solutions that will each need to be considered. On other days, other bills will be introduced that we might welcome or take issue with, but the bill that faces us today—the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill—is one that we are happy to support. I echo the minister's comments on criminal justice authorities, which will ensure best practice. We recognise that best practice has not always happened and that there have been faults. Those may have been systemic or structural or, sometimes, they may have occurred simply because personality issues have arisen. In the best circumstances, perhaps criminal justice authorities would never be required, but the fact is that the existing failings and flaws need to be addressed. We know that concerns about the proposed criminal justice authorities were expressed not only by island authorities, as Mr Wallace mentioned during the stage 3 debate, but by mainland authorities. However, provided that the Executive takes on board the fact that there can be no one-size-fits-all solution, we believe that bringing criminal justice matters together will ensure that the necessary systems and parties—both those from different authorities and those from different departments within the same authority—will work together. For that reason, we fully support the proposals. Clearly, the management of sex offenders has been a significant cause for concern, not only in the newspapers but in our communities where problems have been caused. Members have raised the issue in many different debates and it is a significant problem. The provisions in the bill will go some way towards addressing the problem but they will not solve it. At the end of the day, we live in a society of human beings—and to err is human. Problems will still arise, but we believe that the bill will provide some reassurance. We take on board the minister's comments that  criminal justice social work will be fully resourced, but we reiterate that the bill will clearly have significant resource implications. The term "wrap-around care" is sometimes used to describe the supervision that serious offenders require, but some offenders will require almost exactly that. For some, a visit from a social worker may be required daily or even several times a day. Such supervision is about ensuring not just the well-being of the individual on whom the social worker is checking up, but the safety of the community in which they live. Given that many such offenders are potential dangers, they will require to be watched—either by social workers or by police officers—with great care. Accordingly, resourcing is a pivotal issue. Another reason why the bill will be beneficial is that it will provide powers that, to some extent, were perhaps already being exercised even though, in many instances, such powers did not exist. The bill may simply legitimise what is already the practice of many police officers and social workers, who have sought to look after the best interests of the community. There is an obligation on us to ensure that such actions have the full authority of the Government and the Parliament. Probation orders—like drug treatment and testing orders, home detention orders and curfew orders—will be beneficial, but they will not be a silver bullet. On their own, they will not provide a solution to the problem but they take us in the best direction. We are happy to accept that. However, further debates will need to be brought back to the chamber on other days because the major issue is not so much what happens when people are released from prison but—despite what the Conservatives may trumpet—the numbers of people who are in prison, which remain too high. That issue still needs to be addressed. Sadly, society will always have a requirement for prisons to deal with those who commit serious offences for which, in society's view, the only suitable punishment by which the offender's card can be marked is imprisonment. For our protection, dangerous offenders must be taken out of our communities, but we have far too many people who are in prison because they are, to some extent, the flotsam and jetsam of our society. Until such time as we address those social problems, we will not be able to address the wider issue. My final point is that, although overarching bills will be needed to address how the Sentencing Commission determines who goes to prison and other issues such as, to some extent, the period that prisoners are required to serve and how they will be released, we must nevertheless recognise that social problems cannot be solved by the criminal justice system. Matters that are connected  with the economy, deprivation and drink and drug abuse are social matters, which criminal justice authorities—whether prison officers, police officers or social workers—cannot solve; society must solve them.

As the lawyers would say, I adopt the comments of Mr Purvis and Mr Butler. As the saying goes, legislate in haste, repent at leisure. We are in fact paying the price for a short-term fix that was carried out many years ago by the Tories to try to reduce the number of prisoners. It is disingenuous of them to come in, as Mr Butler said correctly, to try to provide a solution to that problem when we are trying to deal with another matter. The issue is of serious concern and Miss Goldie is quite right to raise it. Clearly, people wish transparency in sentencing. They also wish to ensure that those who are a serious danger and threat to our communities are addressed. We need to do that in a manner that will provide a long-term solution and will not create even more problems.  This is not the bill in which the matter should be dealt with. We should have some trust and faith in the Sentencing Commission, which is, after all, made up of people who are distinguished in many fields. We should allow them time and space in which to come forward with a solution that will not simply be aimed at an election campaign, which is obviously gearing up under Miss Goldie and her new deputy, but which will provide a working system for the people of Scotland for years to come. We have serious problems in our prisons. One of the issues is addressed by Miss Goldie's amendment. However, we have to address a variety of matters. Simply seeking to have short-term and long-term prisoners dealt with in the same way is utterly nonsensical. We should be seeking to get as many short-term prisoners as possible out of incarceration so that we can deal with them in the community, as Jeremy Purvis has said on record on previous occasions. We need to take a pragmatic and sensible approach. I do not usually concur with the First Minister or adopt what he says, but I thought that his earlier response to Miss Goldie was quite correct: we should allow the Sentencing Commission to come forward with suggestions and, thereafter, let the Executive produce a bill that will cover the entire area of our sentencing policy rather than only the question of how we manage a minority of serious offenders who are released on licence and a few other add-ons.

To some extent, I concur with Mr Maxwell. Irrespective of how the provision has come about, I believe that it will be beneficial. As a defence agent, I know that when a probation order was imposed, the courts forgot all about it unless its terms were fundamentally breached. The provision will empower our sheriffs and, because it provides them with a more hands-on approach and opportunities for monitoring, it will also help to back up probation officers in any difficulties that they might face. I seek clarification on a point that probably affects sheriffs more than the probation service. Will sheriffs receive advice on how to use the provision? Will some methodology be provided with regard to instances in which, for example, what might turn out to be a short leash could be put on someone on a probation order? Will the  Executive work with the Sheriffs Association to ensure that the sensible provision works and is used in practice?

We fully support the amendments in the minister's name. We have been calling for such measures for some time and we welcome their arrival now. However, we seek assurance from the minister on the points that have been raised by the Association of Directors of Social Work, although that organisation's concerns will no doubt have been transmitted directly to him. Clearly, the new measures will have immediate effect and will have significant resource and financial implications, especially for local authorities and, most important, for social work departments. It is clear that the people whom the new measures will deal with will require significant resource management and that that will impinge greatly on social work departments. As has been outlined today, there have been record numbers of vacancies in social work, so we seek an assurance that local authorities will not be further burdened without the provision of the consequent resourcing. There are difficulties for which everyone in the chamber has to take responsibility. Having given responsibility to local authorities without any consequent additional resourcing, we need to give them some assurance. Given the sensitivities of the great difficulties and recent tragedies that have occurred, we must ensure that we are not simply passing the buck. I trust that the minister will ensure that local authorities are properly provided for in doing what the Executive, to its credit, is asking them to do. We support the measures.

Jim Wallace is correct to highlight the unique nature of our island communities. We recognise their special needs and requirements. However, we believe that the amendments in the name of the minister address the issue. The minister addressed to some extent the other issue that I want to raise, but I seek a further assurance that there will not be a one-size-fits-all approach. Although the needs and wants of island communities are distinct, the same could be said of many other areas in relation to criminal justice. The needs and wants of the Angus glens are not necessarily reflected by what is required in a Dundee housing scheme. In east-central Scotland, what happens in the Borders is not necessarily reflected by the requirements of the city of Edinburgh. We seek an assurance that practice and guidelines will provide an opportunity for the requirements of different areas to be addressed differently. The islands are unique, but there are vastly different areas even in mainland Scotland. It is essential that, in relation to their powers, criminal justice authorities should be given the guidelines and direction that enable them to deal with matters individually, to assuage the fears and alarms not just of island communities but of other rural areas that have raised concerns with me and, doubtless, with the minister.

I have a great deal of sympathy with amendment 6. There might be times when an immediate response is necessary; if so, I have no doubt that a CJA will make such a response. However, if we are gearing up to a situation where there might be a dispute, some formal period should be allowed for the CJA to deal with matters expeditiously. Although that period should be a reasonable length, it should be of sufficiently short duration. The provision should not prevent any immediate response to an issue of significant public concern, but I agree that a minimum period should be set to give the CJA the opportunity to make a fuller investigation in the variety of departments under its control. Ms Baillie's amendment 6 strikes a sensible balance between those two needs.

I welcome the debate. However, as other members—especially Ms Alexander—have commented, it is ironic that it has been initiated by the Tories. Scottish manufacturing did not just haemorrhage under the Conservatives—it was crucified. That carried not just an economic cost, but a social cost for many of our communities; when the Conservatives look at the statistics, they forget that whole communities were fundamentally damaged. Some changes that occurred may have been inevitable, but the Conservatives made them with cruelty and without taking cognisance of the social costs. In many communities, whole generations—not just young men, but old men who could not adapt to the new service sector—were left to wither on the vine. The Conservatives created a vacuum that allowed long-term unemployment and heroin to enter the veins of many communities. Today we face the social consequences of their economic policies.

Not at the moment. I have far too short a time and the member has had an opportunity to speak. There are points that must be made. Of course our service sector is doing well. However, it is not old fashioned to say that manufacturing matters. A few years back, it was perceived as almost de rigueur to say that manufacturing did not matter and that it was all about the service economy and tourism. However, the two sectors are not mutually irreconcilable and should not be placed in opposition to each other. Of course we should be proud of our financial services and of the Royal Bank of Scotland, which has become the biggest business in Scottish history. We welcome that, but manufacturing and services are not in conflict. Tourism, our biggest industry, is important, but we also need a manufacturing base. There has been globalisation, and some industries were always going to suffer because of competition from south-east Asia, the Indian subcontinent and, in more recent years, eastern Europe. However, there is still a place here for  manufacturing. We must address our current position. It is not just a matter of bandying about statistics on who did what in the 1970s, 1980s or 1990s—fundamentally, the question is about where we will go from here. I take issue with Mr Arbuckle, who talked about the event involving Scottish Enterprise Fife. I was not there, because to some extent I have no locus in such matters. However, I hope that Superfast Ferries was mentioned, because that is part and parcel of what is happening in our manufacturing base. Superfast has seen growth both in its figures for tourists visiting Scotland and in freight, so why has it reduced its service? It has done so because it cannot make the same profit margin on the North sea route between Rosyth and Flanders as it can between Germany and Finland. That is the case because the Finnish economy is fundamentally booming, whereas the Scottish economy, if not flatlining, is staggering along. Why does Finland, which stands on a more northerly latitude than Scotland—the latitude of Tampere, where Nokia is based, is akin to that of Orkney—manage to compete, in many case in manufacturing, when we do not? We must learn lessons from that. New opportunities are arising for us in photonics. Recently I met someone who told me that we may have missed out in silicon glen, as compared to silicon valley, but we have an opportunity in photonics. No sooner had he told me that than I opened the Saturday morning business pages of The Herald to see that a new research and development company based in Scotland, with indigenous talent, had gone into liquidation. Manufacturing matters. We must stop looking backwards and establish a position. I say to Murdo Fraser that fiscal autonomy is fundamental. At the end of the day, what matters for a manufacturing base is a competitive economy; the Superfast Ferries situation testifies to that. We need to have the powers and the imagination to move forward. I am conscious of the time, Presiding Officer, so I will stop there.

We should get back to the subject matter of the debate. No one is suggesting that we should start to build a bridge as of tomorrow. The funding and the construction workers are not there to do that. We are talking about a growing problem that could become a catastrophe, not simply for Fife and the area south of the Forth but for the whole of the Scottish economy. Of course we should consider alternative action. As far as I am aware, all members support the concept of fast ferry solutions. We also support the expansion and enhancement of rail provision, but we recognise the difficulties that that will cause. Of course car sharing should be encouraged, but there is a limit to what we can do. As well as affecting commuting, the fact that we live in a much more atomised society has social and economic downsides. There is a limit to the extent to which we can manage to get people to car share and so on, so we must have a plan B. We cannot keep going in the direction in which we are heading; we must plan ahead. That is why I pay tribute to Scott Barrie for securing the debate. Scott Barrie, Bruce Crawford and David Davidson were quite correct in the points that they made. We are talking about a national issue; it cannot be seen simply as a Fife issue or as a case of north of the river versus south of the river. The economy not only of Edinburgh and central Scotland but of Dundee, Aberdeen and the rest of Scotland will be affected if we fail to address the potential problem of the bridge. I listened with incredulity to some of the remarks that Andrew Arbuckle made. However, he was correct to say that the issue is national, as other members have said, and that we must examine what has been done elsewhere. He mentioned the bridge that has been built across the Øresund, which has united the city of København and the ancient kingdom of Skåne, or Scania as it is described in relation to Shakespearean matters. That was done because it was essential for the economies of Copenhagen and Malmö to unite if those cities were to compete with North Rhine-Westphalia and the likes of Bremen and Hamburg, which act together, and to see off the growing threat of Poland and the Baltic accession states, never mind St Petersburg. We must accept that there is a problem in east central Scotland. It does not affect only people who live north of the river because there are people who live in Livingston but work in banking in Dunfermline, for example. Our economy must be able to compete not just with North Rhine-Westphalia but with Copenhagen and Malmö. If we do not have the necessary transport links, we will not be able to do so.  We are discussing a plan B, which I do not believe should consist simply of a replication of the existing bridge, which funnels traffic into the city of Edinburgh. A multimodal option must be considered. We must also consider a bridge that will handle westbound traffic. However, we cannot have no plan because, if we do, the whole of the Scottish economy will disappear.

It is ironic that the debate occurs following recent events that have somewhat overshadowed what  we are debating today. Like the minister, I wish to concentrate on the main issue of freedom of information and the benefits that go with it, even if it has costs to the individual. However, it would be remiss of me if I did not make brief comments on more recent matters. On the publication of expenses, it is quite clear that we must publish—there is no alternative. It is essential that there is probity as well as scrutiny in public life. Nevertheless, we must bear in mind the fact that although the Scottish Parliament is barely six years old, two key figures have been devoured. I know both of them and believe that they are decent individuals who have contributed significantly to Parliament. We must ensure not just that individuals avoid being devoured, but that this institution is not destroyed. I know that many people believe that, whatever their political party, all MSPs are beyond redemption—that we are all tainted. That may be the case, and elections will prove that. However, if there is to be any redemption for Parliament and if there is to be a new influx of people who are not tainted, Parliament must be worth coming into. It must be an institution that will not simply seek to destroy. Such people must be able to have their own lives and have the opportunity to make mistakes and survive the consequences. I turn to the principles of FOI. We are in danger of losing sight of the aims, intentions and valuable outcomes that the minister touched on. Freedom of information is a good thing—we need to restate that. Whatever the by-products of freedom of information may be for individuals, it is fundamentally beneficial for society and for our communities. The principle of openness is important. It is sound and, I would argue, it is essential in the increasingly complex society in which we live. Nevertheless, there has to be a review, and we welcome the steps that the minister is taking, because the regime is not delivering as perhaps it could or should—there is some way to go. As I have mentioned in previous debates, we must see the glass as being half full rather than half empty. Progress still has to be made. We must go beyond simply devouring individuals in a firestorm and look at what we are trying to do in achieving accountability and allowing access to individuals. Some decisions in our society are made by accountable politicians and elected officials, but a great deal in our lives is dealt with by quangos, non-departmental public bodies, public-private partnerships and commercial organisations. Such matters impact as much upon the daily lives of individuals as do decisions that are made by the Executive and other public bodies, in which a minister can be held to account. However, unless individuals are tenacious and make efforts such as  those made by the likes of Robbie the Pict, there are significant difficulties. The fact that we need more openness was mentioned earlier by the minister and has been mentioned, to his credit, by Jim Wallace. It was suggested—and probably remains the intention—that we have to open up. However, where we need to go further is not so much in Parliament, because everything is now being put online and in the public domain in other ways. Instead, we should consider aspects of life that are not dealt with by elected politicians but that have significant impacts, and on which no accountable officer, such as a councillor or a minister of state, is answerable. Where do we go now? We must not roll back but go forward. The minister is correct to say that it is a matter of balance, and the Presiding Officer has touched upon the balance between individual rights to access and the cost to commercial organisations and Government agencies, whose purpose should not be drowned in a sea of paperwork or under a plethora of requests. We must get that balance right. It is always a judgment call, and sometimes we will get it wrong, but we should bear in mind two fundamental guiding principles: accessibility and affordability. On accessibility, we in Parliament—and to some extent the Executive—have done well. The same applies on accountability. However, we need to open up private bodies because they are just as important as public bodies. People want to know what is going on with Reliance, what the contracts are with HM Prison Kilmarnock and what PPP schemes have been entered into. Some matters will be commercially confidential, but others will not be, and the way in which the latter impinge upon daily life is as important as any matters for which Parliament can be called to account. On affordability, it is a matter of balance. However, we must recognise that if we set a threshold of cost at a level that is beyond the ordinary man or woman in the street, the principle of openness is taken away. We need to balance accessibility with affordability, and we must not price individuals out of the market. There has been some debate about multiple requests. My understanding of the minister's position is that multiple requests can be addressed at present. It is simply a matter of seeking to aggregate requests from individuals. There is a mechanism in the legislation that would allow an organisation that is bound by FOI—or that may in future be bound by FOI—to say that the cost implications are significantly more than can be justified, and to seek to impose a higher charge. We must bear it in mind that fishing expeditions will be carried out by individuals, sometimes with malevolent intent; however, that must be balanced  against the right of individuals to know what is happening in their society. The Scottish National Party welcomes today's debate, even though it is overshadowed by matters that are beyond our control—and which cannot be dealt with in the timetable—that have not just saddened Parliament but have stigmatised us all. We welcome the concept of FOI: it is fundamental to the society that we wish to create and it is part of the founding principles of the Parliament. However, we must keep FOI accessible and make it affordable. We must open it up beyond Parliament to include other bodies that matter fundamentally in daily life. We must remember that although there are people who are simply at it—for want of a better phrase—or who are looking for mischief, we should allow people who are on to something that clearly impacts upon their lives or the lives of others the opportunity to obtain information without their being bankrupted as a consequence.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will provide to enable youth football coaches to obtain first aid training. (S2O-7889)

Is the minister aware that the mandatory first aid certificates required regularly by the Scottish Youth Football Association are now subject to a £40 charge by the St Andrew's Ambulance Association? That might be a modest cost, but it is one of many that mount up for the voluntary sector. Given the importance of sport, which was touched on earlier, and given that we have a national health service, will the minister undertake to consider whether we can ensure that that modest cost is picked up by the NHS and, at the same time, allow additional support for coaches, not simply in first aid but in matters of drink, drugs and nutrition?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many staff employed by VisitScotland are solely dedicated to promoting the city of Edinburgh. (S2O-7795)

Edinburgh's competition is global, not local, and international destinations, not Scottish resorts, are the threat. Further, it is ingenious of the minister to refer to the convention centre, which is a separate matter. Amsterdam, which is a major competitor, employs 138 dedicated staff for the Amsterdam area tourist board. How can Edinburgh possibly compete if it is not adequately resourced?

I quote from John Horgan who, when writing about Sean Lemass, said: "History is always to some extent what we make it, an attempt by the present generation to take possession of the past and to use it as a route map to the future." This is the first opportunity that we have had to debate in the chamber the revelations in the McCrone document. Notwithstanding what Mr Johnstone seems to think, the paper did not appear to indicate that independence would be a disaster for Scotland, and it shows how our economy could be transformed. We can look back and compare the 30 years that we have wasted with what other nations have done. Some of those nations, such as Norway, have been blessed with oil, and others have succeeded without the benefit of oil, but all have put us to shame, and we have  the opportunity now to decide where we go. We have wasted 30 years and there is no reason why we should waste another 30 years. It is no wonder that the McCrone document was marked as secret when it contains quotations such as: "This paper has shown that the advent of North Sea oil has completely overturned the traditional economic arguments used against Scottish nationalism. An independent Scotland could now expect to have massive surplus both on its budget and on its balance of payments and with the proper husbanding of resources this situation could last for a very long time into the future." It goes on to the killer quote, which is: "Thus, for the first time since the Act of Union was passed, it can now be credibly argued that Scotland's economic advantage lies in its repeal. When this situation comes to be fully appreciated in the years ahead, it is likely to have a major impact on Scottish politics." No wonder they tried to keep the document secret. However, we had to go through unmitigated Thatcherism and the devastation that it wreaked upon our communities.

The minister has had his opportunity. When the First Minister said that he was waffling, at least he had the good grace to sit down; the minister should learn from that. Mr Johnstone should note what the document says about the only thing that the SNP got wrong: "Thus, all that is wrong now with the SNP estimate is that it is far too low; there is a prospect of Government oil revenues in 1980 that could greatly exceed the present Government revenue in Scotland from all sources and could even be comparable in size to the whole of the Scottish national income in 1970." All of that was kept from us and what we got from Mr Wilson's colleagues and, indeed, from other political parties was the prediction first that all the oil and gas would be gone by the 1980s, then that it would all be gone by the 1990s and then that it would all be gone by the start of the new millennium. Now we know that there are 30, 40 or 50 years of oil and gas left. We now have further revelations—it is not oilgate but mediagate. The Government was so frightened and intimidated by a television programme that it decided to interfere. When a Government starts to interfere with and distort the media, it fundamentally subverts the democratic process. Harry Ewing MP, from the Labour Government, is quoted as saying that the programme that the BBC proposed to transmit before the 1977 district elections was "serious enough indeed, to warrant intervention by the Government at the most Senior Level."  Ewing described the proposed timing of the programmes as "absolutely devastating in that they will be screened just prior to the District Council elections in Scotland. There can be absolutely no doubt that their effect on the outcome of the District Council elections will be to say the least quite disastrous, not only for the Labour Party but for other political parties in Scotland as well." No wonder that there was Labour and Tory unity to do down the SNP, as the headline in today's edition of The Herald suggests. Had that been done at Westminster by a Labour Government to a Tory Opposition or by a Tory Government to a Labour Opposition, there would have been outrage. It would have been viewed as Sovietesque tactics—something fit for a banana republic. We now know that our oil wealth has been hidden from us and that those in the pan-unionist coalition that has acted against the interests of Scotland colluded not just to do down the SNP but to subvert the democratic process in Scotland. Thankfully, we still have oil left. When we form the Administration, we will ensure that it is used for the benefit of the people of Scotland, not for Thatcherite policies and to subsidise mass unemployment.

I put on record our thanks to the committee, the clerks and all those who were involved in the inquiry. I also pay tribute to the deputy convener. Having occasionally appeared at the committee as a substitute, I appreciate the difficulties that he must have experienced today. It is hard enough to prepare for these debates at the best of times, but when one has prepared oneself to sum up the debate and one is then asked to lead it, immediate problems arise. Important debates such as this, which are the final outcome and the public airing of a committee's report, have a natural beginning, middle and end, but Mr Butler managed to set the scene not only correctly but with aplomb. Although the committee's denigrators might say that the report is, on the face of it, worthy but dull, there is nothing wrong with that. Not all action by a legislature, executive or other public or voluntary sector administration needs to be snappy or sexy. However, any action must be worthy and must address the fundamental problems. The report's summary of conclusions confirms the breadth of the problems, for which there is no single solution.  The problem of the small minority of young people who behave in a deeply antisocial manner will not be addressed by a snappy soundbite, because it is deep-rooted and multifaceted. Short-term action, such as the ASBO in the deputy minister's constituency, is required, but the fundamental need is for long-term action. As my colleague Christine Grahame has pointed out, many of the committee's recommendations have been made before but have not been acted on as well as they should have been, so it is necessary that we repeat them. The need for multi-agency planning and multi-agency delivery to address the gaps in services may be a classic no-brainer, but we need to continue to address the issue. I am glad that the committee forswore the opportunity to seek tabloid headlines and instead went for a more sensible and practical approach by asking for pragmatic steps to be taken to deal with the issues that have been raised. The committee inquiry took place at a time when the press was full of headlines such as those that we have seen in more recent weeks. According to a United Nations report, Scotland is the most violent place in the world, and other reports have said that Scotland is the murder capital of western Europe. However, that is not the case, and to say so is clearly nonsensical. I am glad that all political parties in the chamber have sought to knock that down. Such reports do us no favours and they certainly do our young people no favours. The perception that we need to live in an almost gated community because every young person is a potential mugger creates serious problems for intergenerational understanding.

Absolutely. The UN report was flawed, and it is a credit to all members that they repudiated it. Stewart Stevenson is right to say that there are hot spots—or whatever terminology one chooses to use for them. The statistics for murder—never mind knife crime and other matters—are serious. There are areas of our country that are of fundamental concern. In most of Scotland, people can leave their car keys in the ignition and their door open without being robbed or having their car stolen, and both young and elderly people can move around in safety. However, there are problems in areas of deprivation, in particular, as well as in some other areas, where there is simply bad behaviour. We must address those problems.  Fundamentally, our approach to youth justice is tied in with the most recent report that was published on deprivation. I will return to that issue. The minister was correct to point out that the overwhelming majority of our children are a credit to themselves, to their families and to their communities. However, a small minority of children are seriously out of control. A chief constable in England has described them as feral youth. That is a rather distasteful phrase, but it is symptomatic of the culture, which we must address, of almost nihilistic behaviour that is antisocial, self-harming and dangerous to others. The great danger is that there will be a war on a generation. I am glad that Susan Deacon is in the chamber, because I remember attending a school meeting at which she said that there are many complaints from middle-aged and elderly people about youngsters hanging about, but that youngsters have always hung about. Simply hanging about is not a crime, although hanging about with a sword or a dagger or in order to mug an old lady certainly is. I am taken by the fact that Miss Goldie is stuck in Linlithgow, because many years ago, when I was growing up in that town, I used to hang around in the railway station, because it was warmer than standing or walking around outside. That was not a crime, but our society is driving towards removing youngsters from such places when they are not doing anything wrong. That creates a sense of alienation, which we must address. We should recall that youngsters are more likely than others to be the victims of crime—a fact that we often ignore. In our society, the person who is stabbed or murdered is more likely to be a member of the offender's peer group than someone else. The solutions are deep rooted. Obviously, short-term action needs to be taken, whether through ASBOs or by ensuring that there are sufficient secure residential places for those who are a danger not just to others but to themselves. However, we must drill down to the fundamental issues. That is where I perceive the strength of the committee's report to lie. It discusses the worthy but dull actions that need to be taken, but it makes it clear that the root solution is to address the fundamental issues. Like Susan Deacon, I have shared a platform with Roger Houchin. The problems of youth justice are to be found mainly in the areas of multiple deprivation. When 25 per cent of our prison population comes from only 56 of the 1,222 local authority areas, there is clearly a serious problem, which we must address. There is no one simple solution. We need to get people into work and to provide rehabilitation. The report also identifies the need for longer-term funding. On page 39, it states:  "There is too much short term initiative-based funding", relative to longer-term and core service funding. There is a clear driver for the Executive and all political parties to seek short-term fixes, and such action is necessary.

Such choices might have to be made. We cannot invest in one area without considering where the money is taken from. However, where I have sympathy with the minister is that I agree that not all short-term initiatives necessarily work. We live in a world in which there is a great deal of risk aversion, and we are criticised for not being an entrepreneurial society—that certainly applies to the public sector. We have to be prepared to fund initiatives; if they fail, that does not mean that we should not try something else. We do not have all the solutions. If a clear solution existed on the internet, we would simply download it and use it. We need to look at the deep-rooted problems and try to work out solutions. We also need to work with individuals, because at the end of the day, antisocial behaviour is a problem of individuals, and we have to recognise that there is no one-size-fits-all solution. The simple element of repression—although that wording is not used—in the United States is not seen as a longer-term solution. The Scandinavian model that looks to address the problems is far preferable. I am grateful for the initiatives that have taken place in Strathclyde and Lothian, in which police work towards problem solving with youngsters as opposed to simply employing crime control or management methods. We have to get to the root of the problem and ask what is causing it. In many instances, the problem is not the young  person who is offending, but his drug-addicted mother or alcoholic father. Unless we address the root of the problem, we will simply be offering a short-term fix and the problem will recur when the young person is released from wherever they have been held. We welcome the report. Although it has drawn to our attention matters that have been touched on before, that does not mean that it does not have lessons to teach us. It draws to our attention the fact that although we need to take short-term action, we are still seeking a long-term solution. We recognise that the vast majority of our youngsters are a credit to our country, but we must drill down deep with a small minority of youngsters, look at individual solutions to their problems, be prepared to take risks—as the minister was correct to say—and invest resources, because that is the long-term solution.

As is customary, I pay tribute to Marilyn Livingstone for securing the debate and for the terms of her speech, but my tribute has to go beyond that. This issue is one in which there are few votes, if any, and Marilyn Livingstone has championed and pursued it with vigour. The Parliament owes her a debt of gratitude for that. As she said, the issue has been hidden away and not spoken about. It is incumbent on Parliament to address such matters. As someone who had a happy childhood and who has fond memories of it, I can only imagine the trauma that must exist for someone who grew up in an environment in which there was physical and sexual abuse, which was made worse because it came either from an adult within the family or an adult who was trusted by the family. I find it hard to imagine the difficulties, but we are duty-bound to address them and I am grateful that the Executive is ahead of the game in doing so. I am not aware of local strategies but I am grateful that things are progressing. However, we have to marry local activity with the national strategy. Much depends on an individual's needs and the ability of the people who best relate to that individual to deal with them. There has to be an overarching strategy to address that. It is clear that there is no single simple solution; what is done depends on the needs and wants of every individual, which makes matters much more difficult for the Executive. This is not an issue in which we can simply draw down an amount of money to put into a particular area because the problem is huge and diverse. The needs of a person in Kinghorn are not necessarily the same  as the needs of a person in the north of Scotland. It is not so much a geographical difference; what matters are the needs and wants of the individual. There is a cultural matter to be addressed, which might require some unity within Parliament. Earlier this year I met a Scots émigré who said that they were a psychotherapist. As a Scottish male of middle age, my mind boggles at the term "psychotherapy". Just what are we talking about? When I put that question to some of my friends, responses went from it being something in the region of psychobabble to it being something effeminate. We in Scotland still have this attitude that something should be dealt with by just getting a grip or giving yourself a shake. The attitude is that big boys do not cry, although clearly they do. We have to change our cultural attitudes. Although that will cause difficulty for the Scottish Executive and it will take time, it has to get around the problem. We have to invest in solutions to such problems. From the learned Dr Jill Scharff, I understand that it is easier and cheaper to invest in solutions. We have not only to persuade people that it would be better and more beneficial for the person who is suffering, but that it is cheaper than attendance at an accident and emergency unit and cheaper than the self-harm that Margaret Mitchell and Marilyn Livingstone commented on and the abuse of drink and drugs. We have to invest in allowing people to work back. We cannot remove the trauma that victims have gone through. There is nothing that we can do but try to learn lessons so that we can ensure that it does not happen to other youngsters. We cannot do anything physically for those individuals, apart from seeking to work with them in order to allow them to work through their problems and seeking to address their current difficulties. That will mean that the Executive has to take action; to its credit, it is addressing the issue. A change in attitude in Scotland is also needed. We must acknowledge that the investment is not a luxury or a frippery, but is of fundamental importance because such victims' injuries cannot be dealt with by putting on a sticking plaster. It is much more complicated than that. Not only is it necessary that we work with individuals, it is absolutely essential if society is to repay the debt that we owe those individuals for allowing the abuse to occur in the first place. From the points of view of the taxpayer and of the Government, it is much cheaper to help people work through their problems than it is to address their symptoms.

The tone of the debate was set by Robin Harper who, in an eloquent speech, spoke about the fundamentals of the subject. The fundamental aspect of the debate is about the fundamental values that define our society and transcend religion and party politics, which those of us in the fortunate and privileged position of having been elected to the chamber have a duty to uphold. At the moment, it is de rigueur to be critical of the United States of America. Indeed, I have taken  part in debates in which I have criticised the actions of the US Government. However, one has only to look at the constitution of the United States to realise that its founding fathers got many things right. One of the things that they got right is that some matters are self-evidently true. Some values are simply self-evident; they transcend moral codes—whether the one on the tablets that Moses brought down or others—and are self-evident to mankind. Some things are simply right and other things are simply wrong. We live in a democracy and civic society through which the rule of law permeates. In a just society, what is important is how we treat not just the powerful and the rich but the weak and the powerless. Fundamentally, the debate is about the values of our society. It is about how we wish to define ourselves and how we wish to be seen by others. Frankly, I think that the situation is shameful. I do not wish to go into immigration policy or the particular circumstances in detail—they have been enunciated much more eloquently by others—but what took place and is taking place in Glasgow is shameful. The Executive's position is untenable. I was happy to march with Robert Brown under the banner "Not in our name" when we were opposing what was self-evidently wrong—a war in Iraq without backing from the United Nations. What is happening to asylum-seeking families should not take place in our name. The fact that what is happening is fundamentally morally wrong and against the creeds and codes of all in society has not changed; the only thing that has changed is that Robert Brown is now in ministerial office. He is trying to defend the indefensible, rather than standing up and saying that it is fundamentally wrong and refusing to accept it. We welcome the Executive's shift to saying that it will take action, but when will it do so? When ministers are successful in an election and are elected to office, they are given responsibility, which brings with it rights and obligations.

No. I stand four-square behind Kathleen Marshall. Some things are self-evidently wrong. Even Dr Murray touched on that. The situation is simply untenable. To seek to justify or support such things is unsustainable. Ministers are given an opportunity when they are elected to power. They have a duty to stand up and act. The Executive's position is to pass the buck and say, "It's nothing to do with us," but that is  fundamentally unacceptable. Ministers have it within their power not to go down that route, but they choose to do so. We need the Executive to stand up for the fundamental values that have been enunciated by political parties, the churches and the children's commissioner, and to represent what we believe is fundamentally right about our society. We do not need the Executive's limp-wristed, hand-wringing position that it will do its best and will go once more cap in hand to London to say, "Please don't do this." What is happening is fundamentally wrong and should not be happening. Robert Brown marched under the banner "Not in our name", but he should now be taking action on something that is fundamentally wrong and goes against the tenets of our society. He is in power. He must act.

As is traditional, I congratulate Margaret Jamieson on lodging a motion on an important issue that has to be addressed. I assure her that my colleague Stewart Stevenson supports the motion. I think that his failure to sign it was down to an administrative error rather a failure to support the principle. Margaret Jamieson has rightly raised matters that we have all taken for granted. There are two aspects to the debate: the general issue of victims' rights and the specific issue of the outcome of the on-going slopping out cases. It is to the Executive's credit that the general issue is being addressed by both the Minister for Justice and the Solicitor General for Scotland. However, the attitude that permeated not just political parties but the whole legal system was that victims were at best an inconvenience and at worst rated no higher than any other aspect of the evidence gathered; they were there simply as part of the process. Sheriffs, in hearing cases, were doing everyone a favour, as opposed to having their wages paid by the taxpayer—including, in many instances, the victims themselves. We need an attitudinal change in this country and to recognise that victims have rights and that they have suffered. That has to be taken into account. I turn to an aspect of the debate that Margaret Jamieson raised. I, too, read the recent article by Lord McCluskey, and I agree with him whole-heartedly. All of us in this chamber, from all political parties, sign up to the belief that there has to be an acceptance of the principles of the European convention on human rights, which is enshrined in legislation. However, what is happening is not what we anticipated. Like many people, such as Lord McCluskey in particular, for whom I have the utmost respect, I am bamboozled about just how we got into the mess that we are in. Of course prisoners have rights. Nobody is arguing that they should be given a diet of bread and water or that they should be detained in leg irons; they have to be treated with dignity and respect.

Slopping out is regrettable; I do not think that it should happen. However, I disagree with where Patrick Harvie is coming from and sympathise with Margaret Jamieson's position. I think that the amount of compensation  that has been awarded is scandalous, given that, without going into the rights and wrongs of regeneration, urban blight and poverty, we accept that one in four children live in poverty and that people live in damp housing. Many people cannot understand how all of us, as members elected to look after their interests, manage to give a substantial award of money to the likes of Mr Napier when they face problems through our failings. We can decide whether to cast the blame on a Tory Government or the Executive, but there is something manifestly wrong in our society when Mr Napier benefits to the extent that he has and yet we fail to address the problems of those who are poor, dispossessed or disenfranchised or who live in bad housing. The issue is not simply the amount of money that has been or is going to be awarded to prisoners, but the cost. Despite the amount of money that has been spent on the legal aid bill, women who have been battered as a result of domestic violence suffer from not having access to legal aid. There is something wrong in our society; the situation is simply unacceptable. Of course Mr Napier has rights; of course in the 21 st century we do not want prisoners to slop out. That should not happen, but, having weighed up the situation on the scales of justice, which is what we have to do, I would much rather see the money go towards repairing damp housing in Scotland than into the pockets of Mr Napier. He should perhaps not have had to expect to slop out, but the amount of money that he was awarded, which astounded Lord McCluskey, baffles Margaret Jamieson and confounds me, shows that there is something far wrong. Yes, we want prisoners to have rights, but we have always to remember that in our society communities also have rights. Frankly, this chamber has got something wrong and out of kilter when the rights of an individual who has transgressed weigh far more than the rights of a community that has to suffer. We have to take action and ensure that the victims have the right to access that money, which, frankly, should not have gone to prisoners in the first place. We must ensure that we end slopping out but we must not reward those who do not merit it, which baffles ordinary people in Scotland.

Is the First Minister aware that a convicted armed robber and, indeed, any person who has served a prison sentence of more than three years is, correctly, banned from possessing a firearm but that the law allows them to own a replica weapon? Given that neither a bank teller nor a firearms expert is able easily to tell the difference between the two, will the First Minister use the powers that are available to him under prison regulations to end that absurdity?

A convicted armed robber and, indeed, any person who has served a prison sentence of more than three years is, correctly, banned from possessing a firearm but is allowed to own a replica weapon. Will the First Minister end that absurdity by using the powers that are available to him under prison regulations, which could be used immediately without impinging on areas that are reserved to Westminster?

I have a great deal of sympathy for what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, although I do not necessarily agree with all the points that he made. However, he put matters very eruditely. There are many poignant aspects to this clearly difficult debate. When we are interviewed by school kids, as we often are, they always ask, "What is the hardest part of your job, mister?" For me, clearly the hardest part is dealing with matters that impinge upon morality.  Differing views have been expressed in different parts of the chamber. I approach the issue with, I must say, a great deal of sympathy for what the Deputy Minister for Justice said in his speech. I frequently chastise the Executive, but it is to its credit that it has brought before us today's debate. In Scottish family law, it is clear that there are lacunae and difficulties. Even Lord James, who sits on the Tory benches, accepts that there are matters on which we must go forward. At present, I am minded to support the reductions in separation periods from five years to two years and from two years to one year. That said, having listened to the points that Fergus Ewing and Mary Mulligan made, I am equally persuaded that there are good arguments against making such a change. I find this area difficult because it is clear that the time limits—whether they be two years and one year or five years and two years—are perfectly arbitrary. Why cannot they be 36 months and 18 months? There is no logic to the time limits, but there are times when, sooner or later, we just need to make a decision. As I said, it is to the Executive's credit that it has introduced a bill that deals with important issues that affect our society. Our party has a free vote on the bill, but our general overall view is to support some upgrading of the law. My position is that I recognise that our society has changed, although I may not always have liked or been happy with the changes. Perhaps I am just becoming middle-aged—I sometimes feel that I am growing into my father—but I recognise that some aspects of our society that I might not wish to see are with us to stay. The law has a duty to reflect, and to be able to deal with, those aspects of modern-day society; it should not ignore them. We cannot have a legislative system that lives a lie. Whether rightly or wrongly, if we now have a society in which more children—or substantial numbers of children—are born out of wedlock, we have an obligation to ensure that the law both reflects that and recognises those children's rights. We need to strike a balance, but we need to go with that. Some aspects of our society, such as gross domestic product and unemployment, can be measured. How can we quantify the happiness of an individual who wishes to leave a long-term marriage and enter into a new relationship? How can we quantify the distress for the other individual who does not want the relationship to break up? How can we quantify the unhappiness of a child whose parents are in a loveless marriage or a marriage in which there is violence? It is also difficult to quantify the problems that arise in single-parent families, but we know that they exist. It is difficult to quantify those intangibles, but try we must.  At the end of the legislative process, we may decide to sit at five years and two years, as Fergus Ewing and Mary Mulligan proposed. Sufficient time should be made available to ensure that those provisions are fully debated and discussed. If that happens, at least we will have had a debate that will allow us to set down legislation for another generation. We need to do that; Scotland is lagging behind at the moment. I practised in family and matrimonial law for some 20 years, as a result of which I am clear about only one thing: matters are very rarely black and white. I take cognisance of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's important point—with which I fully agree. If someone can avoid going to court, they should do so; the problem is that to err is human. I have a great deal of sympathy for the points that Mike Pringle and Sylvia Jackson made. However, in circumstances such as those that they raised, the problem is not the law but the individuals involved. I am reminded of the old adage of King Solomon simply saying that the child should be divided up; we can just imagine the natural mother speaking up and saying, "But a sheriff cannot do that." A woman might say that she will not give the father access when there is no manifest reason why he should not get it. What do we expect our sheriffs to do in those cases? Would we not be the first to oppose the sheriff if he were to remand the woman to Cornton Vale for 30 days? Do we expect the sheriff to impose a fine of £2,500? Surely that would just impoverish the family and impinge upon the child. There are instances when the problem is not the law or the sheriff but individual human beings. In many instances, people act irrationally. We have to try to minimise that and to ensure that we fully debate and discuss these matters. Again, in many instances, the best way forward is for people to avoid the legal process. I agree that we should look at reconciliation and mediation. As Christine Grahame said, it is essential to try to take the sting out of the situation in order to avoid the bile and acrimony.

I disagree with Pauline McNeill. Thankfully, those cases are few in number—they happen rarely, and powers exist to address the situation. For example, if he so desired, the sheriff could impose a custodial sentence—I have every sympathy with sheriffs who do not take such  action—and although he could impose a monetary penalty, he often does not. Ultimately, he could switch custody or residence from the mother to the father or vice versa. However, in many instances, it would not be appropriate to do so. We have to try to rationalise how we deal with those people and, for many people, the only way to go about things is to improve the mediation situation. The SNP agrees fully with what has been said about parental rights and I am glad to see that other parties are on board on the issue. We also agree that the provisions on cohabiting couples are equally essential. These are value matters, however. I have been married for many years—I forget how many; I will probably be chastised for saying that when I get home. It is for individuals to decide whether to marry. I believe that marriage is a good thing and that it benefits society, but there are limits to what society can do to enforce such views. We have to recognise that we need both legislative change and cultural change, and the law has a role in bringing about cultural change. In the exchanges that I have had with the minister in previous debates on the subject, I have raised the issue of respect. Respect is not simply to do with antisocial behaviour but involves people recognising not just their own rights but those of their children. People have to recognise the impact that what they want from a relationship has on a child that they have brought into the world. As a legislature, the Parliament has to try to move these matters forward. We need to beef up the definition of cohabitation. A separation is involved: the judiciary does not decide the law but interprets it, and the Parliament's role is to give clear criteria.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address traffic congestion in west Edinburgh as a result of the opening of the Royal Bank of Scotland's headquarters at Gogarburn. (S2O-7398)

The minister is aware that that is a major area for development for Edinburgh and all Scotland. It is not just the Royal Bank of Scotland; airport expansion is on the go. Does the Executive accept that investment in road access, as well as in public transport, will be necessary and that paying for that should be the responsibility of all Scotland, not just the Edinburgh council tax payers?

I intend to deal only with the criminal justice aspects of the legislative programme. I was intrigued not simply by what the First Minister said in the morning but also by what the Minister for Justice has said this afternoon. In particular, I was intrigued by her points about introducing proposals to deal with kerb crawling and serious pornography. That is something that we will fully support. Such crime is not victimless; it is not a transaction between a willing buyer and a willing seller. It is almost invariably a case of an exploited woman—it is almost always a woman, somebody under threat of violence or in great need, poverty or desperation—being used and abused, and we shall certainly support any action that is taken to tackle that. We reserve our right to examine any such proposals, but we fully agree that we should go with a distinctive Scottish solution where we see a need to address issues in that way, because what is suitable in Soho might not be acceptable in Scotland. We shall fully support the Minister for Justice and the First Minister in those matters, because we believe that addressing those problems is long overdue. However, we shall continue to ask the Executive why it is prepared to take a distinctive view on that but not on other matters.

I will not give way at the moment. We must recognise that nobody moves into politics in Scotland to make it a worse place or to seek to increase crime. Although we are in a less  confrontational place than Westminster, we are still in adversarial politics, but we must remember that we are trying to deal with matters where there is a general intention to achieve the right result, even if we disagree on policies. I accept that the Executive has made progress. Many of the initiatives that have been introduced by the Lord Advocate and administered by the Solicitor General are long overdue. They did not come about earlier for two reasons. First, it was because of neglect; we simply allowed institutions to go unchallenged and to set their own agendas and we did not give rights to the citizen because the participants seemed to matter more. Secondly, it was because we did not have a legislative chamber and we did not have access to the legislative time to overhaul and redraw our justice system. We now have that legislative chamber, so it is important that we make progress and that we recognise where progress has been made in relation to victims and others, but that we recognise the distance that we have still to travel. We must also recognise that, even then, mistakes can still be made and must be investigated. However, there are areas in which progress has not been made, and firearms is one of those areas. I disagree fundamentally with Pauline McNeill; we cannot simply depend on the Home Secretary. We have powers that we can use so that we can act. We can act by using the licensing system to bring in an opportunity to deal with the situation. If we can license sex shops and greengrocers, we can license shops that sell weapons and ammunition. The tragedy is that the Executive is not using the powers that are available to it, never mind seeking to obtain the powers that we really need to be able to address such matters. There are fundamental differences between gun crime north and south of the border—touch wood, it will remain that way. We do not have drive-by shootings such as take place in the likes of Nottingham or south London. However, urban and rural Scotland has a serious problem with idiots—youngsters and adults—firing air weapons and we have to address that problem. Bail also requires to be addressed; it has been a problem for a long time. It was a problem when I gave up practising law and was elected in 1999, and the problems with bail have spiralled out of control since then. It is not just a problem for people who are facing charges for serious sexual offences, for example. It is unacceptable that 55 people were granted bail when they had been charged with murder. Scotland has a system that recognises the presumption of innocence, but our police do not arrest people on a whim or fancy. Our procurators fiscal are charged with the duty of deciding whether they believe that there is enough  evidence to bring a charge, whether that evidence will stand up in court and whether it is in the public's interest. Those caveats are in place and we have to consider whether the scales of justice are balanced when we consider the protection of our communities and children. Our bail system is fundamentally flawed. We have standard bail conditions. Should there be conditions that the accused should turn up at court on each and every diet, that they should notify the court of a change of address and that they should not commit another offence while on bail? It seems to me that those conditions represent normal courtesy. Perhaps we should have a top-to-bottom review of the bail system. There is a fundamental problem, particularly with youngsters who are serially offending but who are repeatedly being released on bail, and the system is being brought into disrepute. The system must be reviewed from top to bottom and we will support the Executive in its drive towards that agenda. The First Minister commented on safer and stronger communities. He also mentioned the respect agenda: whether it was started by him or by Tony Blair, we fully support it. We are talking about people exercising responsibility and showing respect to their neighbours. That agenda is also about our society showing responsibility for all our communities and persuading our people to have some respect for themselves. The First Minister would do well to address another matter that was raised by Tony Blair many years ago. As well as being tough on crime, we have to be tough on the causes of crime. We will not be able to address crime in this country until we take care of drink, drugs and deprivation—the three Ds—that fuel crime in our country. Sadly, I think that that was left off the agenda. We have to clamp down on offenders and those who supply drugs, but we also have to address the demand for drugs from a section of our society that is so alienated and where people have so little respect for themselves—never mind for others—that they prefer to inject into their veins something that will kill them and which continues to fragment our communities. We have to be tough on crime and on the causes of crime.

I thank my colleague Fiona Hyslop for initiating the debate and, indeed, the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland because, as Fiona Hyslop and others have testified, the royal highland showground and those who work there are part of the landscape and life of the city of Edinburgh. They contribute to the city's economy and its social interaction, and have done so for many years. That said, there are clearly difficulties. We face a difficulty with Edinburgh airport's expansion and we must bear in mind its importance to our economy. Mark Ballard made points about the likely implications of expansion. Everybody accepts that, in a fossil-fuel using world, limits will be put on the growth of air transport, but it is clear that for the foreseeable future Edinburgh airport will expand. I understand that, only today, it has been announced that a route to Warsaw will commence in October. That should benefit us not only by allowing outbound business, but by bringing inbound fresh talent such as is currently proliferating in Edinburgh. We have to balance conflicting needs and wants. We must also acknowledge that the west of Edinburgh, where the showground and airport are located, is fundamental not only to the city of Edinburgh but to the whole economy of Scotland. That area is currently the dynamo of the Scottish economy, so if we undermine it, not only will we imperil the advance of Edinburgh's economic interest, we will also undermine the interests of the whole of Scotland. I also believe that some of the land-bank opportunities that exist there are as  important to Edinburgh and Scotland as the Dublin dockland development was to Dublin and the Republic of Ireland in providing impetus and driving things forward. Fiona Hyslop mentioned the Royal Bank of Scotland. The debate cannot be thought of as an argument or battle between the RHASS and BAA. It is, in fact, much wider than that because, as the area includes land that has potential for development, we must consider alternative options. It might be that the dispute can be resolved simply by ceding land from the royal highland showground to the airport but, irrespective of that, it is likely that land opposite the Royal Bank of Scotland's current location will be developed, so we must consider the area in its totality. In doing that, we must acknowledge that it is not simply a case of BAA versus the RHASS; we must factor in the RBS and other businesses that we hope to attract to sites in that area, and we must consider how the RHASS operates within that. There is a variety of permutations. Mary Mulligan mentioned the opportunity for the RHASS to move out to West Lothian, and Margaret Smith and Fiona Hyslop commented that we might be able to reach agreement simply by ceding ground to BAA, although that is currently disputed. It has also been suggested that ground is available on the other side of the A8 from where the RHASS is currently. We have the opportunity of freeing up land for the airport, of maintaining the highland showground in its current vicinity, and perhaps of maintaining some green space. James Douglas-Hamilton rightly said that we want economic development and benefits, but that we also want to retain green space to avoid Edinburgh and Glasgow becoming one continuous conurbation. We must not view the matter simply as BAA versus RHASS. The Executive has a role not simply in arbitrating in that dispute but in recognising the implications for Scotland's economy and society. The Executive must become involved; it cannot simply leave matters to the current participants or to the City of Edinburgh Council.

At this juncture, it is important that we recall why we have a debate after dealing with the amendments. We do not just want to record our thanks to the clerks and all the people who have been involved in a bill's consideration, appropriate though that is. The debate gives us an opportunity not to focus on the minutiae, but to consider the overarching question of why we want the legislation. It is important that we recall the reason for the introduction of the Transport (Scotland) Bill. Transport is fundamental to our society; not only does it provide access for people who would otherwise be excluded but, as every member of every party is aware, it is vital to the economy. Union and business representatives tell us that transport is fundamental to Scotland's having a sustainable and progressive economy in the 21 st century. There are difficulties and, to be fair, we are addressing them. Members might disagree with the pace at which the Executive is moving and with some of its priorities, but there is general consensus in Parliament that we must move forward. In many instances, there is less to be agin and to compete over than many members might think.  There was some chortling from Labour members when my colleague Fergus Ewing correctly said that he wishes that politics with a capital P could be taken out of transport, but the Scottish National Party considers that to be important. If members who laughed had listened to Mr Scott, they would have heard him mention how he aspired to replicating in Scotland what took place in Austria and Sweden. The point that Mr Ewing made was that the basis of success in those countries was consensus, rather than a partisan position on transport; national consensus about transport's importance is what took matters forward.

That is where we are coming from. In Scandinavia, transport matters are dealt with by consensus, so regional transport partnerships will allow us to concentrate on where we want to get to. Perhaps we are in difficulty here in Scotland because of the blight that we suffered under Westminster not simply because we were unable to legislate because we did not have the Scottish Parliament, but because for 25 or 40 years rail was in and then out, then buses were in and then out, depending on whether we had a Labour or Tory Government. Transport was booted around as a political football. That was the fundamental cause of considerable problems, so we must move away from that approach. I agree with the minister and with my colleague Fergus Ewing that we have to depoliticise transport policy and achieve national agreement because less divides us than many people think. It is important that we acknowledge that our communities have changed, which is why we need the regional transport partnerships. Communities in the east of Scotland have undergone social and economic change such as—to some extent—happened in the west of Scotland 100 years ago. Edinburgh's growth—it now has a travel-to-work area that covers south Fife, the other areas of the Lothians and the Borders—cannot be dealt with by a single authority. That is the same as what happened 100 years ago when Glasgow expanded into Renfrewshire, Dunbartonshire and Lanarkshire, which needed a structure to cope. Those areas have had the benefit of SPT, which has served them well, so we need to replicate the best aspects of SPT elsewhere in Scotland. Our communities, economic needs and society have changed and our current local authorities are far too small to be able to address that. That is  why we believe that, if we wish social and economic progress, as all members do, we need the correct structure. We have a fundamental need for a vision of what we want to do, a strategy for how to do it and, most important, structures that will allow us to deliver the vision and implement the strategy. That is what the bill is about and why we support it.

I accept a great deal of what the minister said. The Scottish National Party welcomes the debate and the consultation, which is long overdue. We accept that immediate action is required because the system is fragmenting. The purpose of our amendment is to draw the attention not just of the Executive but of the Parliament to the fact that we require not simply a short-term fix but a long-term solution. We must bear in mind the fact that the field is complicated. As the minister said, there is no simple solution and it is not a matter of just pouring in more funds. The conflicting pressures on health, transport and the economy mean that that is not an option. We need to consider not just the service that we offer—which we must improve—and by whom it is offered, but how that service is provided. We must consider the structures that should be put in place, which fundamentally affect the service and its consequent cost. That is where we are coming from. We appreciate that the consultation is necessary to ensure that we get the current system—albeit that it is struggling—up and working, and we appreciate that the Executive may not feel capable of making a commitment today to establish a commission. However, we ask the Executive to recognise the spirit in which we lodged the amendment and the points that we will make in the  debate. At some stage, rather than simply trying to improve the leaking bucket, we should consider recreating the entire system. We are in the 21 st century, but our legal aid system is from the 1960s and 1970s. The problem is its structure, which is what we must change. We will support the Executive consultation and its desire to improve the situation that we face; however, we must fundamentally change the system, which is clearly struggling. From advice centres to the legal profession, there is a significant problem. Advice centres have to cope with a plethora of matters that are coming before them because of the changes in society. They are having difficulties with funding and with requests from a population that is much more conscious of its rights. The legal profession has seen legal aid rates diminish and is now voting with its feet. Simply increasing the legal aid rate is probably not going to work. Even if we increased the legal aid rate substantially, increased student debt and the fact that the legal profession is now a much wider-ranging profession that offers opportunities in information technology, construction and other matters, mean that young law school graduates no longer want to work for legal aid firms. Even a substantial increase in legal aid rates will not change what has happened in the profession. We might require to consider paying lawyers a lot more handsomely to work in a narrower field of activity. We might have to recognise that other areas will be better dealt with by different structures, whether they be voluntary or public sector agencies. I do not think, however, that we can change what has gone on in the Executive. Why has it happened? It is not a matter of apportioning blame; it is about recognising that the system has changed. The criminal legal aid system was created in the 1960s and the civil legal aid system was created in the 1970s, but the world as we know it is much more complicated. It has moved on and there has been a change in society, the economy and people's consciousness of their rights. That has to be considered. I can give some examples. Michael Clancy of the Law Society of Scotland made the point to me that when criminal legal aid came in, the criminal law of Scotland could be contained within one book. Now there is more than one book for road traffic regulations. We have created new sanctions for technology and telecommunications crime and a plethora of other matters. We needed to do that and, whether it was the Scottish Parliament or Westminster, we were correct to bring in such legislation. It has, however, caused problems that we must address. The system is struggling to cope with those changes.  Our civil society has changed. Since the late 1960s and the early 1970s, we have become the property-owning democracy. People own their houses and have disputes with their neighbours that were previously regulated by councils or housing associations. People now also leave legacies that cause arguments and difficulties. Our society is much more consumer-orientated; people have more possessions than ever and they want to be able to litigate or act to protect them. None of those matters were considered in the beginning, so it is not a matter of apportioning blame, but of recognising that the ground under our feet has shifted and the society in which we live has changed, and the legal aid system cannot cope unless we review it fundamentally. New issues have arisen that we must provide for, such as immigration and asylum, and there has been recognition of the needs and wants of those who suffer from mental health problems. Such issues were not anticipated back in the 1960s, but they are a drain upon resources and funding and we must change the system and review the structures, not just try to manage a system that is not operating. What do we do? We must conduct a root-and-branch review rather than the piecemeal reform that is being proposed, although that is welcome. At some stage, and on a cross-party basis through a commission, we require to work out what sort of structure we need, and who will deal with what in this complicated society. That should be done by a commission because it has to be non-partisan. We have done it before on other fundamental matters—with Kilbrandon and more recently with Cubie, Sutherland and Arbuthnott. When the issue is not party political, we should ask the great and the good of our society to consider anew where we are going. What will we ask the commission to consider? The current position is that someone may litigate because their car has been shunted by another and they sue for £450. Do we really have to pay a sheriff £119,000 per year, plus pension, to arbitrate on whether the minister, for example, should have signalled, or whether I was going too fast? A fundamental point of law has to go before a sheriff, but should public resources be used when it is a simple matter of fact? It is not just about the rate at which legal aid will be payable. Should such a matter be put before the sheriff court at all? Should we be replicating systems that are used elsewhere that use evening courts, for example, or an investigatory magistrate procedure whereby legal aid is not available and lawyers are excluded. The procedure is one where the magistrate asks questions such as, "What were you doing, minister?" and, "What speed were  you going at, Mr MacAskill?" and we would have to bring witnesses. We also have to consider other aspects of civil litigation. The minister pointed out that people are rightly bemused when a husband who batters his wife gets legal aid with no contribution, but the wife who has been battered and is living on credit and scraping to keep the family together has to pay a substantial contribution. That is not justice. It is difficult to find a solution, but our amendment makes it clear that the interests of justice are paramount and I believe that our society wants us to review such injustice. We have to ask whether the new matters that have arisen, such as questions over immigration, mental health and consumer issues, might not be better dealt with by trading standards officers, advice agencies and immigration advisory services. As I suggested at the outset, we should pay lawyers very well for the narrow fields of law in which they should be expected to operate, but we need to provide other sources that can deal with other matters in other ways. Instead of using a system that is croaking and creaking, we should consider changing the whole structure. Our approach recognises that there is no simple solution and that we need to make difficult choices. As my friend John Swinney said, it is probable that what is capable of being delivered in urban Scotland will not necessarily be available in rural Scotland, so we might need to deal with some aspects in different ways in different circumstances. However, the fundamental point is that we cannot go on as we are. We support the minister on the need for a consultation to ensure that we get immediate action to review the current situation, which is failing. However, as the Parliament for the people of Scotland in the 21 st century, we need to review not just the services that are provided but the whole basis upon which those are predicated. We need a review that starts with a blank sheet of paper and brings in people to work out how we will operate for the next 50 years. I move amendment S2M-3012.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes with concern current difficulties in the funding, staffing and resourcing of a variety of legal services through a multiplicity of agencies, professions and services; believes that the provision of legal and advice services requires a fundamental review in order for it to meet the new challenges and needs of the 21st century, and calls for a commission to be established with a wide remit, predicated on the principle that access to justice for all is paramount, to consider and advise on the best method of delivering such access and the best use of available resources within the judiciary, legal profession and the public and voluntary sectors."

I apologise for not being here for the opening speeches. I was at a constituency engagement and I am grateful for members' indulgence. I also apologise to Mr Brownlee for not being here for his entrance to the chamber and I welcome him. I welcome the long overdue debate, but I have one criticism. Having appointed Sheriff Principal Nicholson, who recruited able committee members  and undertook adequate consultation—as Donald Gorrie commented—I wonder why the Executive needed a further consultation. That said, we are where we are and progress must be made. I support the comments that we should be looking at Sheriff Nicholson's critique of the bill. Although there were spats about various matters—on our side of the chamber and on others—it is clear that more unites than divides us. Almost every speaker made points about significant matters with which I fully concur. The fact is that we have a problem with alcohol in Scotland. I will not moralise about that because I have offended in spectacular fashion more than most and I fully accept my culpability. Although I seek to reform, I still transgress sometimes. That the change in our approach to drinking must be both cultural and legislative was made clear by Mary Mulligan. We need new licensing legislation because the current system is not working and needs to be changed. The system comes to some extent from the early part of the 20 th century and we need to recognise that society has moved on. There are worries about liberalisation, but we must accept that there has to be movement. That does not mean that there has to be a free-for-all and I concur with Mary Mulligan that we must set parameters and have rules—there can be no free market for alcohol. That said, the society in which we find ourselves has moved on. I discussed recently with an ex-pat Scot his reminiscences of Scotland and he spoke of the darker side of Lanarkshire, back when pubs were the forbidden fruit and one could not see into them. That was not a healthy atmosphere and it was contrary to our interests. We should welcome any professionalisation of the trade. There was a myth that licences were held by wives, when we all knew that it was the husband that ran the pub; such mystique is fundamentally flawed. There should be openness and transparency. We should encourage and trust those who want to improve their businesses. There are concerns about how lager is promoted and sold, but there should be some trust in the licensee. We have to set parameters, about whether music can be played and about what licensees can do in the confines of their premises, to take cognisance of the people who live around licensed premises. At the end of the day, however, subject to rules about when they can open and what they can do within their premises, we should allow licensees to use their common sense. We need to clamp down on promotions that encourage binge drinking by youngsters. However, we might at the same time clamp down on opportunities for licensees in some parts of Scotland to promote a free pie with a half for pensioners, as long as they leave their whippet  outside. What is the problem in allowing licensees to do that? We should keep it in mind that some promotions are perfectly viable and healthy—there should be some trust on that. The fundamental problem with alcohol in this country is cultural and there is no easy way of changing a cultural problem. That applies as much to alcohol as it does to other matters that pervade our society, whether domestic violence or knife crime. Such problems have to be addressed using a legislative framework. I do not see anyone in the chamber who is a member of the cross-party group on Scottish writing and publishing, but when Carl MacDougall talked to the group about society and the importance of literature he made a humorous remark of which we in Scotland should take cognisance. He asked us what the fact that the Eskimos have about 50 words for snow says about Eskimo culture, and we all laughed. Then he asked, "In Scotland, how many words are there for being drunk?" and he started off: fou; stotious; blootered; bladdered. The list goes on, but I am conscious of restrictions on language in the chamber. Carl MacDougall narrated 50 definitions of being drunk and each of us in that crowded room could probably have added at least 10 more. Carl asked, "What does that say about Scottish society?" To be fair, other societies in northern Europe, such as Germany, Finland and Norway, could probably do likewise. However, we should not laugh at the Eskimos without considering what that says about us and what it says about a problem that we should be addressing. As Bill Aitken said, individuals must consider their behaviour—some of us perhaps more than others—and recognise that, for their own benefit, never mind that of society, they have to change. Scottish society should take a look at itself, because there is a pernicious belief that, being Scots, we can drink everybody else under the table. That may be viewed humorously and used euphemistically but it is undermining and dangerous. The change has to come from the top. It is easy to say that 16 to 24-year-olds should be targeted, although in some areas there is a problem of youngsters drinking Buckfast and young girls drinking alcopops, which we have to address. However, it ill befits anybody to say that it is a problem of the young, when the Christmas bash of every political party in the Parliament will involve copious consumption of red wine and other alcohol, and when every board of directors' reception in this country, from the Royal Bank of Scotland on, will involve the consumption of alcohol. We cannot simply pin it all on the younger generation, because it is not their fault. The fault starts at the top, with adults and with the parents of those youngsters; therefore it is about each individual addressing their behaviour and Scotland  addressing its culture. It is true that there is a problem in northern hemisphere nations such as Finland and Norway, but that does not apply to our kinfolk in Canada. Toronto and Ottawa do not have the same drinking culture as us, yet arguably the weather and climatic conditions there are worse. We cannot make the excuse that it is something about the dark nights and the cold winters that makes us go to the pub. There is an argument that alternatives, such as sporting facilities, amateur dramatics and music should be provided. There has to be a carrot as well as a stick. However, change has to come from within individuals as well as from within society. We should support legislative change, but recognise that it is just a prelude to cultural change.

Ministers are correct to address the problem and the Executive is correct to take steps to deal with it. Antisocial behaviour blights communities and makes individuals' lives a thorough misery. It affects health and undermines the fabric of society. It is corrosive to communities. We must remember that although some antisocial behaviour is criminal, some is not. We must deal with those matters differently. For example, it is clear that noise, on which the minister commented, must be addressed, as must drug peddling. However, other matters are not necessarily criminal, such as failing to clean the common stair or to cut the grass on a common or in a close. Such behaviour is antisocial and we must accept that it undermines the ethos of a community, but it cannot be dealt with as a criminal matter. That is not to say that all such behaviour is acceptable—clearly, it is not. All that I am saying is that some antisocial behaviour is not criminal and cannot be dealt with simply by the police or by prosecution. We require other avenues to deal with it. We accept that part of the Executive's motion about taking the powers in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which we supported. It is necessary, however, to ensure that local authorities and other agencies are properly resourced, not simply chastised and castigated for not dealing with matters. However, if the measures are to work, it is important to have that aspect of the armoury.

I accept that that substantial  amount of money has been provided, but local authorities have other departments that are imploding and must rob Peter to pay Paul. Local authority social work departments have difficulties and stretched resources. We welcome the money, but if it leaks out through other holes in the proverbial local authority bucket, a significant problem exists. The powers are just one aspect and they are not the whole solution. The powers are fine for some, but they are probably only the few. We must address the root causes and not just the symptoms and the malaise. If we are to go to the roots of offending, we must address the causes of criminality and not just the crimes. We must accept the extent of the problem. The minister is correct that whole areas are being made miserable, but in substantial parts of Scotland, such as the leafy suburbs in which I and no doubt other members live, antisocial behaviour is not a problem or is addressed in the community. We must put matters in perspective. Scotland is not a war zone, although—unfortunately—some areas tend to resemble one. We as legislators have a duty to address that. We must not portray action as a war on a generation. The overwhelming majority of youngsters are a credit to themselves, to their families and to their communities. We must not be seen as lecturing and hectoring them. Moreover, we must remember that the root cause of a child or youngster's participation in criminality may be his mother's heroin addiction or his father's alcohol dependency. It ill befits those of our generation to castigate the younger generation if the problems stem from our generation. As I said, we must address the roots of criminality. We must deal with the problem, create a culture and bring it on board in a variety of ways. I do not normally support Tony Blair, but it is necessary to encourage respect. The Scottish National Party's position is that taking powers is appropriate, but that it is essential for society and individuals to take responsibility. Individuals must accept that actions have consequences. If someone throws a stone, it might injure someone or break something. People cannot make excuses that they did not mean that to happen. They must remember that actions have consequences. People must take it on board that they must respect others' rights. Other people in the community or in their stair have the right to have their views respected and to have the volume of music kept lower when they are trying to sleep. People must take their turn at cleaning the common stair and—especially if they are young, fit and able-bodied—at cutting the front green, rather than leaving it to a pensioner. All those matters require respect.  It is difficult to legislate for respect. That is why we believe that the powers are simply one aspect. Legislation cannot say, "You must respect your elders." That is impossible. However, that does not mean that we as a society do not strive to be tough on the causes of crime as well as on crime itself. That takes education, work with voluntary bodies and work with youngsters. The minister should take on board the points that Tony Blair has made, because it is correct to address not only social responsibility, but individual responsibility to others in the community. People practise that with their families and we must accept that they should also do so in the broader community. How do we address that? We do not do that simply by repression. If we move youngsters from outside one shop or one place to another place, all that we do is displace the problem. We must do what Strathclyde police—to their credit—are trialling in the likes of South Lanarkshire, which takes on board what places such as Sweden do in trying to work out who the children are, why they are standing in a place and whether they have a problem at home. [ Interruption. ]

I am happy to accept that and I am not suggesting that—I am well aware of the minister's commitment to youngsters. However, the perception—if not the reality from the minister—is of an attack on a generation of youngsters and of repression rather than seeking to reform and rehabilitate. We must learn lessons not only from Sweden, but—as the minister agrees—from what is happening in the likes of South Lanarkshire. We must work out the causes of criminality. If the cause is a parent's heroin addiction or another drug addiction, that must be addressed. If the cause is a lack of employment, we must tackle it. We cannot simply deal with the behaviour. Back not only in 1997, but in the mid-1990s, when Labour attacked a Tory Government that had ravaged housing estates by creating areas of mass unemployment into which heroin flowed, Tony Blair said that Labour would be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime. In moving our amendment, the SNP supports the Executive in being tough on crime, but the perception and the reality are that the Executive is not being tough on the causes of crime. That is why we must address social and individual responsibility and  respect for all. Our society should address the three Ds that blight our country—drink, drugs and deprivation. I move amendment S2M-2893.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "believes that the Antisocial Behaviour etc. (Scotland) Act 2004 offers further options and powers to relevant local authorities and agencies; notes, however, that appropriate resourcing of police, local authorities and other local, national and voluntary agencies is a prerequisite for tackling antisocial behaviour, as is co-operation and interaction between, and amongst, them and national government; believes that individuals must accept responsibility for their actions and the consequences of these and, in addition, respect the rights of others in their community and society, and further believes that it is essential that government at all levels accepts responsibility for all communities within Scotland and addresses, not just social exclusion, but also the scourge of drink, drugs and deprivation that scar our land."

I am grateful for the Presiding Officer's indulgence of my earlier technical error. On that note, it is appropriate that I should thank the clerks, the committee's convener and the other members of the committee for dealing with the technical aspects of the bill, which, to some extent—along with technology—remain beyond me. It is appropriate for us to support fully the bill's purpose. We operate in a magnificent Parliament that deals with a variety of tasks; the Parliament is charged with tackling a multitude of issues for the people of Scotland. Yesterday, grand affairs of state were mentioned in the First Minister's report on his trip to Malawi. Later this morning, there will be a debate on dealing with antisocial behaviour—that debate is vital to life in Scotland. This afternoon, we will consider the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, which is crucial legislation. It is clear that the Baird Trust Reorganisation Bill does not fall within the ambit of any of those matters. However, we are the Parliament for the people of Scotland and the committee decided that there was no avenue for making the required changes to the Baird Trust other than through a private bill. The convener was correct to point out that the Baird Trust was legislated for back in the last century. As the inheritors of Westminster's powers, our only way forward is to tackle the issue through a bill. We should do so not begrudgingly, but in a manner that takes on board what is necessary. The bill does not deal with grand affairs of state, but it is important for the Baird Trust, its members and the many people who benefit from it. Consideration of the bill will take up 30 minutes of our day, which is not a great deal. Members who have served on the committee have been required to attend two meetings. We should just accept that. As the committee's convener said, it is clear that there is no opposition to the proposed changes, which are perfectly sensible—even if we do not know in what position they will put the Baird Trust or what they will allow it to do. I happened to see  "Newsnight" last night, on which there was a debate involving a Liberal Democrat MP and a Labour MSP and minister. It may be that the Baird Trust will wish to deal with matters furth of Scotland. The Lib Dem MP—with whom I have to say I disagreed—suggested that the links between Scotland and Malawi were not especially strong. If he studied the history of the Church of the Scotland and of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Malawi, he would realise that there were significant links between those bodies. We might not like to crow too much about some of those links—such as the attendance of Dr Hastings Banda at university and divinity college here—but the links between the church in Scotland and the church in Malawi are important. If the reorganisation of the Baird Trust provides an opportunity to expand the links between Scotland and Malawi, it is important. The reason why the Parliament is dealing with the trust's reorganisation is that no other body in Scotland is capable of doing so. We are Scotland's legislature. The issue requires legislation; we cannot pass it on to a charity commissioner or regulator, the churches or the local authorities. The buck stops with us—that is why it has been appropriate and correct for us to go about our task under the guidance of the convener and the clerking team. It is clear that we can deal with trust's reorganisation through an accelerated procedure. The Procedures Committee is reviewing how private bills are dealt with by the Parliament. Every now and again, we will have to deal with historical anachronisms. Although that adds to our work, we should accept that it is part of the responsibility that goes with being elected to the office of member of the Scottish Parliament. The proposed change is limited and we have satisfied ourselves that it will not cause any problems, but will allow the Baird Trust to do more effectively what James Baird originally charged it with doing. I commend the motion to the Parliament.

I am sorry. No, I do not wish to speak on this motion.

I tender my apologies for the discourtesy of not being in the chamber for the opening speeches. Regrettably, and as is often the case, my media interview did not proceed at the time that it was supposed to. It is appropriate that we are reviewing the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. Such review is part and parcel of the legislative process and the purpose of the Scottish Parliament. We are a unicameral Parliament, so we have to make legislation without having the opportunity to review matters. Some time after legislation has been introduced, therefore, it is appropriate that we should pause and reflect on whether what we sought to achieve has been achieved; whether the act is working well; whether things can be improved; and what amendments we need to make. When we do that, it is appropriate that we look at issues in Scotland in terms of the glass being half full rather than half empty. It is clear that some aspects have not worked out as well as we would have liked, but significant process has been made in other areas. A difficulty for the committee is that there may have to be a further review because, to some extent, the ground is shifting under our feet. The decision, which I and the SNP support, to introduce regional transport partnerships is long overdue. We can use that method to provide in other areas of Scotland what currently exists in the west of Scotland. The representation from that area here today makes it clear that we must not  throw the baby out with the bathwater in respect of what has served the west of Scotland well through the SPT. Regional partnerships represent progress, in that one of the difficulties for buses is that they transcend local authority borders. Local authorities face significant difficulty in many regards. We must consider the society that has evolved, in respect of broader travel-to-work areas, and extend the opportunities that exist for regulation and control to be taken over that. That means broadening out the base. To some extent, bus services are a Cinderella service. They are often maligned, but they are a good service for those who use them. At low cost, they are capable of delivering a great deal. I believe that trams will be appropriate at some stage, but I am aware that for the current cost to the city of Edinburgh of tramlines 1 and 2, we could renovate the entire Lothians bus fleet and, I am told, run the buses free for the next seven years. We must question whether, on a utilitarian basis, the bus service is best value and whether it runs when it is wanted, which is not only at peak times, and at an appropriate fare level. We must make progress on matters such as park and ride and, most certainly, integrated ticketing. There is a role for Government in that. An integrated structure will have to be created. I have a friend who works in Denmark but lives with his partner in Malmo in Sweden. He commutes daily from Malmo to Copenhagen, a journey that involves two countries and two currencies but one ticket. We travel between the cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow in one country with one currency, but we need two tickets. We must bang heads together. We are a small country and we should be capable of delivering an integrated service. I accept that a multitude of factors, such as local authorities, transport authorities, the private sector and the public sector, must be taken into account, but ultimately it is the role of Government and this Parliament to deliver on such matters. People want buses that arrive on time and are easy to use, as well as new fleets, and if the ticketing system is complicated they will not use the bus. We have come a long way, but much must be reviewed. I appreciate that we have made progress, but we will have to return to many matters when the new regional transport partnerships are in place, because the ground will change significantly.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to meet air quality obligations under EU directives. (S2O-6742)

The minister will be aware that the directives will cause traffic management difficulties for local authorities in many urban areas, whether Shandwick Place in Edinburgh or Hope Street in Glasgow. The strategy is a national one that has been signed up to by the national Government. Will the Executive commit to financing and assisting local authorities that face the consequences of those decisions, desirable though they may be?

The Scottish National Party fully endorses the Executive motion and the minister's comments. She is correct to raise such matters and it is proper for her to do so in her speech. The world—not simply the economy, but society—has globalised. Crime, as well as labour and capital, are mobile and transnational. Crime is capable of stalking across many lands, so  countries need to work together if they are to address it. We must accept that we live in a shrinking world and that crime is therefore much more transnational. Globalisation brings economic benefits and the benefit of international travel but, although we must recognise its fruits, it comes at a price and we must guard against that. A cheque card that is stolen from a Scot on holiday can easily be used for crime and one that is stolen to order in this country can be sent abroad to cause mayhem. A vehicle that is stolen in Scotland, to be put in a container and sent to eastern Europe or elsewhere, can be out the country before the owner has noticed its absence. Businesses and individuals receive e-mails from Nigeria and elsewhere that cause fraud, mayhem and severe loss. The minister is correct that crime knows no boundaries. Whether we are talking about guns being imported from the Balkans, drugs being imported from Afghanistan or people being trafficked through eastern Europe or elsewhere, we need to accept that the world has globalised and that crime agencies must co-operate. We must also bear it in mind that no country is an island; all countries are interdependent. Even the most powerful nation in the world—the United States of America—must recognise that fact, and not simply because of the terror that manifested itself on 9/11, which showed the USA that it was not immune to circumstances that can ravage places elsewhere in the world, and that no matter how it seeks to secure its borders, there will be difficulties that it will be required to address. The USA would do well to remember the words of Noam Chomsky—I note that the learned professor was over here recently—on cocaine trafficking. Despite the activities of America's special weapons and tactics teams, Food and Drug Administration, Drug Enforcement Administration and its military, cocaine still enters the USA from Colombia. However, 94 per cent or 95 per cent of the ingredients of the cocaine that is sold on the streets the United States of America are manufactured in the USA then exported to Colombia to be assembled with the basic powder and re-imported to the United States of America. Professor Chomsky made the point that the US authorities are unable to stop the cocaine being flown in and, rather than wage war on campesinos who make a small percentage of the ingredients of cocaine, they would be better to address the problems that exist in their own society. That shows that even the manufacture of cocaine is an international process that transcends countries. It is not simply that the war is in Afghanistan or the problem is in Colombia; the problem is as much in our country as it is those others and we need to work across the board to address that. As the minister pointed out, we need to accept that point  in respect of a variety of matters, such as terrorism, fraud and people trafficking. We must also accept that crime comes in a variety of shapes and forms. A man in a suit is as likely to perpetrate a crime as is a youth in a hooded top. Legislators elsewhere must take on board the fact that much serious crime is committed not by hoodies, but by hoods dressed in dapper Armani suits. Many years back, Woody Guthrie sang: "Yes, as through this world I've wandered I've seen lots of funny men; Some will rob you with a six-gun, And some with a fountain pen." It is important that, in addressing crime, we bear it in mind that the problem is not simply a small element of youth, but serious and highly organised crime. The SNP's amendment recognises the difference of Scottish society. We have to work internationally and transnationally, but we must realise that Scottish society is different and distinct. What works in metropolitan London and what is needed in metropolitan Paris is not necessarily appropriate for Scotland. Lothian and Borders police would tell members that its policing methods for the Cowgate are different from those for George Street and most certainly different from those for Lothian Road on a Friday night or any other night. What is needed in Paris, London or Chicago is vastly different from what is needed in Scotland; how a policeman in Thurso would act is, in many instances, vastly different from how a policeman in Tooting would act. The SNP accepts that some things are universal—we must always be prepared to accept best practice, wherever it comes from. However, we must acknowledge that our society is different. We have a unique legal system; it might not be the best system in the world, but it is ours. We must be prepared to learn where that system needs to improve and we must recognise and address its faults, although it has served us well through centuries and will continue to do so. Our system has also been moulded and shaped to meet our society's requirements. Our policing has a different culture. It is very much based upon communities and on policing going upwards. It is also based upon chief constables' being almost sacrosanct; apart from being accountable to the board that appointed them, chief constables are certainly not subject to political interference. We are anxious to ensure that what has served us well in the past should remain. We must ensure the independence of our chief constables and their decisions about what is right for their communities, subject to discussion with the democratically elected boards.  We must also ensure that our law is paramount and that our legal system prevails. Clearly, we must be prepared to co-operate not just with extra-national jurisidictions but with the jurisdictions elsewhere in the United Kingdom. However, as I say, we must always bear it in mind that our legal system is unique and distinct because it is for our distinct and unique society. It has served us well and it will have to develop and evolve and take on board ideas from others nations, but it must be paramount. We must ensure that new agencies and structures do not try to force the proverbial square peg into a round hole and that they allow our system to develop as best suits our society and the way it wants to address a global phenomenon. I move amendment S2M-2824.1, to insert at end: "notes, however, that, whilst co-operation with other bodies both elsewhere in the United Kingdom and abroad is vital, Scotland has a unique legal system and a distinctive policing culture that is community-based and independent from political interference and therefore that the Scottish legal system and Scottish Law Officers must always be responsible for, and in control of, operations in Scotland and the representation of Scottish views and needs abroad."

The Scottish National Party came into the debate fully supporting the report and it still does, but I am rather surprised that some members have spent more time attacking the party's policy, which is not on the agenda, than supporting the committee's work, which is on the agenda. Our position was outlined eloquently not only by my colleague, Richard Lochhead, who advanced it, but by John Swinney, who put forward a consensus to which we are happy to sign up. The committee's work is not the Scottish National Party's view per se, but we are happy to support it as it is an advance on the current situation. John Swinney was right to point out two key matters: we must be tighter, better focused and more co-ordinated; and, perhaps most important, we need greater ambition. I was disappointed that we had from the minister a mantra of further strategies, more advertising and the fresh talent initiative. Those are all praiseworthy to some extent, but I remain to be convinced that they will deliver. Even if the minister is not prepared to accept the view that the SNP expresses, I ask that he take into consideration the many valid points that Mr Jackson made. Those points were part and parcel of the committee's report and we are happy to sign up to them. Mr Jackson also commented on the SNP's position, which is clear: we believe that Scotland would be better as an independent nation and would be better served by being represented abroad, as are the Republic of Ireland and other independent nations. However, that is not currently on the agenda. The SNP is a democratic party and accepts the current constitutional basis, but it believes that the country can and should do better and considers the activities of other legislatures, such as those on which Mr Lochhead commented, that are doing far better—whether that is Quebec with its légations or Flanders with Export Vlaanderen. Some of Mr Stone's speech was rather bizarre. He mentioned our chamber, which is a wonderful auditorium, but it should be much more than simply a venue for Sir Bob Geldof, much as we welcome him.

Not at the moment, I am sorry; time is constrained. Neither should the chamber simply be an auditorium for the leaders of the G8 to parade around. The minister and I have debated the cost- benefit analysis of the G8 summit, but it is coming and we must get the benefit of it. It is not simply about the venue that we provide; it is about how we as a nation participate in the world.

Not at the moment. Our responsibility as a nation is not just to do what we can within the devolution settlement to make Scotland a better nation at home; it is about how we allow our nation to participate abroad. We must enhance what we have at home in the way of export and trade because we are a small nation that requires to trade to survive and we are situated on the periphery of western Europe and of a major trading bloc. Our responsibility is also about how we participate in the matters that were highlighted this week by Sir Bob Geldof. We cannot simply be spectators in the 21 st century. It is our duty and obligation to participate in such events. We must raise our game. We can and do accept the constitutional arrangements—those are subject to debate at future elections and constitutional referenda or whatever other occasions—but we can do better. I accept some of the points made by the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform that there has been progress. As far as Scotland is concerned, the glass is certainly half full, not half empty. Mr Morrison was quite correct to say that the air route development fund has been an exceptionally good thing for Scotland. There has been an enhancement to tartan day—it is getting better. We can dispute its Brigadoon image, but it is clearly a magnet for bringing in people from the Scottish diaspora. There have been improvements, but we can and should be doing more. We can do things better and we should be reaping the rewards; other countries do so, and benefit, from a far lower juncture. It is about being able to participate. We do not have to recreate offices here, there and everywhere but, leaving aside the influence of Susan Stewart, structure and strategy are clearly important. One of our major failings in the United States is that we do not have the structure in place there. We do not seek to expand the bureaucracy per se, but one person cannot operate in isolation. The Executive should consider the points made by the former First Minister, Henry McLeish. Structure is as vital as strategy. We need to have a strategy, but we also need the structures to allow it to operate successfully. Susan Stewart was isolated. I believe she was much maligned—I never saw her do anything wrong. We must ensure that we have the apparatus that goes, perhaps not with a nation state, but with a devolved legislature that wishes to play a successful role in the modern world.

As is normal, I pay tribute to my colleague Sandra White for lodging the motion. It is lengthy, but that illustrates the complexity of the multifaceted issue that must be addressed. Numerous problems transcend an array of matters that are covered in Parliament and elsewhere. It is appropriate that the debate follows the debate—in particular the deputy minister's speech—about victory in Europe day. She stated eloquently that the war was waged against fascism and tyranny. We should remember that people gave their lives, limbs, youth and whatever else not only to defeat fascism and tyranny, but to create a better world. That is why, in the election in 1945, a war hero who was instrumental in delivering the defeat of fascism was overwhelmingly defeated by Labour. People returned from the war or left the factories desiring not simply the benefits of victory, but to change the world to make it a better place for them and future generations. The battle had been waged and they expected the world to benefit all, not merely some or a minority. I pay tribute not to Labour Governments that have been elected recently, but to the Labour Government that was elected in 1945, which sought change. It did so and made many advances, but as time has moved on, we have perhaps not made the changes for which we hoped. There is still a long way to go—that is not a criticism of any Government or party. As I said, we have failed to deliver some of the changes that were sought to create a fairer world. The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 provides one way to make progress, but it is appropriate to recognise that not only legislative change, but cultural change is necessary. I know that today has been a long day, that earlier debates were heavily attended and that numerous other events are taking place elsewhere, but it is perhaps symbolic that the turnout is lower than it has been at other junctures.  People do not necessarily see the problem, which is that many of the problems that disabled people experience and many of the issues that the manifesto raises are hidden. Therefore, it is important not only that we introduce legislation to ensure that rights are available to those who suffer from disabilities of whatever form, and that we enforce that legislation, but that we address the cultural attitudes that exist in us all. I have to put my hand on my heart and confess that I have often been guilty of ignorance of the difficulties that people who have mental or physical impediments face. We must acknowledge that we need not only legislative change, but cultural change, but if we wish to achieve cultural change—whether in this matter, in respect of binge drinking or something else—we have to set a tone at the top that makes it clear that we desire a society that includes everyone. Therefore, it is important that we have this debate and that we address all the issues. I welcome the progress that is being made on the DDA, whether in Westminster or on aspects that the Executive brings to Parliament. Inclusion is not simply a question of imposing a moral right that those who have disabilities should be included in aspects of society that the rest of us who are able bodied take for granted; in Scotland in the 21 st century, it is also an economic imperative. We know that we have a demographic crisis, that we must get fresh talent and that we need all hands to the pumps. When I walked up Holyrood Road yesterday, all the cafes, bars and hotels on that street were advertising for staff. We do not have the labour supply to meet Scotland's economic needs. It is not only a matter of imposing a moral right that disabled people should be able to participate in the fruits of the society in which they live; if we wish our society to maintain its economic progress—never mind its social progress—we must take steps to allow disabled people to participate. We need them on board, just as they have every right to participate, like the rest of us. I am happy to join in the debate. I pay tribute again to my colleague, Sandra White, for having brought this important matter to Parliament's attention. The DDA is the way forward, but we must get to cultural attitudes and change minds as well as law.

The report is short, as is the debate, but a considerable number of matters have been raised, including literacy and numeracy skills, the role of families in rehabilitation, tackling drugs and the importance of social work departments interacting with organisations within and without prisons. We welcome the fact that the report seeks to bring together and harmonise two fundamental issues—prison and rehabilitation. Prison is an unwelcome necessity in our society and—unless we believe in utopia—it is here to stay. Rehabilitation is a by-product of prison, not its primary function. The Justice 1 Committee is to be commended for reviewing the effectiveness of rehabilitation and prison and for seeking improvements. There is no suggestion of an immediate cure for problems, because there is none. We need to enhance and improve what we have and bring in innovative measures, but there is no silver or magic bullet. The report is welcome and worthy and should be treated as such. Prison and rehabilitation are distinct. I agree with the deputy minister and disagree with Mr Harvie. The primary function of prison is the punishment of offenders and the protection of the public. That is its core value. Following from that is rehabilitation, but rehabilitation is not the primary purpose of prison. People are not sent to prison to be rehabilitated. If we wish to rehabilitate people because they have a drug or alcohol addiction, we should send them to whatever organisation exists to address that problem. The primary reason for sending somebody to prison is that they have committed an offence that our society views as of such magnitude that it can be marked only by a prison sentence and/or that they are such a danger that they require to be confined for the safety and security of the rest of society. Rehabilitation is important, because we live in a society in which we do not wish prisoners to break rocks, work in the salt pans or simply eat porridge. A democratic, civilised society has a duty to do what it can to reintegrate people who are in prison. The important point that I take from the report is that, in many instances, we need to drive at reintegration, not rehabilitation. Many members mentioned the importance of maintaining family links and dealing with numeracy and literacy skills. We must address those issues, because they go back to the reasons why people are in prison in the first place. In many cases, they are there because of deprivation or addiction.  We must consider how to fine tune the system and ensure that treatments that take place in prison continue outwith it. However, we delude ourselves if we suggest that the aim of prison is to rehabilitate, although prison can assist in that. When we confine people or punish them, we have a duty to do our best to reintegrate them into society, but that can never be the core or kernel, because prison is simply not capable of that. We can ensure that, as far as possible, we have a seamless system, that families can attend and that we provide drug and other addiction services, but, fundamentally, we must recognise that the primary role of prison is to punish and protect. While prisoners are in the care of society, we must do our best to rehabilitate them, but that is a distinct matter. The Justice 1 Committee has done a worthy job in showing how the two issues interact, but we must accept that they are distinct.

I will follow the normal course of events and, like other members, congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate. I also thank him for his thoughtful speech. However, the normal platitudes are inadequate tonight. On this occasion, we have to pay greater tribute to Paul Martin. The subject of the debate is the tragic event that befell the Cummings family. That event is not only significant in Paul Martin's constituency, but has national ramifications. Paul Martin has doggedly and tenaciously pursued the matter. Tonight's debate is simply a culmination of that work, which has resulted—albeit with the support of the Executive—in change taking place. Members of the Scottish Parliament are often abused and derided. On this occasion, Paul Martin has done us all a favour by showing what an MSP can do by not seeking personal advancement and, indeed, by not being partisan. He has pursued the issue, effected change and publicly raised matters that are of significant concern not only to the people whom he represents, but to the Scottish nation. I put on record the fact that the normal platitudes are simply inadequate in this debate. The Scottish National Party welcomes the recent changes that were announced by the Executive. These issues are difficult. Notwithstanding the tragedies that occur, which devastate individuals and communities, we must never lose sight of the fact that the number of people who are involved in such crimes is, thankfully, limited. The perpetrators of such crimes are dangerous people—they are not only highly manipulative, but in some instances, I am sad to say, probably incorrigible. That is why we have to look at other ways of dealing with offenders. Paul Martin made the valid point that the people whom he represents are not vigilantes. People are entitled to know whether a sex offender is living in their area. I have agonised long and hard about whether Megan's law and other such ideas are a good or a bad thing. I remember a conversation with the professor of criminology at the University of Edinburgh, in which he reversed the question by asking, "What would you do if that happened in  your area? Do you think that you have a right to know?" The fact is that I would insist on knowing. I would be outraged if the council and the Executive knew that a sex offender was living in my area but my family had not been advised of that. The difference in response in such situations borders on the issue of class, which is a matter into which I stray only infrequently. If such a crime were to happen in the leafy suburb where I and the Lord Advocate live, members can rest assured that we would have used the contacts and the resources at our disposal to hire the best lawyers in the city to ensure that action was taken. In other areas, particularly Royston, people do not have those good connections—unless they have a connection to a member such as Mr Martin, who will take action on their behalf. Those people do not have the resources to go to lawyers to take steps to protect their community. It is entirely wrong to denigrate those who protest and call them vigilantes. Those people are pursuing the only course of action that is available to them. They cannot use the connections that are available to the middle class or to the more affluent members of society, in which I include the members in the chamber. I repeat that Paul Martin deserves credit for the actions that he has taken. As I said, the issue is not only local, but national. It comes down to the representations that the social work department concerned has made to us all. I am referring to issues such as resourcing—this sort of social work care does not come cheap. The problem needs to be addressed not only in prison, but when offenders are outwith the prison environment. Although those people need significant monitoring, we cannot put a price on the lives of our children. Treatment programmes and new initiatives have to be considered. There is no simple solution. Again, I pay tribute to Paul Martin for raising the issue and securing the debate. The SNP welcomes the steps that the Executive has announced and taken to date; the Executive can rest assured that it has our full support. As Mr Martin has correctly shown, the subject of the debate is not a partisan issue, but a matter that affects all of us in all our communities.

I am not sure what Mr Harvie was driving at. I can only assume that he was referring to what I said in response to the point that Mr Jackson made. If someone has a drug problem, I fully accept that that requires to be addressed. However, if someone commits a serious offence as a result of that drug problem, such as a knifing, stabbing or armed robbery, it is important that that crime be punished. Is Mr Harvie suggesting that we should ignore the actions of those people when and if they go beyond the simple problem of their addiction? If not, does he accept that the seriousness of the offences and the consequences of their actions on our society require that those crimes be addressed by punishment and imprisonment?

The Scottish National Party fully supports the motion and the minister's words. It is clear that there is a  cultural malaise in Scotland that manifests itself not only in a drink culture, but in a knife culture and a growing drug problem. That cannot simply be legislated against, but needs to be addressed by our communities and in our communities. The SNP welcomes the debate. Crime is a continuing societal problem. It is the cause of worry as well as death, injury and upset. The debate, as with other debates at the moment, takes place against the backdrop of a general election, which gives rise to a great desire for instant solutions and one-off remedies. Our view is that we must take cognisance of the fact that no one party has the prerogative over law and order; it requires to be addressed in all communities no matter what viewpoint one takes or faith one professes. That is not to say that action and prescription are not needed, because they clearly are. There are some easy remedies that we need to use. We need more police, a more visible police presence and more resources for the organisations that are trying to tackle crime through other means. We also need more disposal options for our judiciary and others who are involved in sentencing to use and more diversion from prosecution. However, there is no one simple solution and, to some extent, that is why we are happy to support the Executive. We have had fewer simplistic soundbites and more sensible, pragmatic plans, which we recognise as being important because, although they will not bring about an immediate change over a matter of days, they will result in a better community. The problems are caused by a variety of factors, which is why there is no one immediate or instant solution. Individual behaviour needs to be addressed as well as social problems. Wicked and reckless actions by individuals, as well as drink, drugs and deprivation, which afflict many, affect and create the climate that fuels the problems. We are happy to support the Executive's motion, although we have a few caveats. In particular, we recognise that resources need to follow those on whom obligations are placed. We must be wary of putting more responsibilities on local authority departments, never mind other organisations, without giving them commensurate resources. We must acknowledge that the problem will be tackled not by one super-organisation but by a variety of organisations—whether local authorities, non-governmental organisations, or Executive departments—and that, in many instances, it is best dealt with through co-operation. We must ensure that co-operation takes place and the Executive must give direction to ensure that its departments and other organisations work together, but I am glad that the Executive has taken on board the point that one super- organisation is not the way to go. We will not support the Tory amendment, which once again is written in jingoistic terms with an eye on the coming election.

The motion is an example of the sloganising that we have had from the Tories since the Parliament was formed without any sensible attempt to move forward. There are aspects of the Tories' amendment that are sensible. Clearly, rehabilitation is part of the process that should occur when someone is in prison and we would say that, fundamentally, we do not have prisons for the purpose of rehabilitation. Prisons are for people who are dangerous to the rest of us in society or who have committed an offence of such seriousness that they require to be incarcerated in order that society may show its displeasure. They are not there to provide rehabilitation. If somebody's fundamental problem is alcohol or drugs, we require to address the basis of the problem that results in criminal action.

It is utterly ludicrous that we have such a large number of people, particularly women in places such as Cornton Vale, who are imprisoned—and, in some cases, committing suicide—because they have defaulted on fine payments. There has to be a better way. Similarly, if someone commits an armed robbery because they need money to fuel their drug problem, they need to go to prison because the offence is so serious that that is the treatment that it merits. If their crime is simply that they possess or are using drugs, it might be much more sensible for us to address the root cause of the criminality. That is the issue that we want to deal with.

I have already taken two interventions. On automatic release, we welcomed the proposals with regard to sex offenders by the Executive and take cognisance of them. Our amendment is designed to add to, not detract from, the point that the Executive is making. We need to take responsibility in Scotland. Responsibility needs to be taken at an individual level because, sadly, too many people are making  excuses for what is purely bad behaviour. I do not want to get into the argument of whether a certain proportion of antisocial behaviour is just antisocial or is criminal behaviour; however, our communities are fed up with people making excuses for wanton and unacceptable bad behaviour. People must remember that they have responsibility for their actions and that, more important, their actions have consequences. We have to remember that there are difficult matters that we must deal with. People have to participate in the criminal justice system because, to be quite frank, we get the police in our communities that we deserve. If our communities, for whatever reason, do not participate in the process—whether it is by reporting crime or becoming involved in the situation—the police cannot do their job effectively and appropriately. I know that it is easy for me—a resident of the same leafy suburb in which our learned Lord Advocate resides—to say that people should participate and report crime, given that I am not getting my tyres slashed, my windows put in, my children threatened and so on, but we must say to people that they must co-operate with the police, otherwise the police cannot do their job. We must get police that our community is prepared to work with. I will make my last point with particular regard to the Tories. We must address the elements that are the basis of a great deal of crime. For many centuries, we based the betterment of our country on the importance of the three Rs, but if we want to resolve the problems that Scotland faces in the 21 st century, we must address the three Ds: drink; drugs; and deprivation. They fuel crime and alienation and, until we tackle them, we will not solve the problems that we are talking about today. Individuals must take responsibility for their actions and we, as a society, through our elected Government, must take responsibility for all communities and all individuals, no matter how marginalised or alienated. I move amendment S2M-2736.2, to insert at end: "and recognises the need for individuals to accept greater responsibility for their actions and the consequences thereof as well as their own role in criminal justice, from reporting crime to participating in jury service, and equally for the Scottish Executive to recognise its own responsibility to all communities in Scotland and address the problems of drink, drugs and deprivation that lie at the root of much desperation and crime."

It is a pleasure to speak in this debate on an issue that is vital to the economy both of Scotland and, in particular, of Edinburgh, of which city it is my privilege not only to be a representative but a resident. The city's banking and financial services industry has gone from strength to strength. As  Christine May and others have said, the Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS have clearly shown the way but other financial services companies, equally, have been successful, whereas other industries, such as those that involved the likes of Bartholomew and Henry Robb, have passed by the wayside. Two important aspects need to be touched upon in today's debate. First, as the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and every other speaker mentioned, we should offer congratulations on a Scottish success story. Secondly, we need to address how we build upon, maintain and manage that success in the global world in which we live. The city's financial services industry has been successful globally but, as my colleague Jim Mather mentioned, there is mounting competition from areas such as Dublin across the Irish sea, the Netherlands and beyond. It is important that we highlight success. I agreed whole-heartedly with Mr Fraser's comments and I was quite happy to sign up to his motion congratulating the banks on what they had delivered. I also agree that the Scottish Socialist Party group's response to that motion was churlish. Indeed, the failure of SSP members even to dignify today's debate with their presence seems to me somewhat shameful. The SSP might consider Edinburgh's financial institutions to be the running dogs of capitalism, but they fuel the Scottish economy and are a great success story. There is something churlish—indeed, something downright ignorant—about the SSP's failure to participate in the debate. There is something particularly Scottish about our frequent failure to recognise or praise success. In Scotland, we are prone to praise our sporting successes. Although they are few and occur on isolated occasions, we are happy to praise them. However, to some extent, any success in the corporate sphere or in the boardroom is denied. We do not simply hide our light under a bushel; often, it is frowned upon for people to portray such success.

I am more than happy to say that such success should be portrayed, but I simply point out to Mr Wilson a fact about Scottish culture. Mr Wilson may dispute that—I will be more than happy to hear from him—but I believe that there is a cultural problem in Scotland that fails to highlight success. In the past, we have been prepared to celebrate the success of ships that were built on the Clyde or in Edinburgh, or of other manufacturing achievements—

Give me just one minute. However, we have been reluctant to recognise the relationship that exists between what we used to manufacture and what we do now in managing funds and operating in the banking sphere.

I am delighted that we are singing from the same hymn sheet, if not from the same document. Having decided that we should congratulate our financial services industry on its success and build upon that success, we must answer the question how we take the industry forward and support it. The Royal Bank of Scotland is the biggest company not only in Scotland today, but in Scotland's history. I note the absence from today's debate of Mr Mundell, who has previously criticised me and my party for our support of, and admiration for, Finland. However, the proportion of Scotland's GDP that is generated by the Royal Bank of Scotland is approaching Nokia proportions in relation to Finland. Therefore, any criticism that Mr Mundell applied to Finland could equally be applied to this country. We must recognise the importance of not just the Royal Bank of Scotland, but all the banks in the sector and the matters that affect them. The sector is fundamental not just to our economic success but, as the SSP should acknowledge, to our success in bringing about the sort of society that we wish to create in Scotland. If our economy does not generate wealth, we will have nothing to divvy up and spend. On how we do that, I believe that we need to learn two lessons from across the Irish sea. First, Ireland has low levels of corporation tax. Our countries do not simply share a confident financial services industry; Ireland's constitutional powers give it a mechanism that provides the Irish with an added advantage and competitive edge that Scotland lacks. We need to address that. Secondly, there needs to be a more strategic direction. We have seen the success that Ireland has created in the Dublin docklands. As a resident of Edinburgh, I believe that our equivalent to the Dublin docklands must be west Edinburgh. With the global headquarters of the Royal Bank of Scotland, west Edinburgh is the dynamo for moving not just the Edinburgh economy, but the Scottish economy. The task cannot be left simply to the City of Edinburgh Council—there must be national strategic direction. That issue has been touched on, and there are other members in the  chamber today who represent Edinburgh. I pay tribute to Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, which has sought to draw together a political consensus that recognises that the issue is important and cannot in many instances be left to the council. I welcome many of the transport proposals for Edinburgh, although I share the desire of others to see them delivered. If there were fewer consultation documents, announcements and proposals, and if some tarmacadam—never mind a railway line—were laid, we would be happier. However, the issue is not simply the transport infrastructure that has been mentioned. In the west of Edinburgh there is a traffic problem, and it cannot be left to the City of Edinburgh Council to deal with it through the road network. The problem has a national dimension and must be dealt with by Scotland, rather than passed to the council. It should not be left to the council to take the rap or to council tax payers to foot the bill. We must address the question of skills. That comes against the backdrop of the debate about immigration—or no immigration, as some parties would have it. We must invest in skills. To continue the sporting analogy, just as successful Scottish football clubs invest in talented foreign footballers, we must ensure that we bring in talented individuals from abroad. We must also bring in many people who are not particularly talented but who can provide skills that our people cannot provide. We have failed to do what the Irish have done. They have invested far more in seeking not just the return of the Irish diaspora, but the recruitment into Ireland of new people. They have invested €1 million in having people return or migrate to Ireland, whereas we are left with proposals and documents such as the fresh talent initiative. We need to do better, because at the end of the day the success of the financial services industry is pivotal to the success not just of my home city but of Scotland. I support the amendment in the name of my colleague Jim Mather.

The Scottish National Party's position at stage 3 is one more of sorrow than of anger. At stage 1, we abstained from voting on the bill, on the basis that we broadly supported its provisions but we wished to ensure that they would contain no Trojan horse. Sadly, that is what has happened and, accordingly, we are left with no alternative but to vote for our amendment and against the bill. As Alex Neil and Murdo Fraser mentioned, matters have moved on such that our education system needs to be brought up to date to deal with the needs of contemporary society and economy in the 21 st century. Accordingly, it is a tragedy that the bill's many eminently sensible and fully supportable provisions are undermined by the provision on variable and top-up fees. On that basis, we cannot support the bill. That is a tragedy because Scottish education is something of which we should rightly be proud. In both higher and further education, as a small country we have punched well above our weight. We should be proud not only of our ancient  universities but of our modern universities and colleges of further and higher education. Our education system has served well not only Scotland but other nations and, indeed, humanity. Anyone who has read Arthur Herman's book "The Scottish Enlightenment: the Scots' invention of the modern world" will have noted his conclusion that the single most important reform that Scotland ever carried out was the education act that was introduced, I think, in 1698. Although the aim of that measure was to give our people direct access to the word of God, it created a literate population and thereby ended up giving them direct access to success and achievement, both economic and social. We have built on that foundation not only in primary and secondary but in further and higher education. Clearly, the further and higher education sector also plays an important part in our economy. In Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen, the combined universities are the second largest employer. They provide not only menial jobs but top-of-the-range employment; they employ not only the senior academics who are involved in research but people further down in the other traditional jobs, for whom other work would otherwise need to be found. Our universities and colleges are an important part not just of our society but of our economy. As I said, we should build on that. On the question of top-up fees, it is quite clear to us that the bill represents a Trojan horse. Scotland is a small country that is buffeted to some extent by things that happen elsewhere. However, we need to address these issues and to go in our own direction. Scotland cannot simply react to a measure that has been introduced south of the border—we need to seek analogies and examples elsewhere. In higher education, the clear example is that set by Finland, where people recognise the importance of the state doing what is necessary for higher education and providing the necessary funding for it. A small nation has the advantage of being able to move more quickly, although it is also disadvantaged in some matters. When institutions are not located in Cambridge, England, or Cambridge, Massachusetts, the state needs to fund some aspects of research and development that cannot be funded by the private sector. There has been a failure properly to consult on the proposals. I disagree whole-heartedly with the suggestion by some members—I cannot remember which—that the correct procedure has been followed. If one is conducting a consultation, it is ignorant to act without allowing that to percolate through properly. That is an insult to those who participate in the consultation and a bad way of proceeding. Why are we to have top-up fees? Is the intention to address a particular problem in medicine? That  problem should be tackled not through an education bill, but as a health matter. The BMA and other organisations have proposed mechanisms for dealing with it. In dentistry, even the Executive is considering specific health-related measures to solve the problem that exists. It should not create a Trojan horse. Wording and nomenclature are important in legislation. Clearly, the wording in the bill is not restricted to medical courses. If the Executive had wanted to restrict the proposals in that way, it could have done so. It has left the door open for it to introduce more variable or top-up fees, which is simply outrageous. The real scandal is the Lib Dem position. The Lib Dems oppose what is happening south of the border and say that they seek to emulate there what they have done here. We all know that their claim that tuition fees have been abolished is fraudulent. The levels of debt testify to the fact that that is not the case. Now they seek to impose on Scotland something that they say is morally wrong and regrettable south of the border. Yet again we face a shameless act by a Lib Dem minister.

I have been critical in the past of Executive motions that have lacked a substantive point around which  debate can pivot. The last such debate about which I could make that comment was on the prosecution service. It would therefore be remiss of me not to make the same comments when such a motion is lodged by the independents group. When I look at the wording of today's motion, it is clear that no one could possibly dispute the position "That the Parliament agrees that its members' primary function is to reflect and address the needs and aspirations of people in Scotland." Unless one believes in an oligarchy or dictatorship, everybody in the chamber subscribes to that view no matter to which party they belong—or whether they belong to no party. However, what do we seek to debate and where are we going to take it? Other organisations exist in Scotland besides the Parliament and we are required to accept that the Scottish Parliament is not the sole font of knowledge in Scotland. We have a particular purpose, but other organisations play extremely important parts in the democratic process and are equally valid as we make progress. I and other members subscribe to participative democracy, so we accept that we are at the legislative sharp end of delivery—the Executive delivers policy, the judiciary addresses legal matters and then there is civic Scotland. If we are to have a broader debate, organisations such as the Scottish Civic Forum might be better placed to take a general position than we are here, when we have a time-limited opportunity to focus on what we want to do and to make some distinctive change. We also have the opportunity of having members' debates; we have had such debates on the Scottish Civic Forum. Call me old-fashioned, but I think that motions should have a beginning, a function and an end, and that there should be some tangible outcome; otherwise, we cannot make progress.

Not at the moment. Many people criticise the role of political parties, but political parties are important in the body politic because they provide cohesion and function. If we simply represented 129 separate views we would end up not knowing what we were debating and, with each member debating individually, there would be no cohesion or outcome. We on this side of the chamber may disagree on ideologies, certainly with those who represent the right of centre, but political parties provide focus and discipline and they place constraints. If we do not have that, debates tend to go all over the place.  However, this debate is in the independents' time, so we must focus on it. I do not disagree with many of the minister's points, but the Scottish National Party wishes to go further. The First Minister has said that we have to raise our game. To be fair, that has been taken on board by all members of all parties and of none. We acknowledge that the opening of this marvellous auditorium gives us a second chance, that we made many mistakes—individually and collectively—up at the Mound and that the game has been raised. However, there is still a considerable distance to go and every one of us must continue to strive to improve our game. Mistakes have been made, and it is clear that devolution has disappointed people. However, we must take a phlegmatic view of matters and we must accept that that was perhaps always going to happen. One reason is the limited powers of this institution and the second is the legitimate aspirations of our people. We have to remember that Parliament was formed following a referendum after 18 years of Thatcherism, which scarred the people of Scotland and will not be forgotten when they go to the ballot box on 5 May. Those years resulted in people being bruised and grieved, and looking for something to change their lives dramatically. People voted not only for a Parliament to be re-established in Scotland but for a Parliament that has tax-raising powers. Even though those powers have not been invoked, we should always remember that. However, people hoped—they may have been right and entitled to do so, even if their aspirations could never be delivered—not simply that the flowers would bloom and that the sun would shine perpetually in Scotland but, more important, that their granny would get a hip operation, that their son would get the job he needed, that their daughter would get the benefits she was entitled to and that they would have more money in their pocket and would pay less tax. Those are all things that people are entitled to and can legitimately expect to happen in their society. Clearly, some of those things could never be delivered, because we do not have the powers; others could never be delivered simply because, no matter which society they govern, Governments can only move so far and at such a pace. I am critical of the Executive and of the United Kingdom Government, but it should be recognised that there is a limit to what a Government can do in a globalised world and that change often has to come about slowly. If we look back, we see that what has happened in Scotland is no different from what has happened in other countries. In post-Soviet Poland or post-Soviet Lithuania, people anticipated that life would be transformed—the yoke of Soviet domination ended and the opportunity for  involvement in the capitalist system arose. However, what happened in Lithuania, for example, was that within one election, President Landsbergis and the people who had faced the tanks of the Soviet Red Army were booted out to be replaced summarily by the apparatchiks who had connived and conspired with the Soviet regime, because life did not change massively in post-Soviet Russia and people still faced unemployment and other difficulties. We must recognise that.

If the member reads what I have said, he will see that I have never argued for powers and independence on their own. If we do not have the powers we cannot make any change, but we cannot do that with the powers on their own; they must be matched by a change in confidence. However, we could also argue that those things go together and that the constitutional powers would result in a change in confidence. Having read Carol Craig's book, I fully support her argument, and I accept that a change in confidence is necessary. The transformation of the Republic of Ireland was not simply down to its being an independent nation state. I say to Mr Lyon that if the Republic of Ireland had not been an independent nation state, it could not have made the changes that were necessary to transform itself into the Celtic tiger. Had it not been a nation state, it could not have stayed out of the Iraq war. Had it not been a nation state, it could not have made the changes to corporation tax that have allowed it to become a far greater target of inward investment than Scotland can aspire to being. That is why, as well as seeking to have constitutional change, we require that confidence change. I do not know how that will be acquired. There are mixed views about why the change occurred in the Republic of Ireland. Was it because of the election of Mary Robinson? Was it because of Jack Charlton and the success of the Irish football team? Whatever the reason, a mood swing came about in the Republic of Ireland that piggybacked on its constitutional powers, and the Republic of Ireland went from being a basket economy—almost a client state of Britain—to being a nation that is now a confident part of the European Union. The Republic of Ireland has a far better economy than Scotland and its citizens are wealthier than Scots. That has happened within one generation, and since Irish migration to Scotland. Parliament must go forward and it must  accept that changes have to be delivered. We must accept that we should reflect and address the needs and aspirations of the people of Scotland. However, at the end of the day, that has to be focused on tangible aims and it has to result, ultimately, in decisions' being made, rather than in our simply agreeing to something while changing nothing.

Precisely.

The member is correct to point out that there is a problem with the culture. Does he acknowledge that all parties accepted that there is a knife culture in Scotland, that we needed to legislate and that we correctly did so? Why is it correct to legislate against a knife culture, but not against the prevalent gun culture and the use of air weapons, replica weapons and real weapons?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Is not it the case that swords are a distinctive problem in English society? Within the past few days, a young man—apparently a charity worker—has been shot dead by police officers in Humberside for carrying a sword. Why is it that we have legislated separately north of the border on knives and swords but have not done so on other weapons? Is there a different problem? If so, what is it? Why are ministers prepared to act on knives and swords but unprepared to act on real and replica firearms?

Well, do so.

Out of half a million.

Nine years on from Dunblane but only a few days on from the funeral of a young boy who was tragically killed in Glasgow by an air weapon, when will we learn that guns are lethal weapons? When will we take action against firearms in our society? That is why we are having today's debate. We can act responsibly or we can abdicate responsibility. Both the Tory amendment, which denies the extent of the problem, and the Executive amendment, which fails to provide a solution, are unacceptable. The Scottish National Party's position is clear: this Parliament must legislate on firearms and it must do so forthwith. There can be no greater duty for a Government than to protect its citizens. We struggle to find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, but we find weapons of a lethal nature on open sale in high street shops throughout Scotland. The Dunblane massacre shook Scotland to its very soul. We thought that such things happened only in movies or in the United States of America, but it happened in a small town in our native land. Scotland vowed collectively that such an event would never happen again and that action would be taken. An inquiry took place and legislation was amended, but that action did not go far enough: a weapon capable of killing a child was on public sale, was lawfully available and was freely used, with fatal consequences. Firearms remain a major problem in our communities. Air rifles have captured the public attention, but they are not the only weapons that cause problems for police and communities alike. Since 1999, the number of police operations involving firearms has increased by 154 per cent in Scotland and by a staggering 670 per cent in Glasgow. Scotland has a significant problem with the sale, possession and use of real and replica weapons. The problem is not just the illegal weapons that are traded by underworld figures. Air rifles are  openly on display and can be bought freely without a licence. Replica weapons might not kill—although they are capable of being modified to do so—but they certainly frighten and intimidate. Armed response officers can no more tell the difference between a real weapon and a replica one than can the frightened shop assistant or intimidated bank teller, yet such weapons are widely advertised and openly available on the high streets of towns throughout Scotland. Moreover, the police face difficulties in revoking firearms certificates when they have cause for concern about an individual's behaviour or actions. The law's hands might be tied, but the potential killer's trigger is not. The current law is outdated and flawed. Senior officers are required to go through far too many hoops and hurdles to revoke a licence. The current law is far too complicated and is not easily understood. Current firearms legislation is made up of a combination of various acts and amendments. The main acts are the Firearms Act 1968 and the Firearms Act 1982, which have been amended on numerous occasions since they were passed. The pieces of legislation are far too many and far too complicated for the new Scotland in the 21 st century. The difficulty is not just that the First Minister thinks that action might need to be taken while the Prime Minister and Michael Howard disagree, but that the decision lies with Westminster rather than with Holyrood. In the most recent Queen's speech, which set out the Labour Government's priorities in that jurisdiction, firearms were not mentioned. If Westminster will not act, we must. However, although the Scottish Parliament is in charge of criminal justice, firearms are reserved to London. That must change. The Executive drive for a surrender of air weapons is commendable. However, a system that allows some citizens still to buy new weapons while others hand in their old ones is illogical and inadequate. We need to address supply as well as demand. Only those who have a legitimate reason, such as pest and vermin control or registered gun club use, should be able to buy and hold firearms of whatever sort. The teenager's desire for an air weapon and the adult's desire to have a shotgun for fun are unhealthy obsessions that, in the eyes of the law, it must become unacceptable to act upon. Scottish society is different from that south of the border. It needs different solutions to deal with a firearms problem that is significantly different. Tragically, in many English communities, the major gun problem is not air weapons or replica weapons but real weapons that are imported from the Balkans and used by yardie gangs or in senseless drive-by shootings.

From my discussions with major police figures and members of shooting organisations, I understand that a European Union directive will seek to address many of those matters. It is correct that that should be so, because many weapons in Scotland and the United Kingdom are supplied from the Balkans or the Republic of Ireland as well as from Northern Ireland. Of course we have a commonality of interest within the United Kingdom, but we must also clearly accept some uniformity on the matter within the European Union. As I said, we have a fundamentally different society. That is why Scotland has different legislation on swords and knives. We in Scotland recognised that swords and knives posed a significant problem—the SNP supported the Executive on that issue—but it is now incumbent on us to recognise that Scotland also has a significant and distinct problem with air weapons, replica weapons and real weapons, on which we must legislate. If it was correct for the Scottish Parliament to legislate on knives and swords, it is certainly correct for it to do so on other weapons. What is needed in Brixton or Handsworth is not necessarily the same as what is needed in Bathgate or Haghill. Air weapons and replica weapons are a major problem in Scotland and action is needed now. That means that the power to legislate must be devolved. As I said, the legislation on knives and swords that applies in Gretna is different from that which applies in Carlisle, because we know that we have a distinct problem and need a unique solution. The same applies to firearms. Devolution was about addressing Scotland's distinct needs. This is a need that is crying out for action. The issue is not just who should legislate but what the legislation should do. A consolidated firearms act is a prerequisite. Let us start with a clean sheet of paper that specifies what constitutes a firearm, replica weapon or air weapon. We need to define how such weapons are sold and specify who may have them and how they acquire and store them. Just as important, we need to specify how we revoke a licence when our police have fears over a weapon's retention and possible use. Nine years ago, there was no Scottish Parliament and action was limited. Now we have a Scottish Parliament and it is time to act on the scourge of firearms in our society. Let there be no more tragedies in the days or even years to come. It is time for this Parliament to legislate on firearms.  I move, That the Parliament notes with concern recent tragedies involving firearms and the continuing dangers in our communities posed by both real and replica guns; recognises that, notwithstanding action taken after the Dunblane tragedy in 1996, there are ongoing difficulties and gaps in the current legislation; calls, therefore, for powers over firearms to be devolved to the Scottish Parliament in view of the distinctive nature of our society, the distinct nature of the gun problem in Scotland and the urgent needs in our communities, and further calls for a new and all-encompassing Firearms Act to clarify what constitutes a firearm, who may possess a firearm, the circumstances under which people may acquire, keep and use firearms and all other aspects relating to firearms, including authorisation, monitoring and revocation.

I welcome the First Minister's comments. However, I should point out that replica weapons are as  much of a problem as air-guns in our society. As we approach the ninth anniversary of the Dunblane massacre, is it not about time that we had a consolidated act that addressed such matters? Why, when Scottish ministers are competent and capable of taking a different approach from that taken south of the border to the problem of knives and swords, are we incapable of addressing the problem of the prevalence of replica weapons and air-guns, which are causing misery and tragedy in our society?

I support the amendment in the name of my colleague Roseanna Cunningham, who is absent  from the chamber because of media commitments, rather than because she seeks to show discourtesy to members who are participating in the debate. That may explain the absence of other members too. Karen Gillon protested rather too much about what my colleague Rob Gibson said. Nobody disputes that a major part of the agenda on addressing poverty in Africa will relate to debt, but it should equally relate to trade and fair trade. I do not seek to make any political comment on that matter, as only last night I supported the debate that was instigated by Karen Gillon's colleague Christine May. We should ensure that the issues of access to trade for African and other nations that suffer from global poverty, as well as the debt that straddles and restricts them, are addressed. Karen Gillon said that "we are where we are". That is important. We are where we are and we should have seen it coming. The minister implied that the summit will be a great bounty—indeed, Murdo Fraser went on about the great benefits that will accrue. However, every G8 summit has caused significant difficulties for the area in which it takes place. There is not a problem only for Gleneagles hotel—there are problems for Gleneagles village, as my colleague has said, and for the city of Edinburgh. The summit will involve not only Gleneagles hotel—it is likely that the media centre will be the Edinburgh International Conference Centre. It has already been indicated that the Sheraton hotel has been block booked for the Japanese delegation and that the Hilton hotel has been block booked for the Chinese delegation. There is an idea that the summit will be a magnificent bounty for the city of Edinburgh, but it may come as a surprise to the minister and to the Executive that Edinburgh hotels are usually quite busy in July. Simply replacing tourists with visiting delegations may not add any value, but may diminish the number of people who would have come anyway. We welcome the delegations and appreciate that they will contribute to the economy—

That is a rather silly thing to say. I am saying that the suggestion has been made that there will be a contribution to the greater good of the hotel business in Edinburgh by bringing in delegates, but our hotels are substantially busy in July. If we wished to add value to Edinburgh hotels, we would have picked a period in the year in which hotels are looking for business. Given that the Parliament is in recess in July and that members have gone elsewhere, it may come as a  shock to some that the city is remarkably busy with visitors then. I move on to the right to protest. The right to protest exists, as Colin Fox said, but it must be balanced with the right of society and communities to ensure that behaviour is appropriate and that points are made without disruption—I think that all members have commented on that. We have had to contend with that issue not simply with respect to a coming demonstration on making poverty history—which is something that all members support, I think—but with respect to other aspects of our society. I refer to Orange walks and other things. How can we balance the rights of people who wish to make a valid point—irrespective of whether we agree or disagree with what they say—with the rights of the community? To date, we have been well served by the police in Scotland, but my colleague was right to draw to our attention that any form of machismo policing could work to the detriment of areas. In the 1980s, there were confrontations during the miners' strike, but we did not see anything akin to Orgreave north of the border because policing in Scotland has always been from the community and has always served the community. We must ensure that policing will not be based on riot squads moving in or on attitudes that are more prevalent elsewhere, whether in the United Kingdom or on the continent. We do not want tactical support groups undermining the relationship between our community and our police force and we must address the potential difficulties presented by those who seek to cause mischief and mayhem. The police are right to prepare for such difficulties, but they must do so in a proportionate manner and bear in mind how the police have always policed in Scotland and how we want policing to remain. That said, it is clear that the right to protest is important. There are no bigger issues in the world today than making poverty history and—to be fair to what Mr Stone said—climate change. Given the scandalous situation in the 21 st century, many members fully support making poverty history. I will be happy to participate in what happens and hope that the First Minister will be prepared to consider supporting the demonstration when it takes place, as opposed simply to visiting Malawi.

Many of the speeches have made a great contribution to the debate and I fully echo the comments that Sarah Boyack and Margaret Smith made. The difficulty is that, at this juncture, we are debating principles, not practicalities, and it is the practicalities that are causing significant concern. First of all, I repeat the comment that I made in the previous debate, which is that the method of dealing with these issues has to change. In saying that, I am not criticising anyone in the chamber; after all, every party has signed up to changing these matters. However, change they must. Margaret Smith remarked on the route, and we should take cognisance of the fact that there has been much opposition to it, as Jackie Baillie pointed out. The people in question believe that their quality of life will be greatly affected and that there will be much disruption to their homes and adjacent areas. Their views must be considered appropriately at the next stage.  The difficulty is that the concept of trams raises two issues, the first of which involves nostalgia. Almost everyone who resides in Edinburgh has either travelled on a tram in the past or heard from fathers, mothers, grandfathers or grandmothers about the benefits of a tram system. Secondly, people who have visited modern European cities acknowledge the benefits of such systems there. If we look back at the past and look forward to where we want to take the city, it is clear that trams have been and are important. They have delivered for our city in the past and now deliver for other cities. The problem is that the devil is in the detail. My main question is whether this is the right time for trams and whether the money that is available could be used to meet other priorities, if that is what is ultimately decided. In the previous debate, the minister had a spat with my colleagues Mr Ewing and Mr Crawford over regional transport partnerships, and we have clearly set out why such partnerships should be empowered with proper resources. However, even the Executive's preferred method meets the difficulty that we raised in the earlier debate. We still need to address the question of who should make the decision. For example, even if we decide to build line 2 now and the various problems are resolved at the next stage, a regional transport partnership might decide that the line is not a key priority. In that event, will the money for the tramline be made available to meet the RTP's own key priorities? Everyone in Edinburgh accepts that trams would be a good thing; however, are they the best thing at this point in time? As I said in the previous debate, people might think it more appropriate to fill in all the potholes; ensure that the infrastructure is maintained; and expand the bus network and improve bus services. As Mark Ballard pointed out, buses are and will remain the principal method of public transport in the city and we should take the opportunity if not to expand the Waverley link in full then certainly to take that service out to Gorebridge. If, as the minister accepts, we live in a world of finite resources, we should allow the proposed regional transport partnership to decide the city's key priorities. If it decides that other priorities are higher than the construction of tramline 2, will it have the money to spend on them? For example, many people in the city believe that it makes more sense to construct tramline 3 than to construct tramline 2. Will they have the opportunity to spend the money on tramline 3 instead? Surely we should be able to decide on the vision that we want to achieve, the structures with which to achieve it and the strategy with which to implement it. That means creating regional  transport partnerships with power, delivering the strategy for what we want to do and allowing those who are empowered to make the decisions to decide where they should spend the money. With that caveat, we support the principle of trams. As I said, the devil will be in the detail.

I congratulate my colleague Linda Fabiani, who did not just lodge the motion but delivered her speech while feeling somewhat under the weather, and I congratulate the Scottish Civic Forum. There are two issues for us to address. One is the importance of the organisation, on which every speaker has commented, and the other is the mechanism for funding it. The reason why Linda Fabiani indicated her disagreement with Mr Ballance is that the SNP in particular acknowledges that not only is the forum a worthy organisation but its funding should be independent. That is why we wish its funding to be removed from the Executive because, unfortunately, we live in a society in which he who pays the piper calls the tune. It would be better if the funding did not come from the Executive. Even if we have no doubt that the Executive has not leaned on and would not lean on the Civic Forum—

On that basis I will happily withdraw and read Mr Ballance's motion in greater detail. The importance of the forum is that, as members have said, it goes to the root of democracy and the founding principles of the Parliament. To an extent, we all take democracy for granted. We might bandy around phrases—or not, depending on whom we believe—about whether we are fascistic or otherwise, but we have not lived under a totalitarian regime for centuries and not for generations have we had to fight for the right to vote and live in a free society. We simply assume that we live in such a society and take democracy for granted. We acknowledge that, to an extent, democracy is in difficulties, given voter turnout, which Rosemary Byrne and others mentioned. It is clear that there are difficulties, but democracy is not simply about voting in elections. That is important and we have to address difficulties in that regard,  but if we are to re-engage people with politics, our democracy has to be participatory. It is important that people exercise their right to vote in every instance—after all, people fought to gain the franchise, which we all accept should be used. Nevertheless, democracy transcends the opportunity to vote, whether for a councillor, for a member of Parliament or for a member of the Scottish Parliament. It is about people participating and having the opportunity to influence various aspects of their lives. It is understandable that people are frustrated as society evolves and becomes globalised and life becomes more complex, because it seems that voting at the ballot box does not necessarily change circumstances significantly. That is all the more reason why we have to have a participatory democracy that works from the grass roots up and is about people interacting not just with the Parliament but at all levels in a variety of ways. That is the importance of the Civic Forum. It has delivered in difficult circumstances with limited funding and it is clear that it must remain. Linda Fabiani has called on us to ensure that the funding is not simply adequate but independent.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address the needs of refugees. (S2O-5459)

The minister will be aware that dignity at work is one need that refugees have. Given the severe skills shortages that many areas of our country face, when will the minister seek to allow refugees proper participation in the workforce to enable them to secure their own personal, and our social and economic, development?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in addressing gun crime. (S2O-5460)

The minister will be aware that replica weapons are a significant difficulty and that they are all too readily available in many shops in our high streets and communities. Is it not time for the Parliament to take responsibility for firearms and to legislate to address the problems caused by real and replica weapons in our communities?

We have no hesitation in supporting Patrick Harvie's motion. The amendment in Stewart Stevenson's name is meant to attract support for the motion, not subtract it. Clearly the matter is one of balance. We require to balance the rights of the individual with the rights of the state and the costs involved with the benefits that will accrue. We have to weigh those factors on the scales of justice to see whether the measures are deliverable. Based on what Cathy Peattie said, it appears that the measures are not only benign, but positively beneficial. The costs will be minimal and the benefits will be substantial. We will be able not only to take a Ryanair flight within the UK, but address the threat of international terrorism and organised crime. If only that were the case—when we drill down into the details we see that it is not. In terms of terrorism, civil liberties and costs, the bill is weighed on the scales of justice and is found wanting. The bill will not address terrorism. As many speakers have said, Spain has ID cards, but they did not stop the atrocity in Madrid. The state of Israel has ID cards and it knows that the way to address terrorism is not simply through employing sophisticated technology, although it has it manifestly across the board. The way to address terrorism is not to whip up a climate of fear whereby we move from a McCarthyite reds-under-the-bed situation to a Blairite terrorist-around-the-corner situation. The way to address terrorism is two-fold: first we must address the root causes, the inequalities and injustices that permeate the world and allow terrorism to fester, on which the likes of Chomsky have commented at length. Secondly, we must identify the perpetrators. When Britain faced the provisional Irish Republican Army, which was probably the most sophisticated terrorist outfit known for generations, if not in the history of modern society, it did so successfully in the main through gathering sophisticated intelligence and identifying the protagonists without bringing in measures that would manifestly fail, whether internment or ID cards. It all comes down to getting sophisticated intelligence. We have to consider whether the benefits are applied or lost. If we introduce the measures in the bill we will create a greater pool of people from which to select and recruit terrorists, rather than address the problem and identify perpetrators. On civil liberties, given that the devolved legislature does not seek to make the cards available—for all the benefits that Ms Peattie and  others have suggested would accrue—why would we want to incur the cost? If the card would allow people to access benefits as a citizen of the state, there would be an argument for it. However, given that this legislature, which is in charge of health and other services, access to which would form the beneficial basis of the system, says, "We're not having it", there is clearly no benefit to it. That takes us back to the cost involved, which would be substantial. If the cost were minimal, we could say that perhaps on balance the cards were worth it. However, we are talking not about millions, but billions and the costs will continue to rise. Will the system provide any benefit in addressing terrorism? No it will not. Will it provide any benefit in protecting civil liberties and improving citizens' rights to access matters of state? No it will not. Will it provide benefit in making this a safer country and providing the sophisticated intelligence that our police and security services require or in providing a more visible police presence, which is the best method of making people feel secure and able to play their part? No it will not. When the bill is weighed on the scales of justice it is clearly found wanting, which is why we oppose the position of the Westminster Government.

I agree with other members that there are no difficulties with the bill's principles but, as with many things, the devil is in the detail, which will be considered at the next stage. Alasdair Morgan, Susan Deacon and Sarah Boyack mentioned the methodology, with which it is clear there are difficulties. To the minister's credit, that matter has been raised previously—it was raised when the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill was considered. The difficulties will continue. We have them with respect to the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill. Alasdair Morgan's point is correct. We do not use this methodology for roads and it is impeding us. As Sarah Boyack has said in the chamber and elsewhere, we must address how we deliver things as a country, but we are not doing things in the best way. Members are facing an  excessive workload, which they are not best qualified to deal with. We have reporters and assessors because they are trained and schooled. MSPs have 101 other things to consider and are not necessarily trained in such a way. It is clear that there are practical matters that must be addressed and dealt with in great detail at stage 2. Individuals who face intrusions in their homes, gardens and whatever else have raised significant concerns about the routes, which must be addressed, and there are arguments about whether a tramway running parallel to a rail line is the best route. The fundamental point that I wish to make relates to the bill's principles. The minister and Margaret Smith were correct to say that what happens in the west of Edinburgh is vital for the city of Edinburgh, and that what happens in the city of Edinburgh is vital for the Scottish economy, as Edinburgh is the engine and the dynamo driving forward the economy. Everyone is in favour of trams; I do not know anyone who says that they are opposed to trams. However, even those who are not opposed to trams say that, first and foremost, they want the potholes filled in, they want the buses to come on time, and they want the trains not to be delayed because there is snow. We clearly live in a land of finite and limited resources and we have to have vision, structure and strategies. I accept that we have to work towards the kind of society that exists on the continent where there are trams. However, the tramlines there are built on a heavy rail network, a bus network, a regulated transport system and pothole-free roads—all of the things to which we aspire. We have to have the vision, but we then have to have the structures and strategies. I believe that we have to move towards a regional transport authority and partnership that has powers, teeth and a revenue stream. We have to allow that authority to make the choices that have to be made. If a tram system is brought in but we have not filled in the potholes, we have not got the bus network up to scratch and we have not delivered in other areas such as the Bathgate to Airdrie line or the Borders railway, questions will be asked about whether we have done the best thing. I would like the minister to clarify whether he will allow the transport authorities, if they are created correctly, to be able to choose how they spend the money and how they work towards building a tram network. Susan Deacon commented on tramline 3, which is as important, if not more important, than line 2. If all things were equal, we would do line 3 before we did line 2. However, let us get to grips with the practicalities. Let us work towards delivering the  projects while acknowledging that, although we want to catch up with the European model at some stage, it will take us some time to do so. Perhaps utilitarianism is best and we should use some money to fill in the potholes so that cars run smoothly and pedestrians do not break their ankles. Every bus service in Edinburgh should be akin to the 22 not the 42 or the 41 that some of us have to put up with. We have to get the rail network running all the time, even when there are leaves on the line and snow is falling. Let us have the powers to use the money for the best for all Edinburgh.

As my colleague Stewart Maxwell said, the Scottish National Party is happy to support the bill. We pay tribute not only to those who were involved in drafting the published document that is before us, but to those who put in a great deal of hard work in research and consultation both before and after the bill went to the committee. All those involved, from the top to the bottom, deserve our thanks and the credit that is due to them. The bill has been introduced not so much because the fire service has changed, but because society has changed around it. There is no suggestion of any fault on the part of the service—indeed, quite the opposite is true, given that all members have voiced their thanks for the current service. We are well served by the fire brigades, both by those who are involved in the control rooms and at auxiliary level and by the front-line firefighters and divisional officers. All of us, in the Parliament and in the country of Scotland, owe them a debt of gratitude. However, life has changed and society is much more complicated. As Jackie Baillie pointed out, the bill will update existing legislation. Schedule 4 to the bill indicates the extent to which existing legislation will be repealed. For the Fire Services Act 1947, the repeal applies to "The whole Act except sections 26 to 27A." For the Fire Services Act 1959, it applies to "The whole Act except sections 8 to 10."  Those sections were the basis on which the current fire service was organised, but it is clear that our society has changed in many ways, radically and irrevocably, since those times. We need to change with society and to ensure that our fire service is able to deal with matters. Often, such change in society has not been for the better. Given the need to address matters such as fire officers who are assaulted in the line of duty, it is clear that some changes in our society have been significantly for the worse. However, such issues must be addressed both in the bill and in other legislation that is working its way through the Parliament. In response to Ms Baillie, let me clarify that the SNP views the bill not as a third way so much as the modern Scottish way to bring our fire service up to date for the 21 st century. We are utilising the Parliament that has been restored to the people of Scotland to provide the fire service with the necessary facilities and legislative framework.

The member may well regret saying that. There has been an element of consensus and there is no suggestion that one party has a greater claim than any other over the fire service. The service benefits all people in Scotland irrespective of who they are, how they vote and whether they are rich or poor. That is as it always should be and no one party should lay any claim to such a service. The SNP pays tribute to the fire service. We welcome the bill because it introduces the facility and the framework that will allow the fire service better to serve not only us as legislators but the whole of our community. We have mentioned two specific points, which are not about matters that are contained within the bill but relate to where the bill and, ultimately, the act may go. First, we have put on record, through Mr Maxwell and through my colleague Shona Robison, our worries about control rooms. Those concerns have been elaborated on previously and we reserve our right to return to the issue. Secondly, we feel that it would have been better for the central authority to have some form of statutory basis. I take on board the points that the minister has made, but we feel that it is necessary to ensure that there is a framework around which the authority can operate and of which ministers have some ownership and control so that it is not made into a quango or agency, or put out and sidelined. With those two caveats, we are more than happy to support the bill at decision time.

I will leave aside the problems that the fresh talent initiative is experiencing from without and address some of the flaws that it is experiencing from within. I refer the First Minister to a letter in The Herald  today from Professor Anthony Cohen, the principal of Queen Margaret University College in Edinburgh. Although he praises the scheme, he indicates that, on a trip to Singapore and India from which he has just returned, he was dismayed to learn from British Council representatives that "they have been instructed not to advertise Fresh Talent further, not least because they have been unable to elicit any further guidance about it from the Scottish Executive." If the Executive cannot get its act together, how can the people of Scotland have any faith in it?

I did not mean to denigrate SPICe, just as I did not mean to denigrate the minister. Mary Mulligan was right to make the point that we can have debates that are not based on formal motions and amendments, but I simply meant that if a debate entitled "Reform of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Services" is to have value and if we are not to go off at tangents—to the credit of most members, that has not been the case—we need to know what the debate is about, where we are at and where we have to go. Therefore, information and statistics would have been of assistance and would have focused the debate. That said, we got there—although perhaps by accident rather than by design.

I thank the Lord Advocate for his comments. I will make two preliminary remarks about the basis of this debate. I welcome this chamber having the opportunity to consider matters that the Lord Advocate and his office, and the Solicitor General, are clearly addressing. This chamber did not exist before 1999 and we used to be lucky if the Lord Advocate had time to consider matters with politicians, because of other duties. The body politic did not become involved and what we had was what we continued with, whether it was right or wrong. Today we are seeing one of the benefits of devolution. However, there are some difficulties with this debate. I do not mean this as a criticism of the Lord Advocate or the Solicitor General, nor do I mean it as a criticism of the Minister for Justice or her deputy. My comments relate to the scheduling of the debate and the way in which information has been provided for it. Clearly, particular circumstances have led to our having today's debate at fairly late notice. However, it is not adequate that people have insufficient information on which to debate. Some of us have a legal qualification. I have 20 years of legal experience, and others too have  such experience. Some have the benefit of relevant experience on committees. However, others in the chamber who have neither legal nor committee experience would still wish to participate in the debate. They have limited opportunity because limited information has been available to allow them to get up to speed on the issues. If this chamber is to provide the perspective of all in Scottish society—and not simply that of people who are legally qualified or who are members of one of the justice committees—information should be available to allow others to participate. It is important to involve not only the practitioners but the receivers of the service.

I am not suggesting otherwise. Members who participate without the benefit of committee or legal experience are to be commended. However, it would have been helpful for them to have information on what is going on. Not everyone will know what the Lord Advocate said in 2001, or know about the on-going work of the Solicitor General. On my way to the chamber, I asked the Scottish Parliament information centre what papers were available. The short answer was none. We will have the benefit of a debate involving those with committee and legal experience, and those with constituency knowledge. However, those who schedule debates such as this one could add to—

By all means.

It may be in the public domain, but many people who are coming to the debate cold may have been looking for a synopsis—even just two sides of A4 from SPICe on the changes in the Crown Office. That would have been of assistance. I want to move on. We put on record our support for the COPFS, which is a body that is perhaps not  given the credit that it deserves. The Lord Advocate was correct to point out that it is the largest legal employer. Its role is not confined to involvement in criminal prosecutions. Many people forget that the COPFS has a role to play in cases of sudden death and fatal accident inquiries and that it acts in the public interest in relation to applications for shotgun certificates and a whole array of other matters. We should recognise that its role transcends that of involvement in the prosecution of crime at solemn or summary level. It is also important to recognise that the COPFS acts in the public interest. That is fundamental. I want to mention no pros—cases in which it is decided that it would not be in the public interest for proceedings to take place. The COPFS has a duty to consider whether it believes that a criminal offence has occurred, whether the case could be pursued and a conviction obtained and whether it is in the public interest that there should be a prosecution. We do well to remember that there are occasions when the COPFS decides that although it could prove in a court of law that an offence had been committed, it may not be in the public interest to do so. I practised as a defence agent in years gone by and I remember many cases in which the COPFS gave people who had erred the opportunity to make recompense in some shape or form and, in doing so, allowed them to avoid getting a criminal conviction, which would have posed serious problems as they got older—for example, when they applied for a job. It is right and proper that the COPFS allows people to thole their assize and make proper recompense. In many situations, it is appropriate not to proceed and to allow matters to be dealt with in an alternative manner. It is the duty and responsibility of the COPFS to make such decisions. Judgment calls have to be made and sometimes politicians do not agree with the decisions that are made. Politicians should cut the Crown Office some slack. On occasion, the COPFS may make what the public perceive to be a mistake, but such things happen. The COPFS needs to move on; that is why the changes that are being brought in are welcome. It must adapt to both internal and external changes. We must acknowledge that society has moved on, not just structurally, but attitudinally. People simply used to accept many things. It was a matter of course that when someone was cited as a witness, they would go. They could not expect to find facilities for a cup of tea, never mind a cup of coffee, unless the Women's Royal Voluntary Service happened to be on duty that day. In today's society, many people would regard that as unacceptable. We would all accept that if people act in a public-spirited fashion by giving evidence or attending court as victims of crime, we have a responsibility as a society to ensure that their  journey through the legal system is as pleasant as possible and that they face as few difficulties and as little discomfort as possible. The changes that have taken place are not just structural and attitudinal; there have been changes in the nature of the system. For a great many years, the system was left unchanged. No consideration was given to it—the thinking was that that was how it was and that was how it would always be. No attention was paid to the anecdotal evidence of cases in which witnesses were told at very late notice that a trial had been cancelled. Crown Office employees sometimes went home without remembering to tell them and they were left in witness rooms like flotsam and jetsam. Such things happened; they were not done deliberately. The system simply failed to address the needs of those who were involved in it. To some extent, it was a legal sausage-making machine. There was a lack of understanding that the individuals who went through the process had emotions and, most important, rights. It is appropriate that the necessary attitudinal and systemic changes have been made. There has also been a change in the structure of the system and in how fiscals' offices deal with cases. As society has become more modern and transport has improved, it has become clear that it is not necessary or cost-effective to have as many manned offices in all the Borders areas or in some areas in the north of Scotland, for example. That does not mean that fiscals' offices have to close; the work that they do can be covered in another way. That can be worked out locally. I welcome the Lord Advocate's comments about morale and related matters. My view is that morale is still patchy. In some cases, that is understandable. The limited opportunity for promotion in fiscals' offices is always a problem. The fact that only so many top jobs are available always causes bottlenecks that mean that, at a certain juncture in their lives, the people who work in such offices have to decide whether they have any future in the service. Although, to some extent, that will always be an irreconcilable problem, we must try to address it. I am led to believe that in some areas there is a worry about pensions, although it would be wrong to say that that is a concern only in fiscals' offices—the problem affects all public sector employment at the moment. There is also worry about whether the retirement age for fiscals will rise. The Lord Advocate may or may not be able to comment on that. I am led to believe that there has been a substantial increase in the number of requests for early retirement. That might simply be a matter of demography—in other words, it might be a result of the number of aging baby boomers. Such matters have to be dealt with if we are to  make progress. Although it is clear that sheriffs and judges are pivotal to the legal system, the courts are not there simply to serve them; the needs of other people who use the courts must be addressed. I know that evening courts have been considered. I think that there was an experiment in Dumbarton, which does not appear to have been a great success. My take is that the fact that the idea was not a success initially does not necessarily mean that it should not be reconsidered. We live in a 24/7 society. Sheriffs are very well recompensed for the job that they do. If they were able to work on a Saturday morning, that would ensure that the cell complexes in the city of Edinburgh could be cleared so that space was available for the people who misbehave on a Saturday night. It should not be impossible for sheriffs to sit on a Saturday and to clear a custody court to keep matters moving. Given the numbers of sheriffs, that would cause them minimal discomfort. We must address that. Given the difficulties that individuals have in attending court and the cost of taking time off work, evening courts might be suitable for dealing with the many minor road traffic offences, for example. I welcome the experiment that took place. In summary, we welcome the steps that have been taken to make progress. The process is long overdue. That view is not partisan or ideological. We are talking about getting the best criminal justice system that we can for everyone who participates in it. In the past, errors were made as a result of the concentration on the rights and responsibilities of sheriffs and judges rather than those of the other people who participated in the court system. The COPFS has a vital job to do in our society, not simply in the prosecution of crime, but in a whole array of other matters. That is to be welcomed. I hope that people can gain a greater knowledge of what COPFS does. We should applaud and appreciate its work. It must be modernised in a sympathetic way, but we are heading in the right direction. The Scottish National Party is more than happy to pay tribute to the efforts of the Lord Advocate and his colleague.

I propose to make some general remarks but I will also comment specifically on the oil industry. The minister was correct to praise Scotland's many successful companies, which have done well in the face of sometimes adverse circumstances that have not been conducive to progress. The companies that have done well include not just low-level companies but organisations such as the Royal Bank of Scotland, which is now a global player. We need to look at the glass as being half full rather than half empty. What frets and frustrates SNP members is not how badly Scotland is doing but how much better it could do. Let us compare what Mr Mather said with what Mr Pringle said. Mr Pringle made a great virtue of a catalogue of growth statistics that compared poorly with our competitors in the European Union and elsewhere. Rather than compare Scotland's performance to that of Liverpool or Edinburgh's  performance to that of Dundee, we should compare how well Scotland is doing to how well its international competitors are doing. If we are continually being outperformed—

I will give way to George Lyon in a minute, if he will make a point of substance rather than his usual schoolboy intervention. We are being outperformed by countries such as Estonia, the Czech Republic and the Republic of Ireland, which are our competitor nations. As a city, Edinburgh must compete with the likes of Stockholm, Helsinki and Dublin.

The fact is that Scotland has had golden opportunities, which it has not taken. Scotland is beginning to fall behind not just competitor nations such as Ireland, Finland and Estonia but other new entrants to the EU. We need to do better. If we are, as I believe we ought, to look at the glass as being half full rather than half empty, our view of the oil industry should similarly be that the barrel is half full rather than half empty. After all, oil is a resource. Many members have referred to the it's Scotland's oil campaign. I remind Mr Fraser that people attempted to put down that campaign by saying that all the oil would be gone by the 1980s. When we got to the 1980s, they said that it would be gone by the 1990s because of Thatcher's expenditure on creating mass unemployment to undermine the United Kingdom's trade union base as part of her economic changes. We were then told that the oil would be gone by the turn of the century. Today, in 2005, as much oil is still to come out of the North sea as has already been extracted from it. In addition, our gas reserves are even greater than our oil reserves. We should play up, rather than downplay, our success. The great tragedy of Scotland's oil industry has been that people have been told a lie so often that they have begun to believe it. People do not see what should have been done. More important, they do not recognise what could still be done if we had access to this wonderful natural resource, regardless of what might be said by those who would rather see it remain under the sea. Although  changes in the industry will take place, it still presents us with a golden opportunity. The idea that oil benefits only north-east Scotland is another myth that persists. The major institution at the forefront of much of the technology is, after all, Heriot-Watt University. Companies that are situated in Glasgow and on the Clyde manufacture specialist bits for rigs in not just the North sea but Alaska, the South China seas and elsewhere. Oil is an all-Scotland industry and an all-Scotland resource. Of course the industry will change. We need to move towards brown-field and fallow-field development. Changes have already had to be made in insurance policies to provide for the costs of decommissioning. Fundamentally, we will see a change like the one that happened in the Gulf of Mexico. As the bigger players such as Shell and Exxon move out, indigenous, smaller-scale, Scotland-based companies can move in.

In a minute, Mr Wilson. Even when the major companies go and even when the last drop of oil has been extracted from the North sea, we can still be a major player. Where are the oil fields around Houston, Texas? Apart from a few nodding donkeys, they have all gone. What matters is the knowledge and the technical capabilities that the industry has acquired. The skills that we have acquired in the North sea can be used in the South China seas, Alaska and wherever else.

Mr Wilson should tell that to Dick Cheney's Halliburton and all the other companies that have chosen to go with economic and political instability and create havoc in Iraq. They are even tendering for possible havoc in Iran. Of course we do not want political instability, which would just undermine matters. However, we operate in a global market. For the European Union's 500 million people, we would be the major oil and gas producer, so we have a golden opportunity. We need to bring through the companies such as Tuscan Energy Ltd that are taking over and developing the fields from which the global players are moving out. We need to have the resource, but we need the powers for that. The Parliament must dispel the myths and lies about oil and gas  that have been perpetrated by the Executive. However, the Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government need the powers to be able to make the substantial changes that are needed and necessary.

Will the member take an intervention?

We live in troubled times, but Scottish National Party members fully support our police and we prefer to take the advice of the general secretary of the Scottish Police Federation than to listen to the words of the minister. The rights and wrongs of Sewel motions have been debated endlessly, within and without this chamber; the pros and cons—never mind the attitudes and positions of each party regarding their use—have been well rehearsed and are well known. Therefore, I do not propose to comment at length on the procedure and will concentrate on the substantive principles at issue. However, it would be remiss of me not to say that, given the significance of the proposals and their effect on a variety of critical areas of justice within our nation, a fuller debate and more in-depth scrutiny were and are surely deserved. Whether from a legal tradition or land aspiration perspective, there was and is considerable cause for concern, which must surely be reflected not just in the time allotted in the chamber, but in the nature of the scrutiny provided. The Executive has withdrawn a major part of the grounds for objection. Its retreat in view of the clear hostility to the proposal that would have created a crime of trespass on Crown land in Scotland is welcome. The plan was unwanted and unnecessary. It was alien to our legal tradition and contrary to our desired direction on land use. The Executive's retreat is a sensible political move, but it is also the correct thing to do. Notwithstanding what Mr Butler said, the Executive should be applauded, not derided, for that. However, the plan should never have been considered in the first place and the Executive would do well to take note of the position in which it placed itself by simply rubber-stamping London Labour's policies. We have a Parliament now and  the Executive must act as our Government. Power brings responsibility as well as rights. The Executive cannot regularly abrogate responsibility nor abdicate decision making. This institution is here to reflect Scotland's unique society and significant diversity from south of the border. The Executive's failure to do justice to serious issues in the chamber demeans it and devalues the Parliament. Let us also dispel the myth that, by rejecting the imposition of a law of trespass on Crown lands, the Executive is denying itself and, consequently, this Parliament powers. The position was that it sought to be able to designate Crown lands as areas in which a crime of trespass could be committed. There might be inadequacies in the law of England, but there was none in the laws of Scotland. Offences of breach of the peace through to terrorism existed as charges and remedies. The Executive has declined the right to impose an unnecessary, unwanted and alien concept on us.

Not at the moment. The Executive has not, as a consequence, ceded any powers that previously existed within the office of the UK Home Secretary to designate matters under the broader interests of national security.

Not at the moment. Those powers still remain the Home Secretary's right and fiefdom. National security is and was a reserved issue, not simply under the Scotland Act 1998, but under these proposals. The Home Secretary did not have to consult Scottish ministers on a law of trespass on Crown lands. Thankfully, that law has not been created and therefore consultation is unnecessary. However, the power in relation to national security remains, as it was always within his office's prerogative. So much for a national Parliament or justice minister of any substance. We remain beholden to the grace and favour of a man not noted for his liberality and we are subject to unilateral and arbitrary actions, as he is one of the Blair regime. Although we welcome the decision to remove the issue relating to trespass, our opposition remains. The Ramblers Association and the Scottish Police Federation are not noted for seeking political controversy, but the issues on which they have expressed concerns on behalf of their members are serious. Our objection remains, because although the concerns of one organisation might have been allayed, the fears of the other most certainly have not. All members received a letter from the general secretary of the  SPF. It was not simply a note of objections, but a three-page document. It was not written in umbrage; it was the result of serious concerns that arose. We would do well to treat it with the dignity and gravity that it merits. Members were also provided with a copy of the response from the minister, which neither answers the points that have been raised nor allays the fears that have arisen. The Scottish police are not subject to political interference and the operational independence of the chief constable is sacrosanct—those are fundamental principles. We in Scotland have opposed a unitary police force and sought to preserve the independence of local services. The measure that Charles Clarke is driving forward, to impose his will, is against our position and is anathema. The minister stated in her response: "No UK Minister can direct Scottish police forces. Only Scottish Ministers would be able to exercise this power." The minister might be more liberal and trustworthy than Mr Clarke, but that does not negate the point that the proposals constitute political interference and political direction. Whether that is from Mr Clarke or the minister, it is simply wrong and unacceptable.

I am just finishing. There is no desire in Scotland for an organisation such as the CRS, the carabinieri or any other quasi-military outfit. For those reasons, the motion must be opposed. Amended it might have been; satisfactory it certainly is not.

To ask the Scottish Executive what dedicated funding is available to market Edinburgh as a tourist destination. (S2O-5143)

I am grateful for the minister's answer and am aware of the written answer that she has previously given that confirms those figures. Perhaps the minister will clarify why the principal organisation that is responsible for marketing Edinburgh—Edinburgh and Lothians Tourist Board—disclosed only £367,000 received from VisitScotland in grant-in-aid. Given the proposed abolition of that organisation, will she assure me and other city of Edinburgh representatives that the missing millions will be found so that the city, which is a major draw and gateway, is fully marketed?

I concur with Bristow Muldoon and David Mundell that the transfer of powers is significant. It is going through rather unheralded and without fanfare, but it should be welcomed, which is why the Scottish National Party has no hesitation in supporting it, notwithstanding the fact that it comes by way of a Sewel motion. The minister, the committee and its convener are to be congratulated on their forbearance. It was always our position that the powers should be transferred, but the minister was correct to ensure that adequate funding was consequent thereto. Had we obtained the powers without the funding, significant difficulty would have followed, but the transfer of powers and the repatriation of funding to the Parliament will add to the Parliament and improve the lot of the weary traveller in Scotland. We have a long route to travel and we can and must do better. We must address unreliability, overcrowding and other issues that are simply unacceptable. Major infrastructure projects are welcome, and we want them to be rolled out in due course—sooner rather than later. However,  the initial priority for all users must be a service that arrives on time, in safety and in comfort. The transfer at least allows us to address our priorities and take it from there. We must examine the fine print and ensure that our financial interests are addressed. Some issues still have to be considered, such as the asset base that remains. The value of the new, enhanced Waterloo station does not appear to have been brought into the equation, although we have paid for it. It is clear that we are expected to fund the direct rail links to the airports at Edinburgh and Glasgow, which the SNP supports, but, although all taxpayers and every commuter in Scotland paid for the channel tunnel, we do not have access to that direct link. Presumably, we need to keep on fighting Scotland's corner to ensure that we can get it. We do not want to be too churlish, but a number of points should be made. It is appropriate to remind Labour members in particular that they were the ones who opposed the measures that are now contained in the bill. I do not want to quote extensively, but we heard warnings from previous ministers about how the railways would almost grind to a halt, how we would be on a siding to nowhere and how the changes would be impossible to achieve but, lo and behold, here we have a significant transfer of powers. We have always pointed out that trains can travel not just across Europe, or indeed from Northern Ireland to the Republic of Ireland, but from Europe into Asia—across Eurasia on the trans-Siberian express—with no difficulty, yet we have been told that it would be impossible to do the same across the border here. The convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee, Bristow Muldoon, deserves to be applauded for his forbearance with regard to the bill and the committee's mammoth evidence-taking session, but it would be remiss of me not to comment on the article from 6 October 2003—which is not that long ago, as my colleague, Fergus Ewing pointed out—in which he and I were involved. The question that was the subject of the debate in the article was, "Should rail policy be devolved to the Parliament?" No, said Bristow. I do not want to be too hard. Bristow was only carrying out the instructions of those who were bidding him to contribute to the article. I think that his private view was always different. However, he did write: "Whilst it is possible to have trains operating between different jurisdictions, as with the Channel Tunnel services, it is not clear to me what the benefits would be of the increased fragmentation which you advocate ... Let's not become distracted by unnecessary organisational change at this point." As I said, I am only too grateful for the committee's work and the forbearance that Bristow  Muldoon has shown, and I am glad that he has now come round to our point of view. To his credit, I think that Bristow always agreed with that view. There is a long way to go, but this is a significant moment in the history of the Parliament. The bill will allow us to integrate services far more easily and extensively than before. In the end, this is not about a change in the motif on trains, as we have seen in the transition from one ScotRail franchise to another, nor is it simply about a constitutional change—for the commuter, it does not matter whether Westminster or the Scottish Parliament has the relevant powers; what matters is the service that is delivered. Having taken over the responsibility, we have a duty to improve the service and raise our game. We must address not just the major infrastructure projects in which we seek to engage, but we must improve the lot of the weary Scottish commuter—never mind the freight sector, which has paid too high a price for too poor a service for too long. It would be churlish to do otherwise, so we fully support the bill and we are grateful for the actions of the Minister for Transport and of the Local Government and Transport Committee and its convener.

The motion is opposed on two counts: on the procedural basis that it is the wrong way to deal with the matter and on the principled basis that it is simply the wrong thing to do. Our opposition to the constant Sewelling of matters that are important to Scottish life and the impact of that on the responsibilities of the Scottish Parliament is well known. The motion is, however, worse than many that have preceded it. Justice is a devolved issue and our legal system is unique. Its independence is even preserved within the acts of union. In 1707, the Scottish Parliament was abolished—not re-established. Decisions were being made by an oligarchy rather than a democracy and the Scottish Government was winding down rather than gearing up. Notwithstanding those things, those who passed the acts of union ensured the preservation of the distinctiveness of our society and the uniqueness of our legal system. That was also at a time when John Rawls had not written on the rule of law, nor had Thomas Paine written "The Rights of Man". More important, we had neither incorporated the European convention on human rights into our system, nor had we established the European Court of Justice. Whatever logic existed after the union of Parliaments has lost its relevance since the establishment of the European Union, which negates the responsibility of this Parliament to address administration of justice and renders redundant the post of Minister for Justice—it is amazing that she is not here. Those are simply the procedural points. What of the fundamental principle of how we administer justice in our nation, with its unique system and distinctive society? A supreme court is to be created, not because the Scottish system cries out  for it or because the Scottish judiciary seeks it, but because the Lord Chancellor in London wants it. Whether in principle or in practice, it is not what Scotland wants but what the Lord Chancellor seeks to impose. The Lord Advocate—I am surprised also by his absence—is the prosecutor for a UK minister and policy, not the agent for the Scottish legal system or the defender of its uniqueness.

Ultimately, we have to ensure parity. We have a court of ultimate appeal in Scotland and people have the right to go to the Hague and the European Court of Justice about other matters. I believe that it would be best to change the procedures by repatriating the ultimate powers of the House of Lords to the High Court of Justiciary and the other courts in Scotland that have served us well. As I said, the House of Lords is an anachronism from 1707. We live in the European Union after the treaties of Maastricht, Amsterdam and Nice. Now is the time to see how we work our distinctive system, not just how it integrates with London. We have to demonstrate that we accept that we are part of the European Union whose laws we have accepted. I do not think that it is logical to create a supreme court in London; it is logical to create a supreme court here in Scotland and to integrate it with other systems that we are now duty-bound to accept because of our membership of the EU. I said, too, that there is no logic in maintaining an anachronism. The reserving of final rights of appeal to the House of Lords was done when the Scottish Parliament was being abolished. The empire was just starting and the EU as we know it had not evolved. Even then, it was made clear that Scottish matters needed to be distinct. So why, when our Parliament is re-established, when it is affected and influenced as much as it is by European and international conventions, should we abdicate responsibility to a different legal system? I am not arguing that a United Kingdom requires a unitary legal system; I am arguing that there is an anachronism in that the final court of appeal for civil matters remains in London when the court of ultimate appeal for criminal matters rests in Scotland. That was then; this is now. We have a devolved legislature, the ECHR, the European Court of Justice and other international bodies. Why not end—rather than maintain—the anachronism of the final court of civil appeals being in the House of Lords or the supreme court in London when the final court of criminal appeals  is in the High Court of Justiciary in Edinburgh. The motion cannot be supported on the basis that civil justice is a reserved matter and criminal justice is devolved. Both matters are devolved and are the responsibility of this Parliament. It cannot be argued that it is right on the basis that there is more UK civil law than criminal law, not when drugs and firearms are covered by UK legislation but form a substantial, if not majority, part of serious crime. The notion is absurd. This motion is the wrong procedure. It is wrong in principle and I oppose it.

We have no hesitation in fully supporting what the minister said and the terms of the motion. We appreciate that a great deal of work has been going on in the background. What we are seeing today is to some extent a reflection of our due democratic system. When such policies arose previously, they were ratified by the Scottish Office and imposed on the judicial system without any attempt at democratic scrutiny. It is clear that there is democratic scrutiny now. We are happy to endorse the points that have been made and we look forward with interest to hearing about additional matters that might be mentioned by the Solicitor General. We will be happy to support them because some matters are not ideological but systemic. A great deal of the problems that we have in the judicial system—how we treat witnesses and how victims are addressed—are not the fault of the current Executive or a past Administration of whatever political hue; they are down to the system that we have. Unfortunately, we have a legal system that is not necessarily about addressing injustice; it is about how we administer it. Hence the maxim that the law is not necessarily the same as justice. It is the administration of these matters that has to be addressed. As the minister said, taking cognisance of the victims of crime and those who give evidence in court is just as important as addressing the problem of perpetrators. We have no dispute with the Executive in that area. We take cognisance of the doubts that the minister expressed about our amendment. We recognise that we lodged it at late notice without discussion. However, we raise matters of some concern and if the Executive is not prepared to accept our points at present, we would like to be satisfied that they will at least be factored in.

We are more than happy to accept that, to some extent, it is the duty of the Opposition to propose generalities and the duty of the Administration and the Executive, together with the civil service and the secretariat, to fine-tune and deliver the work. I also accept that when it comes to witness relocation, moving someone from Glasgow or the west of Scotland to the northern isles or the Western Isles is not best suited to maintaining anonymity. Moving people to Liverpool, Manchester or urban London is what happens. It is clear that there has to be some cross-border harmonisation. We think that such matters could be addressed even within a specific Scottish witness relocation programme, but we accept the points that the minister made. We are not prepared to accept the Tory amendment. We all know where the Tories stand and we disagree with the concept of ending early automatic release. They are entitled to that position, but we are trying to address the matter of victims and witnesses, which would have been better addressed without the Tories giving us their mantra chant. We know that an election is coming in May, but we are trying to address an oversight of which we have all been culpable—past and present Administrations, the Opposition and the Government. We have to do better, and rather than singing an electioneering song, we should try to improve matters and move forward. Therefore, we will not be supporting the Tory amendment. It is clear that victims and witnesses are critical and their needs are distinct. Witnesses and victims have both been taken for granted. Numerous analogies and examples can doubtless be given by every member, but we all have to do better. We accept that progress is being made and credit has to be given to the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for trying to address the problem. We are bringing Scotland forward from a time when such matters were dealt with shamefully. We are all aware of the anecdotal evidence of witnesses languishing in witness rooms not having been told that the trial had been discharged. We are aware of instances, whether in Forfar or anywhere else, where the facilities for a witness are provided by the Women's Royal Voluntary Service. I do not denigrate that institution in any shape or form because what it does is worth while  and beneficial but, at the end of the day, is it the most appropriate body to cater for witnesses? When nobody else is available, the WRVS steps into the breach and we are thankful for that, but we must treat witnesses better. People often have to wait for several hours to give evidence despite the fact that they are doubtless considerably inconvenienced and worried—they must be able to get a cup of coffee or tea during that time. That must be addressed. Our view on victims is to some extent much the same as the Executive's. Some issues have been overlooked. We address victims' immediate needs, but we forget about their long-term requirements. The minister mentioned our amendment and I will talk about two points in it. We recognise that giving evidence is difficult. It would be one thing for the Lord Advocate or me, who live in the suburb of the Grange within about five doors of each other—although I should add that we have not been on holiday together—to give evidence in a trial, but everybody is aware that, in many suburbs in small-town Scotland, people who give evidence face not only the feeling that they are breaching the no-grassing culture, but intimidation: their windows get panned in and their children are harassed. Such things happen. The situation is a no-brainer and we must address it. Giving evidence can be extremely frightening. It is a citizen's duty, but it is one thing for the Lord Advocate and me from the safety of our salubrious homes to carry it out, and quite another for a person in Craigmillar or Easterhouse who knows that their children will be intimidated and that their windows are likely to get a brick through them to do so. If we are to allow such people to carry out their duty as citizens, we must support them. The police try to provide support, but the right hand in government does not know what the left hand is doing. Local authorities will not work with police authorities because they say that matters are being addressed in other ways or that people will use the system to queue jump in order to get a house. We must do better. With victims, we must accept that both psychological and physical injury matter. People get recompensed for a broken nose, but there is no recompense for old ladies who have difficulties going out at night or young women who feel intimidated by crowds of youths. Society has let down those who suffer in such ways. We do not address properly psychological or psychiatric matters and we must consider that. The budget is not unlimited, but we must do better. I move amendment S2M-2241.2, to insert at end: "; further notes that, whilst it is a citizen's duty to report crime and testify, in doing so significant difficulties and dangers can be encountered by many; calls for additional  assistance to be given towards rehousing and protection including a specific Scottish Witness Protection Programme, and further recognises the serious psychological effect that being a witness or victim of crime often involves and so calls for any future reform in this area to include adequate provision for treatment of trauma."

Mr McMahon said that he was baffled. I am somewhat perplexed that he should fail to see that the debate is not so much about procedures as about principles. The procedures can be addressed, whether through the Procedures Committee—to pick up on a point that Mr Smith made—through the methods that Mr Mundell suggested or through another means. However, the issue is fundamentally a question of principle—Mr McMahon may have forgotten that, but we believe that it is fundamental. The principle is whether we wish to have supercasinos in our communities, a point that, to his credit, Mr Brown of the Liberal Democrats touched on. It is also fundamentally about the problems that gambling causes, which can be exacerbated by supercasinos, and whether we wish to regulate supercasinos or leave them unregulated. The ethos in our new chamber since the First Minister first spoke in it has been one of raising the game, not simply raising the stakes. In this magnificent auditorium, we are supposed to be raising our sights; we are supposed to be raising our game, not just playing the game, whether the puggies that Ms Leckie referred to or other games such as blackjack. Our society is different geographically, demographically and socially. As other members have indicated, we know that we have a problem that we need to address. If we fail to do so, we will pay the consequences. If we do not address the problems with the Gambling Bill, we will have to deal with crime, health and debt problems and a whole array of other problems that will be exacerbated by the bill and for which the Parliament has devolved responsibility.

The principle remains the same—the new Labour Government is closer to the likes of Bernie Ecclestone and the big American casino companies that wish to come in than to the ethos of looking after the people whom it is supposed to represent. We know that gambling is a serious problem and causes difficulties. Information on that has been clearly provided by churches, academics and others. The statistics prove that we have problems and, whether from Australia or elsewhere, they show that supercasinos will exacerbate those  problems and make them infinitely worse. The Parliament has a duty to legislate to ensure that supercasinos do not come here. That is our responsibility and we must accept it. Of course, there is no difficulty with people going to the bingo or having a flutter—those are not problems—but we have a duty as a state and as a Parliament to address factors that will make matters infinitely worse. We legislate on narcotics. We legislate on pornography. We have a duty to legislate on supercasinos, given the harm that people will do to themselves, their families and their communities if such casinos are introduced. The bill will open Pandora's box and we will face a significant problem. I am glad that Mr Brown spoke out against it; I hope that he will have the courage of his convictions and vote in accordance with them. We are aware that the issue is about individual responsibility and teaching people about the consequences of gambling, but we have a duty as a state to take responsibility where people fail to address their own problems. We legislate on smoking because we believe that it can be detrimental. We act not because we are a nanny state, but because we acknowledge that there is a significant problem and that there is an onus on this Parliament to act. The debate is not about procedures. The procedures could be resolved without even involving the Scotland Act 1998. Fundamentally, the issue is one of principle. However, if people have no principles or cannot decide whether their principles come through Brown or Blair, or through the American companies that are the main backers, it is no wonder that they abrogate responsibility. Others in the chamber believe in the principle that we have to take responsibility. We believe that gambling causes social problems that supercasinos will exacerbate and we fundamentally believe that it is the responsibility of all members to vote against the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in the provision of its central heating programme for pensioners. (S2O-4724)

I thank the minister for his answer. As he will be aware from his answer to my recent written parliamentary question, many pensioners in the Lothians who should benefit from the programme have experienced a delay of up to five months, which is clearly a considerable difficulty at this time of year. Will he undertake to ensure that all possible steps are taken to accelerate the programme as quickly as possible? Failing that, will he ensure that emergency alternatives are available at an affordable and accessible rate?

I congratulate Mr McLetchie on bringing this issue to the Parliament and on his measured speech, with much of which I did not disagree. It is clear that there are two aspects to the debate: the question of congestion charging and the question of a referendum. London has congestion charging. However, it is to Ken Livingstone's credit that he made it clear that if he was voted in as mayor, he would introduce congestion charging. He got the electoral mandate to do so and he has delivered. There can be no dispute about the democracy of that. To be fair to Mr McLetchie, I do not think that he disagrees that that is one weapon with which to introduce congestion charging. Edinburgh did not seek to do that. We have a history in Scotland of using referenda, whether on the creation of this Parliament or the fluoridation of water in Strathclyde. They were successful and welcomed by the population.

I do not have time. What is taking place in Edinburgh is unacceptable. However, I differentiate between the referendums in Edinburgh and West Lothian and fully accept Mr McLetchie's points about how referenda should be run. We should all be worried about what the City of Edinburgh Council is up to, whether we are for or against congestion charging. First, it is fundamentally wrong. It brings all of us as politicians into disrepute. To use such a loaded question in such an unfair manner denigrates the whole body politic. We all know that no matter what political party, if any, we represent, all politicians are universally condemned and viewed as chancers. When such a loaded referendum is to be used, what else can we expect? The referendum could cause difficulties for the minister due to the difference in position between Liberal Democrat councillors and a Liberal Democrat minister. With the referendum it could be difficult to work out what was meant, especially if there is a close result. It is fundamentally bad for the body politic. I congratulate West Lothian Council on its referendum. West Lothian is part of the congestion problem in Edinburgh, so it has to be part of the solution. The way forward is to follow the path down which we are heading to regional transport authorities that allow such matters to be dealt with, because Edinburgh cannot address congestion that comes from elsewhere. West Lothian has to be brought on board, as do East Lothian, the Borders and other areas.  Edinburgh cannot drive forward the issue as it is doing, because it is fundamentally wrong. We did not think that that was part of the body politic in Edinburgh. Someone referred to it being typical of the west of Scotland mafia, but it is not even that. This is a political matter that brings to mind Ukraine or North Korea. It is simply unacceptable. I back Mr McLetchie in raising the matter.

I echo the minister's comments that the legislation will have been produced not only in the chamber today or in committee; its passage is a long and laborious process, and many people outwith the parliamentary field have input considerable time and effort. Thanks and credit must go to them. In supporting the motion, we return to the initial question: why should we support the bill when we have the common law in our armoury? The clear answer is that the common law is not working. Incidents have been narrated on numerous occasions, first in a debate initiated by Karen Gillon. We have the common law, but every member will be aware of incidents, and the  number of such incidents is multiplying. Such behaviour is antisocial and unacceptable. We are not seeking to replace the common law, as the minister clearly stated in his reply to Pauline McNeill's intervention.

Such crimes are not prosecuted for a variety of reasons, including people's failure to give evidence or report crimes and difficulties in apprehending the perpetrators because people do not bother telling officers who did it, even though they saw them. A variety of factors are at play; it is not simply down to problems in the Procurator Fiscal Service. I accept that we have problems that must be addressed, but we support the bill and the minister today because the common law is not working. Will the bill be the solution? Clearly, the answer is that, on its own, it will not be a solution. It will not make the attitudinal or cultural changes that are required to stop the bad behaviour, but—as the minister, to his credit, made clear—we are sending a message from this chamber that actions such as stoning firemen who are trying to put out fires and throwing bricks at paramedics are unacceptable and will not be tolerated. We are the elected Parliament of the people of Scotland. If we do not send that message and let it ring out true, nobody else will. First, the bill will give fiscals the opportunity to libel a variety of charges. Simply throwing an egg at an ambulance could be libelled as a breach of the peace under the common law. However, there are circumstances—sadly too prevalent—in which fires are raised or malicious calls are made to draw fire engines into circumstances simply so that they can be attacked. That is unacceptable. Although such offences could be libelled under the common law, a decision could be taken that it would be appropriate to use the full weight and majesty of this legislation to show that the behaviour is unacceptable and to make an example of the person. That is why we are giving this option to those who are charged with dealing with such behaviour. Secondly, as the minister said, the bill sends a message that, although there is no single, simple solution to the antisocial behaviour that manifests itself in such offences, such behaviour will not be tolerated, will be dealt with heavily and there will be no acceptable excuses for it. It might not be proceeded against in every instance following the passing of the bill, but the legislation will be there for the fiscal to use and the sheriff to implement if they so desire.  As I said, the bill is part of the process of sending the simple message that we are not prepared to accept such behaviour. I have sympathy for the Conservatives' view that such attacks can be dealt with under common law, but the common law is not working and we must change the situation. The bill on its own is not necessarily the solution, but it is one more string to the bow of those who seek to end such behaviour. The bill makes it clear that the Parliament believes that that behaviour is unacceptable. We support the bill.

I appreciate the minister's comments and accept that amendment 7 represents an advance. However, in pressing amendments 15 and 16, I point out that the devil is in the detail and that we are dealing with matters that will result in criminal prosecutions, that will be pored over by sheriffs and that will be argued by learned advocates and solicitors in courts throughout the land. As a result, we must get things as right as possible. It is not enough simply to fall back on the argument that common law can already deal with such matters. Indeed, the arguments that have been made in response to my amendments were raised in the earlier discussion between the minister and my colleague Stewart Stevenson. The bill's purpose is to go beyond the common law. We do not subscribe to the Conservatives' view of the bill; we appreciate the logic in introducing legislation that will ensure that we try to change the culture and that makes it quite clear from the highest position in the land that certain  behaviour is unacceptable. I say again that we do not accept the argument that, in respect of the bill's provisions, the catch-all provision exists in common law. The bill must add value to the current provisions and let us get to where we want to go, which is why we need to be specific about certain definitions. That is the purpose of amendments 15 and 16. I accept that difficulties remain about how we specify matters. Amendment 15 seeks to broaden the bill's definition of emergency worker, and amendment 16 seeks to deepen it. I have listened to the points that have been made and acknowledge that the minister is taking matters substantially beyond the current situation; indeed, organisations, especially the Association of Directors of Social Work, welcome that. However, as Stewart Stevenson pointed out, social workers and those who act in a health care capacity still face significant problems. Not every emergency that a social worker goes into will fall within the current criteria. For example, they might have to act in response to a telephone call or other information and deal with a situation in which a warrant would not be required. I appreciate that we need to find out how the legislation beds down and works in practice and I welcome the minister's earlier comment that the book is not closed as far as categories of emergency workers are concerned. However, some social workers have to deal with extremely difficult situations that might require a police escort. They will not be covered by the bill's provisions if, for example, that escort is not available and they are assaulted. I realise that the common law is available to procurators fiscal and sheriffs who have to deal with such offences. However, in moving amendments 15 and 16, I seek to put on record the various difficult circumstances that are faced by social workers—who often do not get the credit they deserve—and which should be covered by the bill. Although I welcome amendment 7, I will press my amendments.

I want to talk briefly about where we have come from rather than where we are. The member will be aware that the mens rea provision for a criminal offence in Scotland is that a crime can be committed intentionally or by wilful recklessness. Does the member accept that the consequences of Thatcherism of mass unemployment and poverty had social implications and that the Conservatives knew, or ought to have known, what those effects would be? Will the Conservatives now acknowledge guilt for the crimes that they perpetrated?

I would have been happy to have moved the Deputy Minister for Justice's amendment as well as my own. We have no real difficulty with its tenor, nor do we have much difficulty with most of the minister's rhetoric. This appears to be an area in which we require to work together, not fall apart. I fundamentally disagree with one part of Annabel Goldie's speech. Perhaps I picked her up wrongly, but she seemed to say that because sex offenders are dealt with in one particular way, other offenders should be dealt with in the same way. I do not believe that, rationally, it is possible to deliver that. A small number of sexual predators are deeply dangerous and are not capable of the rationalisation that is required. They might not be mentally ill or capable of being treated in prison, but they might be either sociopathic or psychopathic and they need to be dealt with differently from other prisoners. To say that that small handful—thankfully, it is just a small handful—should dictate how everybody else is dealt with is not acceptable.

It must depend on the individual. If somebody is incapable of making a rational decision or is deeply dangerous because of some psychological flaw, it is our duty as a Parliament and as a society to deal with that person differently. A handful of people out there—as I said, thankfully, it is only a small handful—are deeply dangerous and we know them to be capable of reoffending if they are released. They are ticking time bombs. To say that somebody who has free will and choice and who has stolen a hunk of meat from a shop should be dealt with in the same way as a dangerous sexual predator is patently not correct. We have to deal with such dangerous people differently. Sadly, they exist and we cannot treat all prisoners in the same way as we treat that deeply dangerous minority. Is there a role for prison in society? Absolutely. There is clearly a need to deal with dangerous people, from whom we have to be protected. Some offences are of such magnitude and of such gravity that none of the available sentences other than imprisonment is appropriate, even if the offender is not dangerous. However, that necessary role of prison is not one of crime control or prevention; it is the sentence of last resort. Simply imposing prison sentences will not dissuade people from committing crime. We must examine other methods, particularly rehabilitation. There are far too many people in prison, including  fine defaulters and people serving various short-term sentences. None of those people is capable of being rehabilitated or reformed in any way by prison; we are simply containing them for a period of time. In many instances, we are making circumstances worse. I sat in on committee meetings listening to the evidence of Andrew McLellan and others as various questions were being asked. What is it that encourages somebody not to reoffend? Do they have a home to go to? Do they have employment that they can access? Do they have a family? In many instances, people who are locked up for a short sentence lose their employment and their tenancy and break their relationships with their parents, partner and whomever else, and the likelihood of their reoffending escalates. That is why short-term sentences do not work. Sadly, Scotland is heading towards having the highest per capita prison population in western Europe. There are many European league tables that we should aspire to lead, such as those on economic growth, pension provision for the elderly and social provision for the needy. However, I certainly do not include banging up more people in our society than in any other civilised democratic community in western Europe among those aspirations. The Executive is culpable of doing that at the moment, and the Tories want to escalate the rate of sending people to prison.

Not particularly. The fact is that we are heading towards having the highest per capita prison population. That is something that we cannot take pride in. I agree with the points that Mr Henry made about that. Our kids are not genetically programmed to commit more crime than youngsters in Dublin, Stockholm or anywhere else. The reasons have to lie elsewhere. There must be other factors, not just with regard to what causes crime but with regard to how other countries address the punishment for the crime. Simply to aim to bang up more people is a counsel of despair. I agree with the minister that there is no one magic bullet or easy solution to curing crime and the social problems that go with it. Poverty is no excuse as far as causing crime is concerned. Societies that are far poorer than ours have lower crime rates. We had significantly greater poverty in this country in the 1920s and 1930s, yet crime was not at the same levels then. There is still clearly a link, however, and if people deny that link, they deny the obvious solution: we must address mass unemployment, social dislocation, community fragmentation and family fragmentation, all of which have occurred. In the  1980s, when the Tories brought in their new great hope under Thatcherism, they ruined many areas by creating mass unemployment overnight. Into the vacuum where once there was labour, toil and work, there came heroin into the veins of many people. The Tories stand culpable of that. It might not have been their intention, but that was the outcome, and they should show some humility.

I will take an intervention from either member.

No, I do not accept that as far as short sentences are concerned. When I met Mr Croft, the governor of Saughton prison, he pointed out that any sentence under six months was useless. The prisoner has a four-week induction period and another four-week period at the end prior to getting out. Most courses last a minimum of 20 weeks. Courtesy of simple arithmetic, unless people are sentenced to at least 28 weeks, there is nothing that the SPS can do with them other than simply control or contain them. Therefore, such short sentences do not work. In fact, they lose people employment prospects, rather than provide people with any skills with which to gain employment. Although there is no simple solution, we should try to develop some consensus about where we go from here. That will need the Executive to trim a bit, and it will require members of Opposition parties to give a bit more. We cannot have a stop-start approach or keep chopping and changing. We cannot limit ourselves to one method, as there is no simple solution that will work overnight. Drug testing and alcohol rehab will not change our society overnight, because we are dealing with problems that have come about over two or three generations of long-term, deep-seated unemployment, in households where there is no work, no father figure and so on. We need to work together to achieve a consensus. However, that consensus must not be simply to lock 'em up or hang 'em high. We must be tough on crime and must ensure that individuals take responsibility for their actions, but fundamentally our society and the Parliament that represents it must take responsibility for all our  citizens and communities and solve many of their social problems. I move amendment S2M-2158.2, to leave out from "accepts" to end and insert: "further notes that the causes of crime are manifold, involving social and economic dislocation and family and community fragmentation with drink, drugs and deprivation remaining at the root of much crime and antisocial behaviour; notes with concern that Scotland is heading towards having the highest per capita prison population in western Europe; calls, therefore, for a visible police presence in our communities and for prison to be reserved for serious and dangerous offenders; calls for action to be taken to ensure that community-based disposals are available for minor offences to ensure rehabilitation and best use of public funds; calls, therefore, on the Executive to ensure that it is not only tough on crime but tough on the causes of crime, and recognises that the solutions are multifaceted and require individuals to take responsibility for their own actions and for society to take responsibility for all its communities."

In any debate, and certainly in a debate as important for  humanity and Scotland as this one, we have to discuss how we got here, where we are at the moment and where we go from here. As my colleague Stewart Stevenson said, those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it. It is clear that we need to learn lessons—we need to take on board how the situation in Iraq happened, why it happened and, perhaps most important of all, how to ensure that it never happens again. However, we are where we are. We do not wish to be here, but this is where we are at the present moment: with military and civilian casualties; with a country devastated; with a world endangered; and with the major institution of peace for the globe—the United Nations—damaged and tarnished. That is the situation that we face. We cannot simply condemn Bush and Blair, although their crimes and culpability are clear for all to see. We need to have a route map, if that is what we wish to call it, or an agenda for withdrawing our troops, sustaining and rebuilding Iraq, restoring faith in international institutions and ensuring peace for all humanity. Our objection to the SSP motion is that it has no future and its simple suggestion that we remove troops by Christmas is a counsel of despair. However, we cannot accept the amendment from the Labour Party, which many of its leading members spoke to, although not Pauline McNeill and others. In a debate such as this, the Labour Party must remember that we cannot forget the past and that we must learn from it, as well as look forward to the future, as Stewart Stevenson said. Frank McAveety made reference to rogue states. Like me, Mr McAveety is a known bibliophile. I suggest that if he wishes to learn about such states, he should read Chomsky's "Rogue States" to find out where the real problem lies. We have to remember, and we will never let the people of this country forget, that we were brought into the war not just on a false premise, but on falsehoods. There were no weapons of mass destruction and Tony Blair lied to the British and Scottish people.

Absolutely. As I said earlier, we have made a more dangerous world, and far from dealing with only one dictator in Saddam Hussein, as Mr McAveety seemed to suggest, Kim Il-sung and others go on regardless. The war in Iraq was not a war to create a more stable world—as I said, the likes of Kim Il-sung  have been ignored—and it did not try to ensure that justice and truth prevailed. As my colleague Alex Neil said, it was a war for oil, for George Bush to cement America's access to that finite resource and for those who wish to cement an Anglo-American coalition. We welcome a close relationship with the United States, but the Atlanticist trend of the current new Labour Government damages us all. The same points were not only made in previous speeches. In his book, American academic Chalmers Johnson makes the point that Saudi Arabia will be lost to the American hegemony and, accordingly, America will require to access oil in other places—particularly Iraq. So that is where we are at. We accept the points made by Pauline McNeill and others that we require to address the problem of the Palestinian state—there can be no peace unless we do. However, we must also remember where we are—some members have disappointed today in that regard. This is the Parliament for the Scottish people; it is not simply an extension of the pavement in front of the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre, where people can chant their mantras and slogans and shout "Troops out!", whether or not the slogan is legitimate. Nor is the Scottish Parliament a Strathclyde Regional Council writ large, where we can say, "This is not part of our game; it is no responsibility of ours and it is for our elders, betters and wisers in a different place." The Scottish Parliament is a magnificent institution and it is the responsibility of those who are privileged to be elected to it to speak up on issues that affect the people of Scotland. Some front-bench members of the Labour Party privately talk about how the Baghdad bounce has benefited them, which is absurd. They should have had the dignity to come to the chamber for this debate. Although the Scottish Parliament does not have the right to order the withdrawal of our troops or to deploy them in the first place, it must address the consequences of such actions. Members of the Scottish Parliament, whether they are on regional lists or represent constituencies, must meet the grieving families who have lost loved ones; they must address the communities who will have to bolster the troops who return; and they must deal with the economic problems that an endangered world brings, whether they relate to a decline in tourism from the USA or to other matters. We have a duty to raise our game and to address not just the wrongs of the past but the way out. I disagree with Mr Raffan about that, although I agree with many of his points and I regret the Greens' spat with him. We should be creating a coalition against the war that is as  broad-based as possible and to snipe—as Green members did, sadly—at members who oppose the war is to do them a disservice. We must go forward. The way out is not to leave it to British and American troops, augmented by Estonians, Lithuanians, Poles, Ukrainians and so on. We should deploy troops who are sensitive to the situation and who are far more acceptable to the Iraqi people. If the Arab League is not minded to contribute, we must encourage it to accept its responsibility, because we will not get out of Iraq simply by pouring in more British and American troops and more firepower. We must find a way out and broaden the coalition by bringing in Muslims and those who were not involved in the first place.

I welcome the minister's comments. I wish to raise a constituency matter relating to the Edinburgh domestic violence probation project, which has been running for many years. The project is waiting to hear the outcome of an application for additional funding to allow it to operate at proper capacity. At present, sheriffs are unable to divert people to the project and although it has been successful in Edinburgh, it cannot be extended to other jurisdictions, such as Haddington. Will the minister consider accelerating consideration of the project's funding in order that further progress can be made?

The debate has been sombre, perhaps the most sombre debate that we have had since the Parliament's restoration, but it has been carried out in a dignified manner. It is a testament to the courage and tenacity of the individuals concerned and to the existence and willingness of the Public Petitions Committee that the matter, which has been a source of stigma and shame in Scotland, has finally been debated. We are not alone and Scotland is not unique, because other nations, such as Ireland or Australia, have suffered likewise and gone through similar traumas. Ours might not be as bad as theirs to some extent, but that does not mitigate the individual wrongs that were perpetrated and the individual calamities that have been experienced. It was important that the debate started with the First Minister's statement, because it is clear that the Parliament not only needs to have the opportunity to announce the bounty and benefits that come from Government, but must account for our society's ills. It was therefore appropriate that the First Minister led by making that apology on behalf of society. The wrongs were perpetrated by individuals on individuals, but it was society that failed. Therefore it falls on us as the national Parliament to address the matter, because although the errors might have been individual, the consequences and the fault were collective. There are none so blind as those who will not see and none so deaf as those who will not hear. Sadly, over many years and decades our society was both deaf and blind. Our children were failed systematically and by institutions, as the First Minister was correct to point out in his statement. They were abused where they expected to find love, care and attention, and in that we let them down. We failed to listen and we failed to learn. We set up the institutions, we funded them and we were ultimately responsible for them. Accordingly, it is appropriate that the First Minister should give a collective apology on behalf of Scottish society, because that is where the failures have come about. The errors were not made by us individually, but the consequences are collective. We doubted not just the victims' stories but their honesty and integrity. In many instances we compounded the tragedy that had befallen them by refusing to believe them. We failed not just in the commission of the offence but in the omission of immediate action. Accordingly, it is appropriate that we deal with the matter in this way.  The statement and debate thereafter ran together. As Nicola Sturgeon made clear, we support fully the First Minister's public apology, which was accepted, and supported, uniformly, as it was correct and appropriate. There are two aspects about which there has been doubt and about which we still need to have a debate in relation to where we are going. We have listened with interest to the minister's statement about appointing a reporter, which is to be welcomed. However, the point was made that some of us support having a public inquiry, for which the petition calls. The petition has two objectives: it seeks both an apology and a public inquiry. Scott Barrie made the valid point that unless we have a clear focus and remit, holding an inquiry will be pointless. If there is to be an inquiry, we have to be clear about what we hope to achieve. The fact that inquiries normally relate to incidents that have just happened is not a reason to repudiate holding them in these circumstances. There are precedents elsewhere, such as in Australia, Canada and Ireland, where similar inquiries have been carried out. It is important that such inquiries are carried out. The points made and position adopted by the reporter might satisfy SNP members and it might be possible to deal with the matter in that way. We will have to see the fine print. We will require to be satisfied that the inquiry will have powers, that it will be a full inquiry and that there will be outcomes and effects. The matter is difficult, because of the problems of how an inquiry would interact with on-going civil and perhaps criminal proceedings, which we have to address. It is fair to say that justice must be not only done but seen to be done. The reporter and any investigatory body must be accountable. Legal issues have to be addressed. I welcome the minister's intimation of the Law Commission's review. As Fiona Hyslop and Karen Gillon have said, we do not want matters to be accelerated, but it is important that the legal issues are addressed and we are supportive of the Executive's action in that regard. The debate has been sombre, but it was important to have it. This is not the end; to some extent, it is only the beginning of the end. I hope that what has been said today has offered closure politically and will offer closure for those who have suffered. We had to have the debate, and the First Minister's full public apology on behalf of society was appropriate and we support it fully.

I will say at the outset that the SNP's amendment is meant to add to the Executive motion, not detract from it. I can only reiterate what Christine Grahame and Linda Fabiani said: that we will support the Executive motion. There are three  particular points in our amendment. One is on the cultural problem that we face, as was perhaps epitomised by Mr Aitken's comments of a few moments ago. We must address that cultural problem and the fact that people fail to recognise it. As other members mentioned, we also have to address problems relating to media and the influence of pornography on the mores and culture that permeate our society.

Not at the moment. We must recognise the international aspects of the situation, and that subject was eloquently espoused by Cathy Peattie and by my colleague Linda Fabiani. We fully support the Executive on this. The Deputy Minister for Communities was perhaps short of time and therefore missed out on what we might perceive as the self-congratulatory part of the Executive speech, which sometimes places us in a quandary when it comes to supporting the Executive. We were spared that, however, and we fully support not just the Executive's tenor and tone, but everything in the minister's speech. She was correct to point out that the basis of the problem is inequality and the abuse of power. Other members have testified to that. She also made it clear that we must deal with two particular aspects of the matter. We must deal with the victims of crime and we must challenge what causes the problem in the first place. That there are individual and social aspects to the matter is clear, and individual responsibility must be taken by those who perpetrate violence. There must be zero tolerance, as there can be no excuse for an assault, whether we are talking about a slap and a gesture or whatever, as opposed to a serious assault. All assaults are unacceptable, as is violence that involves insidious humiliation. That is equally bad and damaging not only to the victims, but to the victims' families, which suffer and are, to some extent, the non-combatants—other members talked about them in a different sense. The minister was correct to point out such things. She was also right to point out that much of the violence is steeped in poverty and straitened circumstances, although we are aware that the problem permeates all strata of society and that domestic violence is as likely to be found in the house of the law lord as in that of the labourer. We must accept that fact. Members who argued for gender equality did no service to the debate—in fact, they undermined its whole purpose. In 20 years of working as a matrimonial lawyer, much of which involved domestic violence cases, I never came across one case that involved an abused husband. I accept that there is such abuse, but such cases are a  minority and we must not get the two types of case mixed up.

Pauline McNeill, Marilyn Livingstone and Christine Grahame have already eloquently made many of the points that need to be made. The fact is that we are here for a purpose. Some chamber debates are not about legislative initiatives, but are simply symbolic or are about addressing cultural mores. Earlier this month, we all observed one minute's silence in the chamber because it was the 11 th hour of the 11 th day of the 11 th month. The community in Scotland and the British Isles and throughout many of the western democratic countries and beyond recognises that we must pay tribute to those who gave the ultimate sacrifice. We should also recognise their wrongs and the iniquities of war on such occasions. Exactly the same applies to this debate. Such debates are taking place not only in this chamber, but in legislatures and jurisdictions elsewhere internationally. The problem that we are debating is significant in this country, but transcends it. We are having a symbolic debate. However, the difference with violence against women is that it is cultural, institutionalised and systemic in many cases. There is violence against male partners in relationships, but it is not institutionalised. Violence against anybody is unacceptable and intolerable, but it is wrong to suggest that the situation of a battered husband is the same as that of a battered wife. We do not see sexual assaults being used as a method of war—which Cathy Peattie and Linda Fabiani talked about—in such cases. Members should have learned the lesson that has been given by the Presiding Officers—to their credit. The proposed amendment would not have added, but would have detracted from the debate. Seeking to bring the matter into the debate again undermined the ethos of what the chamber is trying to do. The United Nations has expressed what humanity is trying to do. We should halt such violence and ensure that victims do not suffer. As the minister said, we should address not only the problems and individual instances, but attack the mores and cultures that create the problems. Until some members take a long, hard look, we will have to debate the subject ad infinitum. The problem is that they must recognise that such violence is not the same as the slapping of a husband by an irate wife. We are talking about a systematic and cultural problem. In many instances, it is institutionalised. That has been testified to in policies being carried out in the Congo, Rwanda and in eastern and central Europe. That is why we must have this debate.  I have suddenly become conscious of the time, and want to make three key points to summarise. We must recognise that the problem is international, rather than simply a national one, and that we must take actions as individuals and as a Parliament. Other members have testified that the problem is a historical as well as a contemporary one, which is why we must be ever watchful. Members have accepted and testified to the fact that we have made improvements. Of course we have moved on: women have the right to vote and are no longer seen as chattels to be disposed of with no right even to their child upon separation, divorce or whatever else; however, there are still cultural problems and areas of power inequality that we need to address. I take issue with the idea that we need to go as far as Elaine Smith or Carolyn Leckie would wish, but I accept the fact that a distance has to be travelled to make this a better world, not just for women, but for all humanity. We have to recognise that the issue is cultural as well as legislative. Not everything can be dealt with by law; we have to take that on board. Nevertheless, the Parliament has the opportunity to send out a clear message that we view violence against women as unacceptable; that we will legislate where we can; and that we will try to ensure that, in our society and our culture, violence against women is intolerable and will be driven out. I just hope that some members will take cognisance of that.

I thank the minister for his clarification of many points and for the tenor and tone of his speech. The fire service has served Scotland and her communities well over years past and present. I refer not only to the front-line firefighters, but to the backroom staff, because the success of the service is the sum of its parts. Disputes with management, Executive and Government have not deflected them from providing an excellent emergency service to one and all. They have changed with the times and adapted to new requirements. From an increased work load in vehicular accidents to a more varied work load involving chemicals, the nature and extent of the calls on their service have changed and increased, but, without fail, the fire service has addressed the safety of individuals and the security of communities. The main purpose of the bill, as detailed in the  policy memorandum, is ostensibly "to deliver a modernised Fire and Rescue Service that responds to the particular demands of the 21st Century and contributes to building a 'Safer Scotland'." It is clear that times have changed and that the society in which we live has evolved, but, to its credit, so has the fire service that has served us well throughout the years. There is an adage that the minister and the Executive might care to bear in mind: if it ain't broke, don't fix it. Reference is made to the need for national resilience. That can be viewed as weasel words. We need to adapt to changing times, but, although it is essential that we address the problems of global terrorism, that requirement must not be used to deliver Executive-desired change under the guise of the defence of freedom when, ofttimes, that is not the case. Our emergency services have coped admirably with incidents as major and varied as those at Lockerbie and Piper Alpha. Of course they need to prepare for other atrocities and tragedies, but that must not be an excuse to railroad through unwanted changes without proper discussion and debate. The first policy objective of the bill is "to define the role of the modern Fire and Rescue Service", but that is an evolving concept. If the role has changed and adapted since the 1940s and 1950s, will it not, as the minister said, do likewise in the 21 st century? If the service coped back then, why should it not cope with future developments? The second objective is to ensure that the fire and rescue service has clearer national and local priorities and objectives. Who could disagree with that sentiment? However, if that is the case, why are we seeking to undermine the statutory basis that enables priorities and objectives to be discussed and debated rather than simply to be set according to the whim and fancy of a minister—I do not mean to imply anything about the current minister; I am thinking of some future minister—and to be the subject of diktat? The third objective is to improve the protection offered to communities. We agree with that aim. However, in what way is it an improvement to reduce the input of communities and potentially to centralise the service? That proposal causes concern to members from all parties, not just the Opposition parties. The fourth objective is to revise fire safety legislation. Clearly, there is unanimity on that and we support the Executive in that regard. Preventing fires from starting in the first place is as important a role and remit as putting them out. Ensuring that actions and steps are taken by responsible parties is part of that work. We accept that, in a democracy, it is the right of  the Executive to legislate. However, it remains the duty of the Opposition to challenge the intentions and the fine print of legislation. We are only at stage 1—and, of course, we have the benefit of being able to see a published bill—but I appreciate the fact that the minister has today further clarified matters, particularly with regard to the use of the affirmative, rather than the negative, procedure for statutory instruments. However, even with the affirmative procedure, the difficulty is that we are left in a take-it-or-leave-it situation. We will find that, although the instrument contains points that are valid and welcome, the Parliament will be able only to say no to the entire instrument; we will not be able to delete particular parts. That is the difficulty that we have with the minister's concession, welcome though it is. We cannot prevent the Executive from using its majority to force through its will. However, we can ensure that errors are pointed out and mistakes and pitfalls are avoided. Clearly, many provisions in the bill are perfectly acceptable, not only to the committee but to the Fire Brigades Union. Whether the implementation of such beneficial proposals required a bill to be drafted is open to debate, but the Executive has chosen to deal with the issues in that fashion. However, we are opposed to particular provisions, which we are flagging up at this juncture. We hope that the Executive will reflect on our concerns and ensure that the gains provided are not offset by losses. We have three main areas of concern. The first is the proposed abolition of the Scottish Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, which is a statutory body that has worked well—it has adapted to changed times and has delivered to meet them. Replacing the council with a non-statutory body undermines the ethos of the organisation. The body might need to be improved and adapted and we can change its name and even some of its structures—the need for such changes is open to debate, as even the FBU accepts. What is not acceptable and what we will challenge is the decision to move the body to a non-statutory basis, which undermines not just its integrity, but its authority. Secondly, we are concerned about the fact that, in conjunction with making the SCFBAC a non-statutory body, the bill will enhance ministerial powers. Ministers are entitled to govern; we accept that that is part of living in a democracy. However, in areas such as the one that we are discussing, in which we have operated as a community and with co-operation between all partners, action must not be taken by ministerial fiat or Executive whim. Certainly, no minister should be able to bind his successors. That is our fundamental difficulty with the direction in which the Executive is moving.

I accept that and welcome the tenor of the minister's words. However, the devil is in the detail and we must ask further questions about the use of ministerial direction. The Executive argues that it is unlikely that such powers would be used. If so, why is it legislating for them? If the Executive does not intend to use them, why have them? Of course, if we remove the democratic forums that previously provided a chamber for debate, we increase the likelihood that we will act by direction rather than after discussion. If the powers are unlikely to be used, perhaps the minister could tell us the circumstances in which the Executive envisages that they might be used. Moreover, if they are to be exceptional, that should be made clear and the times at and issues on which the Executive would intervene should be specified. If there is no hidden agenda, the Executive should make that clear, detail the situations in which ministerial edict might have reign and let the Parliament decide whether that edict should run. Our third concern relates to the number of fire control rooms. That issue has been a matter of great concern, as we have heard, and others in my party will comment on it at length. However, it is important that we remember that we are talking about not only a national fire brigade but a local fire service. Part of the strength of that service is that it is for the community and, fundamentally, from the community.

The minister's words are factually correct, but many members of the public and many members in this chamber—not just those in my party—are concerned about the direction in which we are heading with regard to fire control rooms. The bill concerns fire control rooms. The question whether the actions that we are discussing could be taken at the moment or after the bill is passed must be addressed. A central strength of the fire service is local  knowledge. Centralisation—reducing the number of fire control centres—will reduce local knowledge and undermine the local service. It is ironic that one of the drivers for the bill is the troubled times in which we live, which are exemplified by the tragedy of 9/11. However, the lesson that New York city learned led it to increase, not decrease, the number of fire control centres. It is clear to me that, if that is good enough for New York, it is good enough for New Lanark. There are also concerns, not least to the FBU, about the consequences of the changes in respect of industrial action. The Executive sought at the Justice 2 Committee to address the union's fears. However, it would be useful if the minister could confirm the position for the record. If those fears are allayed, our doubts on that issue will be assuaged to some extent. Clearly, changes can be made to improve the fire service, but that has always been the case. Is legislation necessary and, if so, does it require to be of the magnitude of this bill? Those are matters that the Executive must consider anew. If it is committed to pressing on, it must at least address the three key points that I have outlined: we require a statutory body in the service; we must not act on ministerial whim or fancy; and there must be no reduction in the number of fire control rooms without proper local debate, discussion and agreement. I move amendment S2M-1960.2, to insert at end, "but, in so doing, recognises that the Fire Service has served Scotland and its communities well and has done so with firefighters, management, employers and local authorities working in partnership and therefore expresses concern about the proposed abolition of the Scottish Central Fire Brigade Advisory Council and its replacement with a non-statutory body, in conjunction with increased ministerial powers allowing for Scottish Executive action without a forum for proper debate and discussion, at a time when there is concern over the retention of control rooms and other aspects of the service."

I welcome the fresh talent initiative but point out the difficulties that are being experienced by Stevenson College Edinburgh, which has indicated that 18 per cent of international students that it has recruited this academic year have cancelled their study. Of that number, 31 per cent cancelled their study due to visa refusal. Does the First Minister agree that that is a case in which we should have powers over entrance to the country as well as entrance to the colleges?

Nanette Milne prefaced her speech by indicating that she was worried about repetition. She went on to mention kinship care, among other matters that members have raised, but she should not have worried about repetition. Frank McAveety might have had difficulty with his Rs, but he did not have difficulty with his rhetoric. In a debate such as this, there is an opportunity for unanimity and for us to agree a position as a Parliament that represents broader society. Clearly, the issue does not fit the pattern of party-political debates, because it is not a partisan issue. It has nothing to do with how members view the imperatives of the economy or the battle between capital and labour, but is about how members view society. I am glad that all members seem to acknowledge that the children about whom we have been speaking are our responsibility as a community, whether or not they are our blood relations, and that, as the elected Parliament in Scotland, it is our responsibility to address that. The points that Frank McAveety made were correct. The outcomes of the Fostering Network's study might not make an earth-shattering difference to service delivery, benefits or the progress that we make in dealing with foster carers and those in foster care, but they make a significant difference to those people. They might not grab the press headlines, but to some extent, who cares? That is not why we are doing it; we are doing it to make a difference and to advance the interests of foster-children. Therefore, we should try to reach a view that will allow the Executive, the Opposition parties and councils of all political parties to go forward together, because it is not a matter of making narrow political points. Earlier today, we had a moment of silence and reflection for the armistice and those who fell in the two world wars. Perhaps some members should have a private moment of reflection on the debate. Clearly, it has been about children who, in many instances, come from very difficult backgrounds and are troubled. We know that many of those children go on to commit offences and crimes. Some members could do with reflecting on why, when we debate the care and welfare of those children, we talk about troubled children who require care, assistance and support and about our endeavours to look after them, but when we discuss them in a debate on criminal  justice, we talk about hammering them, hounding them and dealing with them in this way or that way. That is not to apologise or make excuses for bad behaviour, because I do not think that any member of any political party condones that, but we must acknowledge that an holistic approach is needed. There is no rubicon that is simply crossed at the age of 16. A troubled teenager from a difficult background—such as a home with a drug-offending or alcohol-abusing parent—who has faced all possible disadvantages does not suddenly, because of an offence that he commits the day after his 16 th birthday, go from being a child for whom we should care to a child whom we no longer look after, whose troubles and tribulations we no longer try to deal with and whom we seek to hammer and do down. Of course we must have rules and regulations, but we must also have an holistic approach, and if we want to address not only the care and welfare of children, but the misbehaviour of many teenagers and young adults, we must have continuity and must ask that some people reflect on the need for sympathy.

Absolutely. Statistics that the Executive has issued show that a small minority of our children offend. Rather than prosecuting a war on a generation, we should try to address the problems of some within it. The minister was correct to come at the matter by discussing where we could try to work together to create a better society. There is no clear, simple solution, but obviously we need to try to improve the level of finance that we commit to foster care. The points that Opposition members and back-bench members from the Executive parties have made on the Executive's position have been made with the intention of seeking to assist; it is a matter not of being difficult, but of seeking to make constructive criticisms. Cash is clearly a problem—my colleague Adam Ingram pointed out that the ADSW has referred to a shortfall of £150 million. The £12 million over two years is welcome and beneficial, but it fails by a long shot and leaves us significantly short. We must address that. We must also take cognisance of the fact that there are social difficulties that we must address and demographic trends that we cannot avoid. I am talking not simply about the trends of an aging  population and a reducing number of children, but about the fact that there are changes to the nuclear family, which we must address. It is clear that one size does not fit all and that we need some flexibility. Adam Ingram correctly talked about a step change. We need to make a significant change because the society in which we live has changed under our feet. As the statistics that Christine May and others mentioned point out, the children who are in care now come in particular from drug-abusing parents. As I and others have stated in previous debates, drug abuse has changed our society fundamentally and we must address it. The one point on which I disagreed with Bill Aitken was on our approach to adoption. There is an overlap, but fostering and adoption should be dealt with separately. There is a review of adoption, and that must be taken into account. Adoption is not necessarily the clearest solution in many instances. I hope that we will consider a more humane system of open adoption, which has greater flexibility, with long-term fostering. It is clear from the debate that two aspects require to be addressed. One is the cash shortfall. We must ensure that we have sufficient resources for people to take part in looking after children. In particular, grandparents and others need to have the wherewithal to do that. Their opportunities are prejudiced. It is not acceptable for emotional blackmail to be used by local authorities, and that must cease. The minister, to his credit, has addressed that in his letter. Fundamentally, we must develop respect in this area. It is not simply about remuneration. People carry out the job and the function of fostering because they believe that it is right and that it is something that they should do. They do not do it simply for financial reward. However, they do ask to be appreciated and respected, not to be denigrated or impinged upon with bureaucratic rules that are sometimes unnecessary and not to be treated badly. They need that respect, as well as any additional remuneration.

I thank the minister for the courtesy copy of her statement and the full update that she gave to the chamber. I endorse the sentiment that the overwhelming majority of kids in our society are a credit to themselves, their parents and their communities. We need to praise the majority, as well as castigate the minority.  I also welcome the suggestion that she will be tough on the causes of crime as well as tough on crime itself. However, given that statistics show that 25 per cent of our prison population comes from 1.8 per cent of our local authority wards and that 50 per cent of our prison population comes from approximately 8 per cent of our local authority wards, we have a significant distance still to travel. On the small minority who cause mayhem and who are in many instances a danger to themselves as well as to others, given the announced closure of Kerelaw school, how and when will we see the creation of adequate numbers of residential secure units to secure the safety of the community and of those troubled young individuals? If the closure goes through now, as has been suggested, we will be left with fewer residential secure units than we had in 1999.

To ask the Scottish Executive what information it has on any difficulties faced by foreign students seeking to study at colleges in Scotland. (S2O-3812)

I am glad that action is being taken, because I want to raise with the minister a point that has been raised with me by Stevenson College Edinburgh, where 18 per cent of international students recruited for this academic year have cancelled their study place. Of those students, 31 per cent cancelled because of visa refusal. We warmly welcome the Executive's initiative for fresh talent and recruiting students  from abroad. However, if success on one hand is being negated by the actions of Her Majesty's Government on the other, is it not time that, as well as deciding on the criteria for entry to the college, we should be able to decide on the criteria for entry to the country?

In supporting the amendment in the name of Stewart Stevenson, we support the spirit and tenor of the Executive's motion and what it has said today and the SSP amendment moved by Rosemary Byrne. We fully dissociate ourselves from the comments of the Tories. We do not think that it is appropriate to talk about war or defeat. That must be addressed. In the new chamber and new ambience in which we find ourselves, we are expected to have not just new solutions, but all the solutions. In an ideal world, that would be so. After all, why elect us if we cannot deliver? However, there are areas that are extremely complex and for which legislation is part, but not all, of the solution. The solutions are multifaceted and manifold. Things have to be tried—they may fail—and tried again. In certain areas, the success rate is nowhere near 100 per cent, but that does not mean that the solutions have failed, should not be tried or should not be persisted with. There is no clear solution. We cannot be delusional, deny reality, and say that we have the sole solution, that there is a magic bullet, or that a panacea is available. I dispute the positions of the Tories and, to some extent, Mr Sheridan's assertion that there is a simple solution. There is none. The most telling contribution was Mr McNulty's, who acknowledged that the issue is not just about police and individuals, but about our communities and society. The problem is not just in Scotland: it affects all western democracies in some shape or form. The situation is certainly much less bad in Sweden than it is in America, and I would much rather pursue a north European solution than implement the Nancy Reagan solution, which Mr  Raffan rightly said was being advocated by the Tories. It is not a recipe for success.

The rhetoric was more akin to what we heard from Nancy Reagan in the 1980s, as Mr Raffan said. Then, it was "Just say no," which was simplistic. It was a failure then and it would be a failure now. That is why we have the utterly ridiculous position that the life expectancy of a young black male in Harlem is lower than that of a young male in Bangladesh. What does that say about the most powerful country the world has ever known? We have to address the situation. We have to recognise that the solution is multifaceted, that no one party has the ideal solution, and that there is no one easy solution. That is not an admission of failure; it is a recognition of reality.

Not at the moment. As we say to drug addicts, unless we accept that there is a problem, we will never address the solution. We have to repeat that. The issue is not simply repression. We accept and support the Executive's proposals to hammer and clamp down on those who are causing mayhem in our schemes. However, that is not the solution, and it never can be, because we are not in a war, which is where we fundamentally disagree with the Tories. In a war, there is an identifiable enemy, whether it be the republican guard or the red army. We do not have that here. We are dealing with our own people: our sons and daughters. They are as likely to be our neighbour as anybody else. The Tories cannot say that they will wage war because, if they do, they will wage war on our communities and society. The collateral damage will not be the drug offenders and dealers; it will be the sons and daughters of the drug addicts, who have never committed any offence. We cannot go down that route. It is fundamentally unacceptable.

Not at the moment. We have to accept responsibility and make it clear to our people that the issue is one of free choice. We have to say that if anyone takes a decision to deal in drugs or participate in supplying  them, they will face consequences and there will be no excuses because it is simply unacceptable. We have to drive that home, but at the same time we must accept that some people feel excluded, marginalised and alienated from society, and that until such time as we address that fact, we have no hope of finding a solution. I am a good friend of Paul Laverty, the scriptwriter for the film "My Name is Joe". He told me that, to write that script, he went and stayed in Possilpark for a while. He asked the young kids, who came from difficult backgrounds and had poor education, why they took drugs. They said that their best hope for the rest of their lives would be to get a minimum-wage job in Burger King or to look around them at who was driving a BMW and had bought a flat in the west end of Glasgow. That is not to condone those who deal in drugs, but it is reality for many people. As Mr McNulty said, we must address those communities as part of our society, because that is what they are and we cannot get rid of them. We must educate them, work with them on health and employment and take responsibility for this social malaise, otherwise we will never address the problems. What Mary Mulligan and Brian Adam said about poppy proliferation and events in Afghanistan was correct. We should do what we can to persuade the poppy farmers in Afghanistan not to grow poppies and to find a crop, perhaps not a cash crop, that would be better for them and their society. Many members present are sporting poppies and I am remiss in not doing so. Why do we wear them? It is not in support of the poppy farmers of Afghanistan, but as a recognition of young men who fell in poppy fields in Flanders. I do not remember our waging war with the poppy farmers of Flanders. No such problem existed in our society then. It was not that there was no drugs trade then—in fact, a generation before the first world war, we had an opium war with China because certain sections of our society desired to have access to the money and resources that went with the opium trade—but there was not the same sense of futility. There was futility in the carnage that took place at Ypres, Mons and other such places, but there was not the same sense of futility among the young men who did not need the benefit of a white feather to troop off to war: they thought that they were fighting for a better society. We must realise that the problem lies within, that we have to have effective policing and that we have to deal with drugs. It is possible to burrow out as well as to burrow in, and if it was not possible to prevent allied servicemen from escaping from stalags or prisoners from escaping from the Gulag, we will not prevent drugs from coming into the country. We must address the policing, but the  Tories must realise that we have a problem in our society and that we must address it, which means addressing social exclusion and bringing everybody on board and giving them a stake. There is no easy answer, but the Scottish National Party will work with all parties in the Parliament that are prepared to be progressive and work in a multifaceted way to address the most serious matter that our society has faced in its lifetime.

We have to acknowledge that progress has been made and that we have come a long way. To his credit, the First Minister recognises the need to raise not only our game, but our sights. However, the horizons should be not simply those that are visible from the chamber, but those beyond our shores. Talking the talk is not walking the walk. We need to do more, to go further and to push harder and the best way of doing that is for Scotland to become an independent nation state. More—much more—can be done and must be done, even within a devolved structure, especially in the three key areas of immigration, trade and tourism. Again, although some progress has been made in each of those areas, much more needs to be done. On immigration, we have the fresh talent initiative, which is welcome. However, if it is not to be at best a failure or at worst fraudulent, we need to see delivery. My colleague Nicola Sturgeon referred to the figures that show that the Executive is incapable of delivering what is needed. Currently, we are being undermined by the Executive's inability to bring in fresh talent. The principal of Stevenson College Edinburgh advised me in a communication: "18% of international students recruited by Stevenson College Edinburgh for this academic year have cancelled their study place. Of these 31% were due to visa refusal." The First Minister wants students to extend their stay, but the tragedy and reality is that many students cannot even access a study place, never mind extend their stay in Scotland. Much more requires to be done in that area. Other devolved Administrations achieve much more: both Quebec and South Australia have the powers and, more important, the means of delivery. We need to take on powers including those to establish a Scottish green card scheme.  In addition to the fresh talent initiative and as an immediate answer to some of the problems that we face, we need to address the issue of wasted talent. I am referring to asylum seekers who, whether incarcerated or restricted from work, have the skills and abilities that could be used for the benefit of the individual and—perhaps more important—of our nation. We must cease the nonsense of disbarring those people from using their talent to benefit our society. We must ensure that the policies that the Tories seek to impose and those that Blunkett is currently invoking do not have any writ north of the border. On trade, we welcome the announcement about China, but it is clear that Ireland is the model—Ireland is the Celtic tiger that leaves everyone else in its wake. Leaving to one side the argument about independent nation states, we can see that other federal, devolved nations do much more than we do. Through the Quebec legations and Export Vlaanderen, the Quebec and Flemish Administrations have people on the ground moving, motoring and trying to deliver on trade and to boost the economy of their regions or federal areas. We are singularly failing to match them, let alone keep the Irish in our sights. We have to improve and deliver on that. There is no such thing as a Belgian trade attaché; people represent either Flanders or Wallonia. There is no reason why Scotland could not replicate such a scheme, not simply in Brussels, Washington and Beijing, but across the globe.

I am happy to take those points on board. As I said, Export Vlaanderen does a wonderful job for Flanders. If we did half as much for Scotland as it does for Flanders, our trade figures would improve substantially. On tourism, the VisitBritian-VisitScotland situation has not worked out. VisitBritain means us no harm, but it is not possible to sell Scotland fully under a British identity: Scotland needs to be sold as the unique brand that is Scotland. The quick fix that Tessa Jowell imposed is unravelling. It came about because of her desire to provide funding for the tourism councils in England, as it was right and legitimate for her to do. However, she did not have any right to undermine structures or to force VisitBritain to take on the responsibility of—and to some extent to become—VisitEngland.  We need to ensure that VisitScotland sells Scotland. If that means working in co-operation in many areas with VisitBritain, so be it, but VisitScotland should decide on the areas that it will target and the areas in which it will work in co-operation. There is an argument for using a UK identity, but the choice and the budget for that must be dictated by VisitScotland. Let us not delude ourselves about the success of visitscotland.com. The company lost more than £1 million in year 1, doubled its losses in year 2 and has had its ownership transferred from the private sector partner Schlumberger Sema to Atos Origin. It is a pity that the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport is not here to address the issue, because the Executive needs to get a grip. We face the situation that Atos Origin could decide to sell visitscotland.com on the open market to the highest bidder and the site could be bought by Tourism Ireland. If the site goes to the highest bidder, we face the absurd situation that our major competitor could own our e-tourism portal. That is not impossible, given that losses have doubled and the site has been bought by a major international company. That company does not give a toss about selling Scotland; it wants to maximise profit. We ignore that at our peril. The things that I have mentioned can be done under devolution, but some things can be done only if we are a nation state. That is where I fundamentally disagree with Irene Oldfather. Transnational bodies are increasingly becoming the norm in international situations. In many instances, that is good and we should welcome it—it is important that small nations work together in, for example, the World Trade Organisation. However, the building block is the nation state. Large regions, no matter how powerful, whether California or Catalonia, are not represented in the United Nations or the EU, whereas nation states, whether Micronesian atolls or Malta, are. A country requires to be a nation state to have its voice heard. I support the SNP amendment.

We live in a democracy that imposes a separation of powers and a system of checks and balances. It also imposes an independent judiciary, an elected legislature and an Executive that is accountable to this legislature. In turn, such a democracy imposes responsibilities as well as endowing rights. Clearly, in normal circumstances, it is the right of the Executive to select and appoint its Cabinet. However, it is also the Executive's responsibility to take account of the views not only of Parliament but of the mood outwith it in the country. To do otherwise is not an exercise of right, but an act of irresponsibility. The Executive is acting not as is fitting in a democracy; it is acting as if it was an elected dictatorship. Sadly, the actions of the Executive are not about exercising its right; they are about imposing its will. Clearly, it is doing so at a time when its will is opposed not only by many of its back benchers and the Opposition, but in the country. I am thinking not only of the mood in the country but of the mood of Labour party members and their representatives down in London. It is clear from the precursor to the reshuffle that Mary Mulligan is intent on continuing the fight, but there is no change in policy: the Executive is attempting to drive through its will against the mood and the wishes of the people, which is unacceptable. We had the unedifying spectacle—indeed, the humiliating spectacle—of an elected minister of the Scottish Parliament having to go down south, cap in hand, after having been summoned to answer for his sins. It is unacceptable that that should happen, given that all members of this Parliament are supposed to be rising to the occasion and to be raising their game. If the reshuffle was supposed to signal a shift in policy, it would be the Executive's right to choose whomsoever it wishes, but when the reshuffle is simply a shuffling of the pack to continue the Executive's failed policies, that is unacceptable. It is the duty of the Opposition to oppose the reshuffle. In seeking to act irresponsibly, the  Executive is abusing its rights. What was the precursor to the change in the Administration? It was Mary Mulligan's resignation. Why did she resign? Because she wishes to continue the fight against policies that the Executive is imposing—policies that are opposed by people but which the Executive is forcing on them.

Not at the moment. What about the changes that have been made? The First Minister has simply moved around his most loyal supporters. Surely we are supposed to have a Cabinet of the Executive, not a version of Lanarkshire friends reunited—albeit in a different environment? Appointment to the Cabinet is supposed to be based on ability and talent, not on servility and biddability. It serves Parliament ill that the Executive seeks to impose its will in such a manner. What have the two strands of the coalition done? The Lib Dems claim that they are making the difference, but what difference are they making on health policy? We saw their party leader Charles Kennedy wax lyrical about the inadequacies of the Executive, but we now see the Lib Dems propping up and maintaining not only a shift in policy but the continuation of a Cabinet that is intent on enforcing that policy. Are they going to kowtow to Mr McConnell or are they going to accept the directions of their party leader? Propping up a failed administration is unacceptable for the Lib Dems. They are equally culpable and their sins will not be forgiven. What about the First Minister? He has spoken in this chamber about raising the game. Everybody has taken cognisance of that. I am not aware of anyone from any party who does not accept it. However, it is equally incumbent upon him to raise his game, but he is singularly not doing that. He is not imposing new ministers in order to improve matters; he is rewarding those who have failed by reassigning them. He is not bringing in fresh talent to drive forward new policies; he is seeking to drive forward the policies that have failed miserably in order to secure the support of his own back benchers, never mind anybody else. In raising his game, the First Minister has to remember that this is not North Lanarkshire Council, nor is it Strathclyde Regional Council writ large. This is the debating chamber of the national Parliament of Scotland—he has a duty to act accordingly. He talks about Scotland being the best small nation in the world, but all we can say is, "Not a chance under this Administration." We oppose the motion.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I think that you have already been given intimation of this point of order, which relates specifically to the Education Maintenance Allowances (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2004 and more generally to how members go about annulling a negative instrument. Earlier this week, I was advised that these regulations could exclude refugees, asylum seekers and children without parents from being able to claim benefits. Clearly, I will pursue that matter in another forum. The difficulty that I want to highlight arose when I sought to lodge an annulment motion to the regulations. At this point, I should say that I am grateful to the Deputy First Minister for discussing the matter with me and acknowledge the difficulties that he is facing. However, I was advised that, at this particular juncture, I would be required to lodge the motion of annulment by 4 pm, which would have meant that the Enterprise and Culture Committee would have had to convene with a quorum tomorrow to deal with the matter. Although I understand that we need timescales, I ask you to reflect on the suggestion that, if a member lodges a motion of annulment, the clock should stop ticking. Instead of having to convene a committee outwith the normal timeframe, we could simply place the matter on the committee's agenda to be dealt with at the next appropriate time. I have not lodged a motion of annulment, because the practicalities of convening the committee tomorrow militate against that course of action. However, other members will no doubt face the same problem at some point. As a result, can we seek a review of the procedures for annulling negative instruments?

I have some sympathy with the points that Bill Aitken makes on the bill being a lawyer's paradise, but even the common law is subject to that criticism and we sometimes simply have to rectify law that we created as a reaction to a specific issue. For example, legislation was brought in to deal with the possession of weapons, which was viewed as a significant problem, because we wished to highlight the fact that the common law was dealing with it inadequately. It became a beanfeast for lawyers debating what length a knife had to be before it fitted the definition, but we closed down the loopholes through legislation. There will be problems with the definition of emergencies, but if we create the legislation, we can deal with the problems that will arise anyway.

I welcome the minister's comments and the bill. I also pay tribute to his willingness to take on board the committee's comments. The committee is to be commended for its work and I am grateful that the minister has taken cognisance of many of its points. It is clear that we face two problems in addressing the issue, one legal and the other social, as the minister said. The number of people involved is not necessarily huge, but the consequences of their actions are substantial. Anecdotal evidence appears to show that there is an increase in the problem. Such behaviour is a danger to those who are trying to do their job, it is a threat to those who are being attended to or assisted, and it is simply unacceptable. The issue is not simply legislative, but cultural. The bill will not be a panacea, but it does two things. First, it gives additional protection to those who are entitled to it. It is fundamental that we give such people the fullest protection that we can so that they can do their jobs properly. Secondly, the  bill gives a clear message that this legislature, on behalf of the society that it represents, views such antisocial behaviour as intolerable and unacceptable and affirms that those who carry it out will be dealt with severely. Emergency workers have a difficult enough task without their work being interfered with by loutish behaviour. They do their jobs to assist members of the public or to follow the policy directions that we make. They are entitled to the full protection that we can give them. The debate on whether the problem is a legislative or a social one was touched on in committee; it is clearly both. A variety of organisations, such as the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates, have commented that we already have sufficient powers. That is true. We have common law powers and can create aggravated offences that can be referred to in the libel. All that is clear and we sympathise with that position. We are creating more and more law, and the more complex it is, the greater the likelihood of calamity. We must be clear that the law requires to be understood by all and not simply by the few. If we continue producing legislation ad infinitum, codification is ultimately essential. However, I do not think that we have reached that stage yet. We must make it clear that there are two main reasons for the bill. First, attacks on emergency workers are symptomatic of a social malaise. Secondly, in enacting the bill, we will make it clear from the top down that such behaviour is unacceptable and that change must come from the bottom up. We have seen that before, to some extent, in the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, which the bill is partly attempting to replicate. We made it clear when we brought in that act that it was unacceptable to assault or impede a police officer in the exercise of his duty. The offence was not regarded as an aggravation of an assault or a breach of the peace, but as a specific offence that society viewed as intolerable. That has resulted in plea bargaining in an attempt to avoid conviction, which is not necessarily to be denigrated. It is part of the system in which we operate. However, the 1967 act made it clear that impeding or assaulting an officer is unacceptable. To some extent, the comments made to the committee by the Prison Officers Association Scotland touched on that. There is no easy way; no legislative silver bullet. The minister commented correctly on that. The bill is part a multifaceted attack that we must make on unacceptable behaviour, if we are to ensure that it does not continue to fester. Sadly, there are people in our society who view uniforms as an incitement, service vehicles as legitimate targets and badges as a provocation. They are simply anti-authority, or against those whom they  perceive as representing authority. Such people are nihilistic and antisocial and it is our duty as a legislature to send out the message that their behaviour is simply intolerable, that they must desist from it and that we are determined to act against it. As I said earlier, I think that the committee has done a vital job. The bill is well intentioned, even if aspects of it are flawed and require to be addressed. Our bill process has three stages and we are only at stage 1. However, it is to be appreciated that the minister has accepted many of the points made in the report, because it is important in a unicameral parliament that we get matters right. My colleagues will touch on some other matters, but there are specific issues that I wish to make clear. Paragraph 118 of the committee's report refers to mens rea and it is important that we clear that up and simplify it. It is absurd if we are required to have an element of corroboration that an officer or paramedic was assaulted in the course of their duty. We must create a circumstance in which it is sufficient that a letter or form of authority from a chief constable, or the director or chief executive of a health board, confirms that emergency workers are members of their staff and, therefore, were acting in the course of their duty. There is no requirement for two people to be cited to speak to that. A certificate must be available to avoid that circumstance and we must take that on board. On the Prison Officers Association's position, we are open to persuasion. I can see an argument both ways, because a prison officer is simply doing his duty, but he is doing a duty with which we entrust him and he is entitled to be protected whether he is in the private sector or in the public sector. If need be, we must ensure that that protection is given. I also welcome the minister's comments on social workers. I was contacted by the chief executive of the social work department in the City of Edinburgh Council, who informed me that, from January to September this year, 222 incidents of assault on social work staff have been recorded: 95 reports of injury, from minor bruising through to general pain and soreness; and 127 reports of no physical injury. A total of 53 incidents were reported to the police, which is unacceptable. There are circumstances—such as dealing with mental health issues or enforcing place-of-safety orders—in which we put the social work staff in the line of fire, whether or not they are accompanied by police officers. If we entrust them with that responsibility, it is our duty to ensure that we give them the maximum protection, and that is why I welcome the minister's comments that he will take on board the points that the committee raised.  The SNP hopes that the minister will learn, and will reflect on the points that my colleagues and the committee have made, but we welcome the bill as a step towards ending antisocial behaviour towards those who carry out difficult and dangerous jobs.

The minister is correct in saying that TIE has done a commendable job to date. However, given the national importance of the issue, should we not set up a strategic organisation, such as a transport agency or some other executive agency, to deal with the matter, rather than leaving it to a company that was set up and is owned and operated by the City of Edinburgh Council?

I congratulate Margaret Smith on the motion, which raises a matter of great importance, not just for her constituency of Edinburgh West, but beyond. I disagree with nothing that she said. We must balance the needs and wants of Edinburgh airport with other interests, such as those of the Royal Highland Centre and the people in Cramond or Kirkliston. The airport is vital, not only because of the aeroplanes and services, but because of the land bank that is adjacent to it, which is important to the economy of west Edinburgh, which is fundamental to the economy of the city of Edinburgh. Clearly, the economy of Edinburgh is at present the dynamo of the Scottish economy to an extent. All those matters are interlinked and we must address them. The airport has transformed Edinburgh and Scotland for the better. We must now recognise that we are part of a global economy, that we are a small nation on the periphery of Europe and that we must trade and attract tourism to survive. Therefore, as has been said ofttimes by me and others, we need to be accessible, but at an affordable price. The airport has come a long way since it was called Turnhouse—I am sure that some members remember that. The transformation in car parking and the new flights, especially to continental destinations, have been of great benefit to the city. The airport must continue to grow. Like Margaret Smith and Brian Monteith, I am sceptical whether  the exponential growth in aviation can continue. We cannot simply extend the line on the graph and say that, because growth has been at a certain rate until now, it will continue at that rate until 2020. As Margaret Smith pointed out, oil prices, finite resources and a variety of changing patterns will affect the situation. That does not mean that we should not have a plan B but, at the end of the day, we must take cognisance of the fact that it is unlikely that growth will continue at the present rate. As Margaret Smith mentioned, we do not want airport growth to continue at the present rate. There must be significant change. Although I would like more direct flights from Edinburgh, I recognise that aviation comes at an environmental cost and that we need to strike a balance. We must increase the number of direct flights to European destinations and reduce the number of flights to London that are taken simply to pick up a connecting flight. That cannot continue and it must be addressed. Fundamental to addressing that is the improvement of rail links to London. People almost have to take a flight to London because of the perceived difficulties with the rail service, which must be addressed. If people are simply picking up a flight to go elsewhere, it makes no sense either personally or economically to wait about and change at a London airport. That must be addressed. We must also deal with Margaret Smith's points about other aspects that enhance the quality of life, not just in Edinburgh West, but throughout central Scotland and elsewhere. The Royal Highland Centre provides a significant boon and benefit to that community and we cannot ignore that. It seems at present that we have an irresistible force against an immoveable object, and we need to broker some settlement. The points that Margaret Smith made about shared parking seem to me to be eminently sensible and ought to be considered. We also have to take cognisance of the fact that the increase in aviation has a significant impact on the people whom Margaret Smith represents in areas such as Kirkliston and Cramond, and on those outwith her constituency in places such as Ladywell, in Bristow Muldoon's constituency. We have to get that balance, but the airport is vital and must continue to be vital. We need to recognise the importance of that area for the growth not just of the city of Edinburgh but of the economy of Scotland, and we must address the balance of resources and the balance of interests.

I put on record my thanks to Trish Godman for securing this debate. It is appropriate both that we should debate this subject and that it should be a members' business debate. With some issues that we discuss and are required to address in the chamber, there is a clear and specific problem to which we know the solution. For example, with the Tenements (Scotland) Bill that we passed earlier, we were aware of the problem and have now introduced legislation that will deal with, if not all of it, then the bulk of it. However, other problems in our society do not have such clear-cut solutions. In these cases, we know that there is a significant problem and that the ground is changing around our feet, but much of what we require to do does not simply involve legislating against drug use or dealing effectively with those who are peddling drugs. Instead, we need to address the fact that there must be a cultural change. That said, it is much more difficult, if not impossible, to legislate for a cultural change. Anyone of any political party or none who says that they know the solution to the drugs problem in our society—no matter whether we are talking about alcohol or narcotics—is either a fool or a liar. Although we must acknowledge that the problem is multifaceted, we also need a cultural change in our society in order to address it. After all, matters have moved on. Many others have given anecdotal evidence. I live quite close to the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration headquarters in Edinburgh and I know one of the major safeguarders in the administration, who told me that in the decade or so in which they have been practising, matters have moved on. For example, whereas children would come before the administration as victims of  neglect or abusive parents, now they are coming as victims of parents with drug problems. The problem has changed our whole society and we must address it. There is no magic bullet. We will have to address matters and take on board the points made by members about rehab and resources, but we have to tackle the problem. We also have to move on from stating that it is simply a question of going to war against those who are dealing in drugs. We can go to war against drugs, but it is a war that we are losing. Nor is it simply a matter of addressing those who are part of a criminal fraternity; it goes beyond that. I am always minded of reading what Chomsky wrote about the composition of the cocaine that is sold on the streets of the United States of America. Something like 97 per cent of the ingredients of the cocaine that is sold on the streets of America are manufactured in the United States, trans-shipped to Columbia, reassembled into cocaine and sent back. The problem is not with Columbian campesinos; the problem is a societal matter within the United States. We can go to war with Afghanis growing poppies or with Columbian campesinos doing the same, or we can address the fact that there is a societal problem that we need to tackle. It is quite correct to say that there is not just a problem with narcotics; there is also a problem with alcohol. Scotland has to take social responsibility for many of its problems. Some of those we will be able to deal with by legislation and some we will have to deal with by introducing welfare provision, whether through rehab or otherwise, but others need to be addressed by a cultural change that recognises that it is a problem that we face as a community and as individuals. We must recognise that individuals, too, have to take responsibility for their actions. It is also important that we address the question of children. In any war there are non-combatant casualties and, in the war on drugs, the non-combatant casualties are clearly the children of those who are drug dependent or who are alcohol abusers. They did not wage war in any shape or form, but they fundamentally pay the price, either through their parents' neglect or through what happens to their parents as a result of what we as a society do to deal with their problem, whether by incarcerating them or otherwise. Unless we are prepared to address a cycle of despair, we must tackle that problem. As many have said, those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it. Unless we address the problems of children from families that are drug or alcohol dependent, we will simply continue the cycle of delinquency and despair, and that is why the matter has to be addressed. Some areas will no doubt be dealt with by the  legislative action that the minister will comment on, but Scotland, all its politicians and all its people have to start thinking anew and start addressing a cultural malaise in our society.

Following on from what Margaret Curran said about the work of civil servants, I want to say that they have, in many instances, been maligned unfairly. I was contemplating the points that were made on amendment 22A and, on reflection, I would say that the advice of officials to the minister was correct and that my political judgment was incorrect. I had forgotten about the scenario of a transfer upon death. It may be unlikely that such a dispute would arise, but I accept that the advice given to the minister was correct and that my political judgment was wrong. We should acknowledge that the civil service does an excellent job.  It may not be a hair-shirt mentality, but we have been making a great deal of the fact that this chamber has been pilloried. However, it is now about moving on and making legislation in Scotland. It may not be earth-shattering stuff, but it is stuff of considerable importance. Without this institution, it is likely that we would only have got round to addressing these matters—in some form of consolidated act—some five or 10 years in the future. We would not have been able to address a matter that is of fundamental importance for many people. It is not earth-shattering to the economy, and it does not knock Scotland and the world off its axis, but it does make a significant improvement for many people and for the general community. Tenements are an important part of Scottish life. They are not unique to Scotland but they are a distinctive part of life. If it was not for the tenement, our whole culture and society would not necessarily have evolved as it has. However, society has changed, which is why this legislation is necessary. There are now more student flats, not only in Edinburgh but in many places where universities and colleges have grown up. There is also the growth of buying to let. As a result, in many stairs in which a common repair is needed it is not possible for people to meet their neighbours. That is not because society has moved on and people do not interact as we did before, when people lived together; it is because people simply do not know who the other owners are, because they are absentee landlords—they are elsewhere. We have to address that problem. We have to be able to litigate properly, rather than ending up in court because there has been a stairheid rammy after people got upset. A significant amount of money can be involved. This legislation is important. As I said earlier when we were debating the amendments, it will not necessarily take the risk out of purchasing a property. That risk will always be there. However, we must have transparency and the right to proceed when there are problems. The minister was right to oppose the points made by Mr Canavan. We should try to resolve matters through mediation, because nobody wishes to go to court. The first stage should be to see whether everybody in the stair can meet together and agree. If that cannot be done, we should see whether there can be some formal mediation system in which some attempt at brokering can be made—with either local or central Government involvement. If that fails, we have to be able to have recourse to litigation, because substantial amounts of money can be involved. We can never ensure that there will not be a risk of a bill being left outstanding or of absentee  landlords or others not paying their share. When that happens, there will have to be litigation. However, we can ensure that people know their rights and have a clear recourse to litigation. That is why we have no hesitation in saying that we fully support this bill. I again put on record my error of judgment and my recognition that the civil servants got it right.

I concur with the points that Annabel Goldie made; the amendments to section 11 are welcome. We can never make the purchase of property risk free—given the circumstances and costs involved, there will always be difficulties—but the law can seek to make matters as transparent as possible and to make information readily available so that people can find out what the factual situation is and can get a clear remedy as quickly as possible. That is the purpose of section 11, and it is greatly welcome. On the points that Annabel Goldie made on her amendment 22A, I had the opportunity of discussing matters with the minister, and I will be supporting the amendment. The minister may be technically correct in saying that matters are addressed and clarified in the schedule, but terminology is important. People do not like to have to look at schedules to find out what is being referred to. The terminology of missives is quite clear in Scots law, and it is understood, not just by practising lawyers but by those who participate in the process, that there are two aspects to the purchasing of property: the conclusion of missives and the creation of the contract and, subsequently, the handing over of the property and the passing on of the money. The minister is correct to say that that is referred to in the schedule, and it could be argued that the nomenclature change proposed by Miss Goldie is superfluous, but it is important that matters are as clear as possible. Section 11 should be as transparent as possible, and we  should make clear the position to which we refer, without having to flick through several pages. The minister may be legally correct, but in the interests of clarity and transparency Miss Goldie's amendment 22A is welcome. It will not undermine the ethos of the bill, but it will make the bill more accessible to lawyers and other practitioners who flick through it, by making it clear that risk transfers when missives are concluded.

Like Annabel Goldie, Pauline McNeill and others, the Scottish National Party is sympathetic to what Mr Canavan proposed. There is a significant number of areas, not only in Falkirk, where there are problems. I am grateful to the minister for taking time to discuss matters with me and for letting me hear the Executive's position. Our view is that it would be wrong to embark on a parallel course of action to that approach. It appears that ombudsmen are a last court of appeal to some extent; they are involved after mediation has been tried, after litigation has taken place and where there is no other avenue or recourse for an individual. To have a parallel route might simply create more problems. What is important is that, as the minister has assured me, we will initially attempt to deal with matters by mediation. If that is unsuccessful, there will be the right to litigation, but to have a further right of appeal to an ombudsman after that is not required. If, at some stage in future, it is felt that an ombudsman is required because mediation has been attempted and has failed and litigation has been tried and been unsuccessful, perhaps there should be an ombudsman. The idea that we could justify yet another ombudsman in a small country dealing with a limited number of cases seems to  me to be untenable, but the role could be considered as part of an overall ombudsman for individual rights. We must take cognisance of the valid points that Mr Canavan made. I am in tune with the Executive's approach that mediation should initially be tried. If that fails, there is litigation. That is the way to settle disputes, not a twin-track approach that may result in greater difficulties.

As others have said, it is a pleasure to participate in this historic debate. The chamber is a magnificent auditorium and it is certainly incumbent on us all to fulfil its potential and, perhaps more importantly, the hopes and expectations of our nation and people. I participated in the closing debate on the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill, as did the minister who will be summing up for the Executive. I said then, say now, and echo Nicola Sturgeon who said earlier that we will support the Executive where it seeks to deliver and we will seek to assist it; however, the debate in the chamber must move on from  what was done in the building of Holyrood to what is done in the Holyrood building. The First Minister is right to call for us to raise our game—that applies to each and every one of us: to the Administration and to the Opposition, as well as to ministers and back benchers. As others have said, the people of Scotland tried us and found us wanting in the old chamber, and we must go forward and improve. Things have to be better, but we cannot legislate for a culture change, nor can we impose respect rather than earn it. That means that the chamber has to deliver: members must raise their game, but the Executive needs to have vision and ambition. After all, this is our national Parliament, not our regional assembly, and the Executive must act and be treated accordingly. We need to have specific actions and substance, not superficial proposals and spin. We need action on the economy and in our society, and we need to take action at home and abroad. It was right and proper that we should express our condolences to the people of Beslan and of Russia. However, on international matters, we need to be able to do more than just send sympathy. It is not enough to send condolences; we must be proactive, which we were not in that chamber up the road when we allowed matters to roll out that had significant consequences for huge areas of the gulf and for our own people, many of whom died. We have to take political, fiscal and social responsibility. The economy and community matters are important. As Nicola Sturgeon said earlier, much is worthy—we cannot dispute that. The points made about a Gaelic language bill were made with great sympathy and sentiment, but we have a situation in which we are proposing a Gaelic language bill, yet the Parliament—never mind the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport—has no powers over broadcasting. If we want to preserve a language in an anglophone culture, we require powers over broadcasting. That issue must be addressed. Mr Brown was critical and said that the SNP campaigns only for independence, but it does not. We believe that the matter can be dealt with by a referendum and that the people of Scotland should be given the opportunity to decide whether they want to be an independent nation, but if we are to deliver, to improve and to raise our game, we have to expand and enhance the powers of the Parliament, and I will give the chamber many opportunities to discuss that. In the Liberal Democrat ranks, a great deal is being said about what is happening in our communities. Comment has been made by others, including my colleague Nicola Sturgeon, about what is happening in health and about communities being damaged by hospitals being  closed or people being moved around the country willy-nilly and over great distances, whether from Edinburgh to West Lothian and back, as mentioned by Bristow Muldoon, or as has happened across the Clyde. It is not just in the area of health that our communities are being attacked. The Liberal Democrats are going strong on what is happening to our sub-post offices and to the Post Office as an institution. This Parliament has no powers or influence on that whatever. Whether it be in a rural or an urban area—as many Edinburgh MSPs from other political parties have pointed out—the closure of a post office is of huge significance and can damage the local economy. We need to expand the powers of this Parliament.

Of course the issue is about policy, but the problems in our post offices have been driven by the Westminster Government. It has undermined our post offices by shifting benefits payments and by forcing closures because of the privatisation agenda of the henchmen whom it put in to undermine that wonderful institution. We should preserve, support and enhance the Post Office rather than simply wring our hands and lament it. On the economy, little was said. Tourism is a major industry, but not one comment was made on tourism until Jamie McGrigor mentioned it. The most important thing that we could do for the Highlands and Islands is something of which we would be capable without any additional powers: Inverness airport is wholly owned by the First Minister, but he offered no proposals to allow the PFI to be bought out, to allow low-cost carriers to fly in or to allow the Highlands and Islands of Scotland to compete on a level playing field with its competitors elsewhere. Tourism is affected not only by accessibility but by affordability. We have high levels of value-added tax, a high pound and high fuel costs, yet not one of those issues is being addressed. Unless the Executive seeks to up its game as a Government, our tourism industry will continue to be hamstrung and face difficulties and it will not progress as it should given the wonderful product that we have. Scotland has not only a magnificent Parliament to visit but magnificent scenery and other architectural matters elsewhere. Doubtless, transport will be mentioned in the minister's speech that will follow mine. Reference has already been made to transport, but not to the  important issue that transcends all other transport matters at present, which is fuel. Fuel underpins the whole of our economy, but no one from the Executive has mentioned how the crisis in fuel will be addressed. Fuel prices are approaching the level at which we saw significant discontent arise several years back, yet nothing is being done about them. The situation is that we live on an island that is oil rich. I cannot remember which Labour member mentioned the possibility—I think that it was Richard Baker—but Aberdeen should progress to become Europe's energy capital. Given the value of North sea oil and the fact that we are oil rich with Scotland's oil—which has been going for a generation and will run for a generation or two more—and that we have never seen the Exchequer fuller, is it not ridiculous that the price of petrol has never been higher and the extent of fuel poverty never deeper? Until such time as we can address the problems brought about by high fuel prices, we will not address the various aspects of poverty and we will undermine our economy. For a small nation located on Europe's periphery to have the most expensive fuel prices in the developed world is barking mad. We wish the Executive well and we will support it in its endeavours to deliver, but we need to move forward—not necessarily to independence just yet, as that will be dealt with in a referendum—to a situation in which the Parliament's powers are enhanced. We need those powers if we are to address matters that range from the Post Office to the price of petrol, so that we are able to deliver what our people want.

Following the tone and tenor of the minister's speech, I pay tribute to all those who have been involved in bringing the bill to where we find it today. In particular, I thank Bill Butler, the other members of the bill committee and the committee clerks. Given that the development has been promoted not only during the tenure of the current Minister for Transport but through those of previous ministers—both those who are still members of the Parliament and those who are not—I thank Nicol Stephen and his predecessors for driving the issue forward. The bill is something that we should be rightly proud of. Three important aspects must be mentioned. First, this is an historic event. As the minister and Mr Butler said, there is important symbolism in the bill being the last legislation that we will deal with in this chamber. Secondly, our procedures need to be considered. Thirdly, we require to consider our future aspirations for the reopened Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line. As the minister correctly commented, it is logical that the line be extended to the port of Rosyth. On the historic nature of the occasion, it is apt and symbolic that our final deliberations are on a positive and constructive bill that has come to fruition during both the current and the previous parliamentary sessions and during the tenure of current and previous transport ministers. The bill has rightly been supported by all parties. Much of our work in the chamber is deliberative in nature,  so it is a change to deal with a bill that is about delivery. That is something that we can be rightly proud of. It also allows us to end on a note of consensus rather than controversy. Much that has gone on in the chamber has brought this institution into disrepute—sometimes justifiably, sometimes unjustifiably—but our leaving this chamber to move to the new one is an historic opportunity to relaunch the Scottish Parliament. I therefore think that we should take cognisance of the fact that we are finishing on a constructive note and go forward to the new chamber trying to build upon that. It is important that we consider procedures. To be fair to the minister, it has been acknowledged that our current procedures are not appropriate. To be fair to the Executive, matters are now being addressed in relation to how we consider planning overall. This summer, we will move not only into a new chamber but into a Parliament that has, I hope, enhanced powers over rail. We believe that the powers are coming, but there is a debate about the extent to which they will come and whether funds will be made available that will allow us to do anything of substance. It is to be hoped that the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway will be the first of many such improvements that we and future Parliaments will be able to build on. We cannot go on dealing with such developments using the private bill process, so we must consider new methods of doing so. The minister has already commented on that and Bristow Muldoon, in his role as convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee, has also pursued the issue. With Richard Baker's knowledge of private bill procedure, the Procedures Committee must find a better way of proceeding with such matters in order to ensure that we can continue to deliver. It is right to dwell on the blessings that the railway will bring to Alloa; other members have commented on the improvements that will affect not only people along the rail link but those who will benefit from the capacity that will be freed up on the Forth rail bridge. There are significant log-jam problems that limit the number of trains that cross the bridge, which has an adverse effect on transport in Fife. The new railway will provide an opportunity to remedy many such wrongs. The minister is to be praised for taking cognisance of the requirement to roll the railway into Rosyth. Trans-European network grants and funding have recently been provided to areas not just in the rest of Europe but within the United Kingdom. Some of those areas are, in fact, competitors for what the port at Rosyth can offer. A press release was published just last month announcing European Union funding for rail and road projects, and I note that a trans-European programme of 30 projects will receive EU funding.  Those projects include a rail corridor that will link Dublin, Belfast and Larne, road and rail links from Hull to Liverpool, a rail line from Felixstowe to Nuneaton and a rail line from Crewe to Holyhead. The port of Rosyth hopes to benefit from being on a land bridge that will create an opportunity for goods that are manufactured or created in Northern Ireland to be trans-shipped through the north channel, which is important to the south-west of Scotland, and on to Rosyth. If we do not allow the land bridge to be united, with a significant part of that bridge being a rail link, we will not be competitive. If exporters can access direct rail links at Holyhead or Liverpool through the ports of Larne or Dún Laoghaire in Ireland, they will use them. Unless we link the rail route to Rosyth, we will not just undermine the rail network that we are constructing in Stirling, Alloa and Rosyth, we will fundamentally undermine the port of Stranraer and the other north channel ports, because it will be significantly easier to export goods through Larne or Dún Laoghaire by rail to connect to sister ports and related ports such as Holyhead or Liverpool. The logical extension of that argument is that we should not see the passage of the bill and the construction of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway as the end of the process. Rather, we should take the next step, which is to roll the railway into the port of Rosyth to allow the trans-shipping opportunities that I described. We can look back with some satisfaction on our scrutiny of the bill. This is the last formal debate in this chamber—although the final debate will be members' business—and we can end on a positive and constructive note. I hope that all of us will take cognisance of the points that have been raised and that we will go forward leaving behind us some of the difficulties that we have had in this chamber and ready to make a fresh start in September.

In general, I welcome the review, which must have two aspects: it must address specific matters relating to the nature and terms and conditions of the job—which I will return to briefly—and it must address the nature and philosophy of what social  work will do in the early part of the 21 st century. It is important that those points are addressed. On the specifics, there are two important matters. First, there has to be a McCrone-type review of social work. It is clear that there are problems, which we must address, with salaries and with staff being pinched by other local authorities. I ask the minister to take those problems on board and to confirm that they will be a specific aspect of the review. Secondly, there is the question whether criminal justice social work should become a separate department. That would be a fundamental mistake, although it is important that we address that issue. Criminal justice social work does not exist in isolation. Those who commit crimes tend to come from situations and backgrounds on which a variety of issues have an impact. It is not just about people having a propensity to commit crime; it is also about underlying social problems, such as mental health problems and poverty. Those issues require to be viewed in the round, and we must address not just the individual who is incarcerated, but the circumstances from which they have evolved or in which their families find themselves. We must address the fact that the issues cannot be dealt with properly in isolation. It is important at this juncture that we address the underlying philosophy of what we expect from our social work departments. They act not in isolation, but in accordance with the rules and regulations put out by us as a legislature and by the Executive and under guidance and guidelines from social work departments. It is important that we recognise that social work practice relates to the society in which we live, which has evolved substantially since the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 was passed. Scott Barrie was right to comment on that piece of legislation, to which I will return in a few minutes. Three key factors come to mind, the first of which is the issue of drugs. As members have said in numerous debates, drugs are a major factor in our society, not just in terms of their interface with the criminal justice system but because they impact substantially on social work services. More kids than ever before are being taken into care or are coming before children's panels, not as a result of neglect but primarily because of drug abuse or because their parents are under the influence of drugs. Although drugs have changed our society, our society has not evolved to deal with the problem. Social work requires to act differently in order to take cognisance of the change that has taken place. Secondly, there is the question of the longevity of the human race. We are reaching a point in our society at which the question is not simply one of what we are going to do with granny but what we  are going to do with great-granny. That point was touched on by Mary Scanlon and others in their references to the care commission. I repeat that the nature of the society in which we live is not the same as the nature of society back in 1968. Thirdly, there is the question of the dislocation of communities. We have a society that is much more mobile, and with that mobility comes fracturing and fragmenting not only of the family unit or the family circle but of the communities in which people live. That factor impacts on the ability of social work departments to deliver. We require an underlying philosophical review of what we expect our social work departments to do. Social work is nothing new: it is something that has been with us since time immemorial, not just since the 1968 act. What changed in the 1960s, however, was the recognition of social work as a state responsibility. In years gone by, social work was done by the clan or the community or by the parish minister or priest. If parents died or were sick, communities took children in. In 1968, it was recognised that, because of the changes that were happening in our society, social work required to be formalised so that the state could take responsibility nationally or locally. It was further recognised that the previous structures—whether in communities or through the church—would not be able to deal with the scale of the problems and that it was appropriate that the state should act. As I said earlier, the three key factors in the debate are drugs, longevity and dislocation of communities. Our society has moved on and it is important for us to work out what we expect our social work departments to do. I take issue with Mary Scanlon's point about privatisation. It would not add anything to the review to have that hare running about. We do not want to see the privatisation of departments in any shape or form. I am prepared to accept that it is not necessarily better to have services delivered by the state—whether by a local department or by a national department. We should be prepared to accept that if a voluntary sector body can deliver services that are as good as or better than those that the state can deliver, whether at the local level or at the national level, that body should be funded to deliver those services. My only provisos are that the body does not seek to impose values that are not accepted by the overarching state ethos and that it is subject to monitoring and scrutiny. I say no to privatisation. What matters is not who delivers, but the end-product for the end user and the betterment of society. It is important that we address the specifics through a McCrone-style review. The hiving off of the criminal justice aspect needs to be addressed  in any review of social workers' salaries and terms and conditions of employment. Fundamentally and for the sake of our social workers, we need to define what we believe society needs in the 21 st century. Our society is much more complicated nowadays. We owe it to our social workers to provide the overarching definition of what their job entails in the 21 st century.

Does the First Minister accept that the award of the franchise to FirstGroup creates a monopoly situation in much of the country? Given that, quite properly, we regulate the rail industry to protect the public interest, is it not time to reregulate the bus industry to protect commuters and travellers?

International refugee week is significant throughout the world. Therefore, it is appropriate that it be recognised in this chamber. I am grateful to members who have supported it and I publicly thank the Scottish Refugee Council, the Refugee Survival Trust and myriad others not only for their assistance in preparation for this debate but, more important, for their care of refugees at home and abroad. I should comment at the outset on two matters. First, the debate takes place in the shadow of events in Sudan where, because of war, famine and destitution once again stalk the continent of Africa. Many will fall and the fortunate will flee. It is our duty to play our part in their care; refugees from that land and from elsewhere must be made welcome. The debate also comes in the shadow of the European elections in which, sadly, almost 100,000 people in our country voted for parties that are either covertly fascist or overtly anti-immigrant. We like to think that we are all Jock Tamson's bairns and that we are devoid of the racism that manifests itself elsewhere. However, that was always delusional, given historical events from the slave trade to the establishment of the British empire, which show that some of our people are no different from people elsewhere and that they are equally possessed of reprehensible attitudes. As well as addressing the refugee crisis without, we must guard against a cancer within. Migration is perceived as being a 21 st century phenomenon; it is a major humanitarian issue throughout the world and a major political issue within all lands. However, refugees are not new. They have been with us from time immemorial.  The fact is that the Scotland in which we live has been created and crafted by migrants and refugees throughout history. Scots, after all, are universally accepted as being a mongrel race. Within the city of Edinburgh, refugees from other lands have helped to make it a capital to be proud of. Were it not for migrants fleeing persecution or seeking economic advancement, the cosmopolitan nature—never mind the commercial success—of the city would never have been achieved. From Valvona & Crolla through Ukrainian churches and Polish clubs to Hibernian Football Club, we have living testimony to the people from many lands who have all come and contributed in a variety of ways to our capital city. The Scotland that we know and cherish would not be but for the contribution that has been made throughout the centuries by people from many lands and different cultural backgrounds—and still they come. Their places of origin may change, but the drivers of their arrival are the same. There is a push me, pull me effect with refugees: some are fleeing war and destitution while others come seeking salvation and opportunity. With regard to the former, it is our moral duty to address the needs and wants of those who flee war or famine. Any failure to do that demeans us as a nation and tarnishes our common humanity—a humanity that we in Scotland are proud to have personified in our national bard and in his immortal words: "That Man to Man the warld o'er, Shall brothers be for a' that." With regard to the latter group, to seek economic improvement is no crime; indeed, it is a virtue that we seek to extol in Parliament in addressing an underperforming economy. For people to do so by leaving their native land cannot be criticised by anyone from those shores. People whose forefathers and foremothers left the ports of Greenock and Cork in search of a new world cannot reject others who do likewise—those who do either have no knowledge of history, or choose to have selective amnesia. Many people in Scotland would do well to remember that Scotland's loss has been America's and Canada's gain and that, likewise, people's migration here will be to our social and economic benefit. It is important to note that refugees do not come empty-handed: as our kith and kin built a new world, they contribute to ours. They not only bring cultural diversity, but add commercial drive. There is currently a dichotomy between Westminster legislative impediments and Scottish Executive desires. That must be overcome for the sakes both of Scots and of refugees. A recent Executive study of refugees and asylum seekers indicated the huge potential that those individuals have, never mind the pool of labour that they offer to a country that faces severe skills shortages.  Fifty per cent of them are educated to college degree level or above, 20 per cent hold a doctorate or postgraduate degree and 10 per cent speak four languages or more. Each and all of those talents are badly required in the modern Scotland that we in Parliament seek to create. Those are skills that they possess and that we desire, so blanket restrictions on employment and working serve us badly, and them likewise. I seek not to berate the Executive—we are debating a members' business motion, on which we seek to achieve cross-party consensus—but to call for it to be more self-confident in its actions and to recognise the necessity of viewing Scotland's national needs differently from those south of the border, and in so doing to allow us to address our international responsibilities and obligations distinctly. To address the needs of refugees is not charity, but common humanity, which also offers significant social, cultural and economic advantages for our own small nation.

I thank the minister for the courtesy copies of his statement and the white paper. Scottish National Party members agree with much of what he said but, as is often the case with the Executive, more has been left unspecified than has been stated. Will he assure us that, following the demise of SPT, which means the end of a body that has served the west of Scotland well, adequate powers and resources will be available for the new agency, never mind the regional bodies? Will he confirm that, to prevent the national agency from being simply a rebranding of the Scottish Executive's roads divisions, it will receive the rail  powers that Network Rail and the Strategic Rail Authority possess, together with the requisite share of finance? Will similar powers that are available to other bodies, or the ability to direct and instruct United Kingdom organisations, be transferred in respect of air and maritime matters?

Like other members, I congratulate Trish Godman not simply on the motion that she lodged, but on the terms of her speech. In Parliament, there are occasions on which matters transcend narrow party interests and a national position is achieved. In this evening's debate, we are not talking only about a national interest, because the second world war was fought between the forces of democracy and decency and those of evil and darkness. We should not forget that. We can criticise present and, indeed, past actions of the Governments of the United Kingdom, of the United States or of any other democracy, but at least they are democratically elected and we can take measures to deal with them; they most certainly never perpetrated the Holocaust. We should remember that, if the sacrifices in question had not been made, the world would have been vastly different and that that would have been to the detriment of all humanity, not just of those people who, tragically, fell under Nazism. There are other factors that we must remember as D day fades into memory and as people pass not just into history, but from this life. We must remember that, with the Holocaust, the motto is never forget. We must remind ourselves continually of what happened because—as history says—those who forget it are bound to commit such actions again. We must take that on board. We must acknowledge that there were two specific reasons for the sacrifices that were made on D day. That generation made sacrifices not just to win the war, but to win the peace. At the end of the day, the war was not fought simply to defeat Nazism; it was fought to defeat Nazism and to create a better world. Mark Ballard's point was valid—it was symbolic that the German Chancellor was at the events to mark the 60 th anniversary of D day, because the war was not just about winning the battle; it was about winning ultimately by creating a better world. It is correct that people should say that the battle of Stalingrad was probably of greater importance than D day was in turning the tide but, if we look back on history, it is clear that had the allies not been prepared to land, the Russian forces would have moved onward. When the Red Army came, many countries would not have experienced liberation day; the iron curtain that came down might have extended from the Elbe to the English channel. Many people who would have lived under  a changed tyranny, whether in Latvia in Poland, would have lost out. The D-day sacrifices were made to ensure that our ally fighting on the eastern front did not exchange one form of totalitarianism for another. Those sacrifices had to be made. That is not to underestimate or downplay the significance to the second world war of the battle of Stalingrad, but it was important that the allies made the D-day landing. Their sacrifices were made to ensure that many people in central and western Europe avoided exchanging one form of totalitarianism for another. Sacrifices were also made in winning the peace. The D-day generation was prepared to forsake its present for a better tomorrow. There was no clamouring for continual tax cuts, because there was investment in infrastructure, health care and education. As a child of the 1960s, I am a product of what my parents' and my grandparents' generation delivered. They ensured that every school that I went to was ultimately a new school, even if it was in an old building when I enrolled. They ensured that the health facilities that I used were modern and were always being upgraded. They did that not by clamouring continually for themselves, but by seeking to create a better world for future generations. That state of affairs has not been rolled back by any one particular party; to some extent, all of us are culpable in what we have allowed to happen. The generations that follow the D-day generation have a duty to remember the sacrifice that was made, not just in war but in peace. The only comment that I will make about the elections is that I do not advocate a vote tomorrow for new Labour under Tony Blair. I do not forget, however, that I am a product of what was created by Clement Attlee and his Labour Government following an historic victory back in 1945. I acknowledge the debt of gratitude that I owe them. Neither should we forget the sacrifices that were made in war or in peace in respect of the blood that was spilled or the work that was done to bring the country back together for the future of our children and their children's children. We must never forget.

I support the SNP amendment, because I think that it is important that, in participating in the debate, members should make a realistic assessment of the outcome. We need to focus on strategies and solutions rather than on flattery and fawning. We must recognise the requirement to have a vision and the need for the structures and strategy that go with that. Fundamentally, such a strategy must be predicated on a realistic assessment of the situation. We come back to Scotland's perennial debate on whether the glass is half full or half empty. It is perhaps important that we take the perspective that the glass is half full. After all, nobody else will  stand up and speak for Scotland. If our country cannot rely upon its own parliamentarians, on whom can it rely? It is also important that any strategy is not based on a false perspective. If there are problems, it would be a mistake to deny them by trying to wash away or wish away the negatives. Clearly, some areas of the Highlands and Islands are doing well. Inverness is doing exceedingly well. In many ways, it has been a victim of its own success. I refer not only to the promotion of its football team but to its traffic chaos and house prices. However, such success is not replicated throughout the Highlands and Islands. Some areas are facing significant problems, ranging from rural depopulation to low wages and other aspects. We need to address those. We must also take cognisance of the need to look globally. With the expansion of the European Union eastwards, the Highlands and Islands finds itself on the EU's north-west periphery, facing competition from the many new lands therein. We need to recognise that Inverness needs to compete not simply with Inverbervie but with the likes of Galway in the west of Ireland and Oulu in Finland. Perhaps Maureen Macmillan could consider that in the context of what she said about broadband roll-out. I wish the minister well with where we are going, but we have a long way to go if we are to achieve Oulu's join-up rates. Given the need for the Highlands and Islands to see itself competing on a global basis, we need to deal with two matters that affect competition. First, we cannot make matters worse. As Jamie McGrigor mentioned, if we continue to price ourselves out of the market through high fuel costs, we have 10 new accession states that will take our place. All the accession countries compete with the United Kingdom, and many of them compete with the Highlands and Islands in particular, yet currently our fuel costs are by far the highest of any of them. Fuel in Scotland is significantly more expensive than in other areas, and it is 50 per cent more expensive than in Latvia. We cannot allow that to continue without making it uncompetitive for firms to locate in and carry out their business in the Highlands and Islands. Secondly, we need to take cognisance of global competition and other factors. As others have mentioned, that means that transport links are very important. One thing that must be re-examined is the private finance initiative scheme for the terminal in the Highlands and Islands. I recognise that the Executive has acknowledged that that is an issue, but we need to move towards a solution. We will not get anywhere by apportioning blame. Hindsight is a great thing, but  the PFI scheme for the terminal was entered into before the take-off or lift-off of the low-cost carrier market. Apportioning blame will take us nowhere. Given the Civil Aviation Authority stats, which show that Inverness had a total of 54 scheduled international passengers in March 2004, we need to recognise that Inverness will not be able to compete globally with those numbers. We need a solution. We also need to consider how we can maximise the advantages of the geography of the Highlands and Islands—the minister mentioned the Scapa Flow development—and minimise its disadvantages. We could minimise the disadvantages if we stopped continually upping the price of diesel, which is fundamental to the movement of goods. We should maximise the advantages by going hell for leather for the Scapa development and by improving transport links. As Mr Fraser correctly said, we need to dual the A9, which is the spine of Scotland. We must recognise that. We need a joined-up vision that is shared by all members throughout the Parliament because the solution will not be delivered in one session by one Executive. Like the developments that were delivered by Tom Johnston and others, the solution will take many years and many Executives, but it can be done.

I, too, congratulate my colleague on securing the debate and I congratulate Thistle Television on its launch and, I hope, its success. I agree fully with most of the points that have been made. There is clearly a dichotomy—although we live in a global age and a shrinking world, there is a desire for diversity, albeit in an age of homogeneity. I do not see any difficulty in our being able to straddle the divide if sufficient action is taken with the structures being provided, and some limited funds being made available. Some people want to be able to access MTV. I may not be of that generation but, in the earlier debate, I agreed with the minister on the benefits of hosting the MTV Europe music awards in Scotland. People in this country and elsewhere can enjoy soap operas and whatever but, even in this age of globalisation, they wish to retain their own individuality and identity. They want local news, local sports content and local stories. There should be no difficulty in balancing the benefits of what is available on the global market with the ability to retain people's individual identities. As Margaret Mitchell pointed out, it is clear that the issue has two aspects: it is about jobs and it is about culture. It is important that we retain our cultural identity; I believe that a market exists and that people actually want to access it. We have to create a level playing field. If we do not, we will—as Chris Ballance and others have said—leave things to the Fox TVs and the Berlusconis and we will end up with a homogenised television service that people will see wherever they live in the world. I do not think that people want that; they want to be able to pick and choose. They want to access MTV, "EastEnders", "Crossroads" or whatever, but also to maintain their individual culture and identity. The issue is also fundamentally about jobs. In Scotland, we are blessed with media schools that are highly successful. Glasgow Caledonian University and the University of Stirling in particular are spewing out media graduates, but the tragedy is that the number of jobs for them in Scotland is insufficient because we have not created the market. Once again, the nation is failing both to access the talents that it is producing and to build on the talents of the youngsters from elsewhere who come here to study but who, after studying and learning, depart to utilise their skills elsewhere. We as a nation are losing out and we need to address that. Radio Telefís Éireann, for example, employs about 2,000 people in Dublin, which is substantially more than the number of people who are employed in any media centre in Scotland. In  Spiddal, a small village outside Galway, Teilifis na Gaelige has a work force of 80—never mind the fact that additional media companies live off TG4 in that area. That amounts to a significantly higher number than are employed by all the media put together in the city of Inverness. The Inverness media companies would not be able to match the number of people who are employed by TG4, which also has outlets for sport, not in Spiddal or in Galway, but down in the Irish Gaeltacht in Waterford. We are missing a trick there. Those companies are not there simply to be subsidised. In Ireland, although it is recognised that they should be supported so that they retain an Irish identity and—certainly in relation to TG4—nurture the Irish language, they have to exist and compete in a global world. Therefore, they are told not just to defend the cultural values and benefits of being Irish, but to try to utilise and sell their products globally. They are managing to do that. As well as being able to visit TG4, I was able to visit a company that is called Telegael, which has just won an Emmy. That shows that, even in small areas of western Ireland, it is possible to compete globally if one has the necessary resources and talents. I do not know whether Thistle Television will ever aspire to winning an Emmy, but unless we give it the opportunity by encouraging it and letting it develop, it will not do so. I believe sincerely that what has been done in Ireland can be replicated here; we must do it. It is vital that we address the changes that Chris Ballance commented on. Ofcom is changing and the BBC will not remain the same. Although I do not want to get into a constitutional debate, I think that we cannot continue with a minister for culture who has no control or influence over the biggest of the mass media—television—which has a fundamental effect on our culture. The fact that the Scottish Parliament cannot get involved in what is happening at the BBC or in Ofcom means that we have significant difficulties, not just in addressing possible economic benefits, but in addressing cultural problems. That matter will have to be debated. The issue is not purely constitutional; it is not just about repatriation of powers. If we want to retain our culture rather than just plug the gaps in Scottish Opera, for example, we must have control and influence over the biggest of the mass media. If we want to create the number of jobs that have been created in Dublin, Canada, New Zealand and elsewhere, we must have such control and influence. All those things can be done, but we need to address the present situation. It is a matter of adding value locally. At the end of the day, we need to give a modest amount of assistance to companies like Thistle Television. They should be capable of doing what Telegael has done, which is to provide an excellent local  service that retains the individuality and identity that people want, allows them to pick and choose—to switch off Thistle Television to watch "Eastenders" or whatever else—and, at the same time, provides jobs. It should be possible for a Scottish company to emulate Telegael's feat of winning an Emmy. We need to provide assistance and, in due course, to consider changing the structure so that we can provide the opportunity for economic growth while preserving our cultural identity in a global world.

The minister said nothing with which I would seek to disagree. On the SNP benches, we normally dispute the requirement for motherhood and apple pie motions. In this instance, it is fair to say that it may be important for us to acknowledge, as a country, the importance of events and festivals. We also need to recognise and accept that they do not just metamorphose on their own and that, on occasion, familiarity breeds contempt. Those of us who reside in the city of Edinburgh, for example, seem to take for granted that there will be an Edinburgh international festival or an Edinburgh's Hogmanay. We think that somehow or other everything will be all right on the night. Clearly, a considerable amount of work goes into such events and it is only fair that it be acknowledged. The minister is correct to say that Scotland is doing well. We have a duty to talk ourselves up when we are doing well, but although we are doing well, we can certainly do better. The minister is also correct to acknowledge that we have to compete globally for events, many of which are competed for not only within the United Kingdom but throughout Europe or globally. To achieve and build upon success, as we have done to date, we must not rest on our laurels, but consider how we can add to and improve our product. It is important that the duty to sell Scotland is not seen as something for the national tourist board alone but for all of us in Scotland; the minister touched on that at the end of his speech. It is most certainly the duty of parliamentarians and the national Parliament. It is our responsibility to talk up Scotland, to give credit where credit is due and to take action where necessary to ensure that we can improve on our record. It is also important that we congratulate those who have done the work in that respect to date, as the minister did in his speech. It is clear that festivals and events act as significant draws to local areas and to the nation as a whole. It is also clear that they provide substantial income and added value and that they contribute to the culture and vibrancy of communities, cities and Scotland as a whole. We have to build on and act on that. In the global age in which we find ourselves—in which travel is much easier—it is important that we  acknowledge the tourist trade's recognition that the destination is no longer enough. Instead, tourists now look for a purpose that will take them to a destination. Simply to sell Edinburgh as a wonderful city with a castle is no longer adequate when tourists can travel just as cheaply—in many instances more cheaply—to Prague or Tallinn. It is not enough for us simply to say that we have wonderful Highlands and Islands when tourists can also easily access South Island in New Zealand. In a world with cheap global connections, it is not enough for us simply to say that we have great destinations: many other cities, communities and countries have equally wonderful destinations and assets to sell and promote. In many instances, we have to provide an additional reason for tourists to come to Edinburgh: they will not come simply because it is a majestic city with a wonderful castle, but they will come because of the fantastic festivals that are now promoted throughout the year. Tourists will visit Glasgow not only because of the city, but because of the international piping festival, which allows people the benefit of visiting the city with an added something special that might take their fancy. We have to look to our laurels and recognise that vital aspect. We must also recognise that not all events and festivals relate to arts and sport and that business tourism also falls into that category. We must consider not only the success of the Edinburgh International Conference Centre and Glasgow's Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre, but that of Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre. The Scottish National Party recently held a meeting at AECC and I know that the minister attended the 2004 VisitScotland expo that was held in that wonderful facility. Venues like EICC, SECC and AECC are competing for business events not only with other venues in Scotland, but in a global marketplace. We have to add value to their efforts. Clearly, many events are not mounted on such a grand scale as those that go on in Aberdeen, Edinburgh or Glasgow, nor are they sporting or artistic events such as the Edinburgh festivals or the European champions league cup final that was brought so successfully to Glasgow recently. Many such events take place in small communities. As Nanette Milne mentioned in her reference to Aberdeen international youth festival, in towns and villages throughout Scotland, significant events take place that add considerable benefit to their localities. I am thinking of book festivals—one of my Green colleagues has lodged a motion on the Wigtown book town festival. Events such as that give added value and we must consider them. Clearly, Scotland has to aspire and to have ambition. The minister was correct to comment on that. Just because we fail once does not mean  that we should not try again. I know that we will have to take a raincheck on whether we proceed for Euro 2012, but the fact that we missed out on our Ryder cup bid means only that we must persist and try again. Edinburgh lost out in the Heineken cup, but it has to try again; I hope that it will succeed. Certainly, the same thing happened with the rugby league challenge cup. Further efforts will be made, even though the bid that was submitted last year was unsuccessful. We must recognise that there are limits. There is a general perception in athletics that a population of 4 or 5 million—not for a nation, but for a city—is required to host grand prix athletic events, so there must be realism in what we bid for. No one would suggest that Scotland should seek to host the Olympics. In the global world in which we live, the Olympic host nation must be of a certain size. Even with co-operation between Edinburgh and Glasgow, the Olympics will remain outwith our league, but that does not mean that we should not have aspiration and ambition. Our major criticism relates to EventScotland. Why is that organisation needed, given that such matters were previously dealt with successfully by Glasgow City Council, the City of Edinburgh Council and tourist boards, local or national? We believe that in many instances the stumbling block was a lack of funding. Let us abolish EventScotland. It may have been introduced with a worthy intention, but our tourism industry has just undergone a review in order to slim it down from numerous area tourist boards to a VisitScotland that will allow us to focus and market Scottish tourism. We do not require a plethora of events. We were doing well under the old regime, but we could do even better under a new one that would allow local, national, public and private bodies that have the incentive to do so to bring in and maximise the benefits of arts, business, communications and other events. The stumbling block for Scotland is the question of affordability and accessibility. We need to add value to the efforts of those who wish to host events successfully, but we must make our country affordable and accessible. Given that we face spiralling costs, we must acknowledge that our major problem is the high pound, high VAT and high fuel prices. We should acknowledge and build on the success that we have today. I move amendment S2M-1341.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the success of the festivals and events throughout Scotland over many years, created and contributed to by a variety of organisations, whether central or local government, national or area tourist boards or private or public bodies; notes that the impediment to further success has been a shortage of funds and that the creation of an additional and unnecessary tier of bureaucracy is not the solution, and calls for the abolition of EventScotland and  the creation of an event fund for appropriate organisations and bodies to access in order to continue and build upon the success to date."

The First Minister will undoubtedly agree that the collapse of the airline Duo Airways was a blow for travellers and employees in Scotland. Does he agree that in the creation of new direct routes, some turbulence must be expected? If so, will he confirm that the route development fund will continue, albeit with a review of its payment methods and operation? Will he undertake to seek new operators for the highly successful routes that operated from Edinburgh to the likes of Oslo, Geneva and Munich?

As is customary, I congratulate Duncan McNeil and his colleagues, particularly Johann Lamont, on the motion. It may be composite, but it is apt and  appropriate that we should discuss it. The motion raises broader issues of disabled access, although it focuses on one specific issue with which there is an on-going problem. People might suggest that, in the grand scheme of the affairs of state, the issue is not important, but the Parliament must be judged not only on its work on major statutes, but on what it does on a variety of matters that impact significantly on people's day-to-day lives. Many disabled people, or carers for disabled people, suffer substantially as a result of the problem. I agree with many of the points that have been made. The issue is part of a broader problem with the orange-badge scheme and other systems that have been introduced. There is a perception that many badges and spaces are obtained fraudulently and that there is on-going abuse. When we speak to organisations that represent the rights of disabled people and their carers, such as Capability Scotland, we find that the reasons behind that perception usually boil down to anecdotal evidence: somebody has seen people who are fit and able bodied, who have all their limbs and who appear perfectly normal, coming out of vehicles that have been parked in disabled parking spaces. That ignores the fact that those people could be carers or could have a disease that does not necessitate the use of a wheelchair or any other form of assistance, but that restricts their movement or ability to walk, so that, although they may appear outwardly healthy, they are incapable of walking significant distances. Such perceptions are a cultural problem. The points that Duncan McNeil and Johann Lamont made are correct and it is important that we should discuss the matter. As the minister will doubtless say in his response, we must decide whether to deal with the matter simply through education or whether we need to introduce specific legislation. That matter will have to be debated. Political leaders will have to give a signal that the abuse of disabled parking is unacceptable. However, if the individuals who carry out the abuse will not learn the lesson, will not listen to others and are not capable of understanding the difficulties that the disabled community faces, the matter may have to be dealt with by legislation. That is a matter of balance and the minister will doubtless refer to it in due course. Duncan McNeil mentioned the difficulties for organisations such as supermarkets that do their best to cater for customers with disabilities who wish to park. Johann Lamont also made the good point that it is not only disabled parking bays that are abused; the provisions made for people with young children are also abused. That issue is just as important as the abuse of disabled parking bays and it causes equal difficulties. I understand the difficulties that many combines and supermarkets will have in deciding whether it is  their job to participate in enforcement and whether they wish to lose custom by plastering cars with "Don't park here" signs or whatever else other organisations, such as the University of Edinburgh, do to those who, to their cost, are recalcitrant and abuse the system. Many retailers will make that judgment call and decide that enforcement is not necessarily in their commercial interest. That is why it is important that the topic has been raised. It should be made clear that people are given disabled badges only after a great deal of consideration and that the badges are not granted on a whim. The badges must be respected, because they allow disabled people to participate in actions that we view as basic and normal. If people abuse disabled parking, society should say from the top down that such behaviour is unacceptable and will be addressed. It is a matter for the minister to decide whether we should consider legislation. That judgment will need to be made on the basis of the statistics that groups such as the one that Duncan McNeil mentioned are taking. If the abuse is not being addressed, we will need to consider extending the powers of the authorities that can enforce the system, because it is becoming clear that many organisations will not self-enforce. The judgment is whether we can achieve cultural change through education or whether we will have to extend the powers of those who can act to address the abuse. Once again, I congratulate the drafters of the composite motion. It is important that we should get the message out that the abuse of disabled parking spaces is antisocial behaviour and will not be accepted.

I assure you, Presiding Officer, that I will be judicious in my use of language in this debate.

I will enter into the spat between Miss Goldie and Ms Baillie on the stats. A great deal of sense has been spoken. The statistics are not new. It is almost 25 years since I embarked on a traineeship as a solicitor in Glasgow in a criminal defence firm, and the statistics were as bad then as they are now. The blame does not lie with one Government, past or present. To some extent, the statistics are a mark of shame on all society. I do not wish to exculpate the Executive, but reoffending is a major issue, and the Executive deserves credit for addressing it. However, it is not promoting any action. We stand for election to implement a manifesto. The Executive is correct to consult, because it is important to do so in a democracy—we do not wish to have tyranny by the majority—but it is important that at some stage we stop the talking and start the action, as Nicola Sturgeon said. At the end of the day, we know roughly where we have to go—it was mentioned by Jackie Baillie and others—we know what action has to be taken, and we have to have the political courage to take it.

Absolutely not. There is a time and a place for consultation, but there is a time  when it has to stop and action has to be delivered. We are keeping our options open regarding the single correctional agency. Consultation should take place on that. However, if we recognise that there is a fundamental problem with the number of people who are going to prison, and a failure to examine alternatives, we have to take action. That brings me to the statistics, which are shameful. We all recognise that we have a demographic problem, in that we have a declining number of young people. With that declining number of young people, we should see a decline in the rate of offending. Any criminologist would say that. The expected decline in the rate of offending is not unusual or peculiar to Scotland; it goes with the terrain. However, the statistics are clear that, notwithstanding the reduction in the number of young people in our community, more people are going into prison. Something fundamental is wrong. One reason for that situation is drugs, which have changed matters fundamentally. I see that the Minister for Justice agrees with that. Drugs have changed the nature of the game. I no longer practise law, but I have held discussions with criminal lawyers and people who are involved in the protection of children and children's services, and they all accept that things have moved on and that drugs are a fundamental problem. We will not solve the drugs problem in our society simply by locking up more and more people. That is not to say that, in many instances, people who take drugs should not be put in prison to protect the public and for retribution. However, the situation has changed, and we are putting far too many people behind bars who should be dealt with differently. Those people are not just female offenders or people who cannot pay their fines, but people who have a drug problem. We must address that situation, because it is a social problem, not a criminal justice problem. I disagree with Mr Harvie when he says that retribution should not apply. I do not mean that we should go down the route of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, and replicate Saudi Arabian justice. The purpose of having community service orders, compensation orders and the ability to impose fines is to recognise that society has a right to say, "You have transgressed. You have acted in a way that is unacceptable. Not only do we wish to stop you and ensure that you do not reoffend, but we wish you to make recompense to your fellow citizens who have suffered as a result of your behaviour." I see nothing outrageous or unreasonable in that.

I was referring to the purpose of community service orders and compensation orders. A community is not paid back when a prison sentence is given, although it often receives protection. I have had the misfortune to represent sociopathic people from whom society needs to be protected. If Patrick Harvie does not realise that some people in our society are highly dangerous and need to be incarcerated not only for our protection, but for their protection, he needs to make a deeper investigation of the social problems that exist. My other criticism of the Executive is on the idea of a single correctional agency, on which I am not sold. As a representative of the city of Edinburgh, I am aware of the City of Edinburgh Council's proposal along the lines of, "Let's kick the social work department." I admit that, in 20-odd years as a lawyer, I gave the social work department a fair kicking at times. People frequently attack social work departments; they are seldom defended. However, the matter must be viewed holistically. I worry that if we put criminal justice social work in prisons together with the prisons agency, we may not realise the necessity for holistic social work that looks outside the prison walls to the family, drug use and so on. A single agency might replicate some of the problems that may arise in Edinburgh as a result of the Labour group's proposed changes in the social work department. Politicians frequently abuse such departments—I am as culpable as anyone—but it is about time that we had the courage to defend them and protect the broader benefits of their work.

Mr Watson referred to this debate and to previous debates that have taken place. A difficulty appears to be that in each of those debates, members have discussed the next debate that is to come. In the debate on EU enlargement, many members spent their time discussing the terms of the negotiations on the constitution. In this debate, in which we are debating the terms that we should negotiate for the constitution, some members—Mr Kerr and Mr Lyon in particular—have debated whether we should support the constitution, suggesting that our support should be absolutely arbitrary and confirmed. For the avoidance of doubt, I make it clear to Mr Fraser that fishing is a major red-line issue for us and that we are highlighting that issue because of its importance to the Scottish people. That does not mean that we will not consider the fine print and detail of other issues and address them—that is taken as read. I take issue with what Mr Kerr and Mr Lyon in particular have said. Whatever he may have said in an intervention, Mr Lyon appeared to argue that  the decision was whether one was for or against the constitution and that the decision should be made now. To me, that appears utterly preposterous. We are entering negotiations that will be not only multinational but multilateral, and we do not know what the outcome of those negotiations will be. Until there have been negotiations, a commitment cannot be made. We do not know what question will be put to the people—indeed, it seems to be a matter of debate whether the question will be put by Mr Blair or whether it will come from the Electoral Commission; that matter must be addressed, too. However, it would be utterly bizarre to take a fixed position before we have seen the final position that has been negotiated with the various members of the European Union. The debate started with my colleague Nicola Sturgeon making clear the three points that the SNP views as important: the reason why the Parliament has a role; the importance of our taking action; and why there is an opportunity. She made it clear that our role is important because it is our duty and right to defend our national interest. She made it clear that it is important to address the issue of fishing because the First Minister is failing to attend to it and has left us with the status quo, which the majority of people in this country believe is entirely unacceptable. She also made it clear that Tony Blair's weakness is our opportunity. In response, Andy Kerr gave us the usual diatribe about the importance of being represented by a large nation state and about only the big countries in the European Union getting good deals. I am always surprised when such views are regurgitated by Labour members in particular, because others in Labour's serried ranks frequently say that the Celtic tiger metamorphosed only as a result of the fantastic deal that it managed to negotiate with Europe and all the spondulicks that come to it as a result of Europe bailing it out. I do not know who negotiated the wonderful deal that Wendy Alexander and others have mentioned. Perhaps Germany represented Ireland or the United Kingdom took it under its wing, but it would appear impossible that a small, independent nation in the European Union such as Ireland—which is even smaller than Scotland—managed to achieve such a tremendous deal.

The difficulty is that the new deal continues while Ireland's gross domestic product far surpasses ours, and the situation is not getting any better. Ireland is overtaking us and leaving us far behind. A warning will come on Saturday.  Where Ireland has gone, other nations, such as Estonia, Lithunia, Latvia and Poland, will also venture, unless we take steps. Mr Kerr also seemed to suggest that the EU could implode and that there could be intense difficulties, but that is utter nonsense. It is clear that the position that is being put forward by Mr Blair, into which we wish to insert a Scottish agenda, must also be addressed by Denmark, Sweden, Poland and other nations that have a Eurosceptic position and which would have great difficulty in winning a referendum if they chose to have one. It was not surprising that Robin Harper's party was not represented by his colleague from the north-east because the points that Robin Harper made about the fishing industry are certainly not what we have heard on the streets of Fraserburgh and Peterhead. When he has a pot shot not only at the scientists and the politicians but, by implication, at those who fish for a livelihood, he should remember that the perception in the north-east is not that Europe has created a free-for-all, but that Europe has given F-all. That is the major cause of controversy on the streets.

Not at the moment. What Tommy Sheridan said was dealt with by Irene Oldfather and fundamentally addressed by my colleague Alasdair Morgan. Mr Sheridan described the European Union as undemocratic, corrupt and an insatiable monster. Such language is better, and more frequently, used in connection with the Soviet Union rather than the European Union. There are problems in the European Union and there is a democratic deficit, but to view it as an insatiable monster is utterly absurd. As Alasdair Morgan said, it has been of benefit in bringing peace to the European continent and in moving the EU on from being an economic union to becoming a union that is also social.

I accept that. However, to an extent, the major problems that social democracies face in the modern world come from the WTO and the general agreement on trade in services. The best way to address such problems is transnationally rather than simply one nation, no matter how big or small it is or whether it is Scotland, the United Kingdom, Albania or North Korea, acting alone. I and people in other political parties have always been concerned that the SSP's hostility to Europe leaves many on the  democratic left and in social democratic parties throughout north and south Europe aghast and perplexed. My colleague Richard Lochhead made an excellent and lucid contribution—there is a bit of flattery—on the importance of addressing the issue of fishing in the context of the constitution. An opportunity exists. With respect to fishing, the status quo is unacceptable. We have an opportunity to ensure that the First Minister stands up and takes action rather than simply acquiesces. I think that Mr Kerr suggested that a discussion or a phone call between Jack Straw and SNP members was not up to much, but such a discussion would probably be more significant than discussions between Jack Straw and Dick Cheney or, when it comes to the actions of Ariel Sharon, discussions between George Bush and Tony Blair. International negotiations take place in a variety of ways. As we approach 1 May, we must be clear. There will be a debate in the months and years to come about whether we should vote for the constitution. Currently, there is an opportunity to decide what the terms of and conditions in the constitution will be. We must defend Scotland's interests. What greater responsibility rests on a national Parliament than that of standing up and representing the people and their issues? If we pass that responsibility back and pass the buck, a decision will be taken over which Scotland will have had no influence. Given the importance to Scotland of the interests and circumstances that are involved, we should support the motion and support partaking rather than spectating. We should seek to ensure that Scotland and our major national interests in the fishing industry are represented. When we have seen the final deal, we should decide at that juncture and in discussions whether we are for or against the constitution. At the moment, it is the duty of all, particularly the First Minister, to stand up for Scotland and to negotiate the best deal, especially on the fundamental issue of fishing.

This debate is about EU enlargement, not about the EU constitution. We are in danger of being sidetracked. The criticisms regarding the  nomenclature of the debate are rather unfair. This is, after all, a committee debate. It is part of the terrain that we try to achieve a broad consensus. In some aspects, it is important to try to maximise the consensus, especially when we are talking about the national interest and not a narrow party interest. In this case, very little has been said about EU enlargement by the minister, or by my colleagues, with which I would disagree. I think that such consensus is a good thing. Putting the emphasis on the EU constitution is detracting from the debate. That issue will be decided on, and voted on, as it should be. I personally disagree with the emphasis of Chirac and Fischler and with where they would like to take us; I much prefer the position of the Finns and others on levels of responsibility. Such issues will be discussed in the months and perhaps even the years to come. At the moment, we are talking about EU enlargement, which will happen within a matter of days. I believe that enlargement is a good thing. We should view it as an opportunity and not as an obstacle. There are two reasons for that. One is the broad effect that enlargement will have on Europe; the other is the internal opportunities that we will have. One is external and one is internal. The external issues have been touched on by others. It is good that we are expanding the borders of Europe—not only bringing in the former Soviet states that are now liberated rather than occupied, but bringing in other places in the Mediterranean and elsewhere. For too long, Europe suffered from an iron curtain; we cannot allow the iron curtain to become an economic curtain. I believe that Jean Monnet and the others who wanted to enhance Europe and see it as a bulwark against war are quite correct. The continent was scarred by two world wars in the previous century; indeed, it has been scarred since the days of Charlemagne by conflict stretching over the millennia. That must cease. The best way of ensuring peace and stability for not only our generation but future generations is to enlarge and enhance the European Union. Simply moving the border from the Oder and Neisse to the Elbe would be fundamentally wrong if we kept things as a cosy economic club for only those members that were fortunate enough to enter it originally. If we did so, we would simply be turning the River Elbe, and indeed any other such natural barrier, into a European version of the Rio Grande and would end up throwing back our equivalent of wetbacks. We would be trying to keep out economic migrants trying to do better for themselves. Europe would simply be an economic cartel.  Going forward will be beneficial for Europe and for Scotland. Of course there are risks but, as Nicola Sturgeon correctly pointed out, the real problems in economic movement, jobs and outsourcing come as a result of globalisation and not as a result of the enlargement of the European Union. Companies are outsourcing not only from countries such as Scotland, but from countries such as the Czech Republic, Bulgaria and Romania. The way to address that is for us to view Europe as an opportunity. Europe does not need to mimic the United States. It can be not just an economic union but a social union. For too long, Europe has been viewed with hostility by the left when, in fact, it offers an opportunity for those who sign up to social democracy—whether from a north European perspective or a broader European perspective. We must regard Europe not just as an opportunity to ensure that we address questions of security and stability in case of war, but as an economic opportunity. We must ensure that we can compete with the United States and south-east Asia. More important, in competition with the United States we must not simply allow ourselves to replicate their devil-take-the-hindmost attitude. We can balance economic prosperity with the social provisions that are necessary in a democratic, fair and just society. We must see enlargement as an opportunity for a better Europe. We should go in willingly, not grudgingly. We should see enlargement as an opportunity, not an obstacle.

Is the member aware that the latest studies from Finland show that more people are likely to move from Finland to Estonia than from Estonia to Finland? Rather than concentrate on alarmist scaremongering about Slovakian Gypsies, we should see that we will benefit from in-bound skilled labour and that as many people are as likely to move elsewhere. The alarmist scaremongering is absolute nonsense.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether security will be increased at consulates and other major buildings in Edinburgh as a result of recent world events and what the cost of such increased security would be. (S2O-1869)

The minister will be aware that the costs of policing such matters in a capital city  are currently being met by the council tax payer in the city of Edinburgh, who is paying higher council tax rates yet is receiving a poorer police service. Does he accept that, as well as capital city status for the nation, Edinburgh requires capital city status for its police to ensure that matters are fully dealt with and that the council tax payer does not have to pay an undue amount and receive a poorer service?

Like Annabel Goldie, I declare that I am a member of the Law Society of Scotland, albeit a non-practising one. I, too, welcome the report from Sheriff Principal McInnes and his committee. We need to recognise that we are in the 21 st century by making changes and moving forward. We must consider the difference between perception and reality. Perception is often as important as reality—there is a perception about aloofness which, in many instances, is borne out by the facts and a perception that the guilty go free—but the reality in many instances is that our system works well, although it needs to be amended, improved and built on. That, rather than knocking down and reconstructing the system, is what Sheriff Principal McInnes seeks to do Although we are dealing with summary justice and not solemn matters, that does not mean that we are not talking about serious offences. Even low-level crime that is committed over a period of time can have serious effects on individuals and communities. Given that we are dealing with summary justice, we must strike the right balance between individual rights and state responsibilities, between access to justice and affordable justice and between local input and national criteria and standards. To be fair, I should add that Sheriff Principal McInnes has tried to do that. Obviously, the major point of discussion has been the question of lay justices and summary sheriffs. To some extent, I am agnostic on the matter. The issue has to be discussed and debated, as is evident by the fact that a minority report was published expressing a different opinion. There are views each way and I can see advantages and disadvantages. I do not know why we should necessarily take a one-size-fits-all approach. There must be a possibility of leaving systems open and flexible. After all, we still have stipendiary magistrates in Glasgow—if they ever existed anywhere else, they performed only a minor role. One approach could be taken in rural areas and another could be taken  in urban areas, for example. Urban areas have access to the qualified pool of summary sheriffs, as they have been described, but that is not the case in rural areas such as Dornoch, where summary sheriffs would not be easily obtainable. Balancing that is the fact that, in many urban areas, people have less desire to make an input because of the size of the community, whereas, in a rural area, there is a desire to get involved, because cases take on greater significance. Therefore, my only plea is that we should not take a one-size-fits-all approach and that we should leave open the possibility for areas to take different routes if they express a desire to do so. I believe that, if that happened, there would likely be a difference between urban and rural areas because of the availability of local sheriffs in urban areas and because of the desire for local input in rural areas. We should accept that. Many of the recommendations in the report do not require consolidated legislation or new legislation. They are—to avoid legalese—no-brainers. We do not have to go back to the beginning, because the changes that the report recommends are ones that the public and the professions have been calling for. There should be movement on fixed-penalty notices. Although we need to penalise people, we do not necessarily have to do so in the same way as we have been doing. We can decriminalise some things and still have the same effect. Let us press on with that. I doubt whether police officers need to continue submitting standardised reports to the procurator fiscal, given that we are in the 21 st century and have access to modern technology such as mobile phones. Such changes do not require the same legislative process as more complex changes. The consensus that I believe exists in the Parliament would enable the Executive to drive on and make the necessary changes in order to deal with the more substantive matters in other ways. Those other matters will require discussion. Presumably, legislation will be required to deal with the new appeals procedure, but that, too, seems to be a no-brainer to some extent. We recognise that we have to maximise the usefulness of our highly paid and qualified judges and allow certain matters to be dealt with in different ways. The only point that I will make in that regard is that, if we ask a silly question, we get a silly answer; therefore, if we ask for a social inquiry report in a murder case, we should not be surprised if we get a silly response. For goodness' sake, in such instances, we should lighten up and recognise that, if a social inquiry report that we have asked for clearly cannot be implemented, we should not blame the social worker but change the system. I believe that we should agree to park the  matters that we can all agree on and debate the other issues in greater detail.

Four years on and four ministers later, many more questions than answers remain. The additional marketing funding is welcome, as are some of the directional changes, but I note that the funding is still less than it was two years ago and that VisitScotland will still be heavily outspent by Tourism Ireland, which is our major competitor. VisitScotland must become a lean marketing machine, not a tourism police force or tourism bureaucracy. The abolition of having to pay for the privilege of selling Scotland is long overdue. However, will the minister tell us who will sell Scotland abroad? Will that be done by VisitScotland or VisitBritain? In the absence of agreement between them, who will decide?

The minister will be aware that the specification to the consultants from Babtie Group Ltd is based on a state-of-the-art scheme that includes full electrification. Although that is laudable, such a specification is likely to make the scheme substantially more expensive than it would be if it were of a more basic and utilitarian nature. Will he ensure that the decision on the scheme is based not simply on the costings of the state-of-the-art scheme but on alternative costings for a more utilitarian scheme, which might in fact be more deliverable?

As is customary, I congratulate the member on securing the debate. It is particularly appropriate, because it is important to have tourism on the agenda. Tourism is an industry that has been beleaguered, often for reasons outwith its control, such as foot and mouth and 9/11. It is on record as being Scotland's biggest industry and spans a substantial part of our country geographically and of our people individually. The website, visitscotland.com, is one aspect of the industry. It is of significant interest to many big hoteliers and, it must be said, of significant concern to many small operators. I agree absolutely with Nora Radcliffe that there should be an e-tourism portal for Scotland. We are in the 21 st century. To some extent, the internet is the medium of the 21 st century and we must use it. Should the e-tourism portal have been designed by the private sector? Absolutely: Ossian was not working and clearly the best people to design it were those with the expertise to do so. Should the  e-tourism portal be owned and operated by the private sector? Absolutely not: I disagree with the circumstances in which we find ourselves. I appreciate that the matter was not in the control of the current minister, but it is a matter of regret that it was driven ideologically by the Executive. No alternative was given to VisitScotland to consider the matter in another way. What we did was to sell out the e-tourism portal to the highest bidder. Having done so, we now find ourselves in the position that we are in today. There are those who suggest that we should sell off the e-tourism portal and start again, but that is blue-sky thinking. In the interim, we must try to resolve the problem in the interests of all. We must give credit where credit is due, despite the difficulties that many small operators, in particular, are having with visitscotland.com. My experience is that, even if visitscotland.com staff are unable to explain all of the difficulties, they go out of their way to clarify visitscotland.com's position and where it is coming from. Although that might not satisfy people, at least the effort and endeavour are being made. I noticed that in dealings that I had on matters that included English as a foreign language. We must ensure that matters are addressed. Nora Radcliffe raised the problems that relate to AOL, which must be dealt with. We must also address other matters to allay the worries and fears of small operators in particular. I am thinking not only of the small operators in rural Scotland—they, as opposed to the major hotel operators, are the backbone of the industry—but of the small guest house owners in the city of Edinburgh, in my constituency, who feel most aggrieved. I congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing the debate. The SNP position is that we should not be in the situation that we are in today but now that we are, we must try to resolve matters. It is not sufficient simply to leave matters to visitscotland.com, which, we must remember, acts in the national interest. It must be brought to account and we must work collectively for the national interest.

I thank the minister for discussing and agreeing the terms of the motion that we are debating today. It is appropriate that when the national game is being debated in the national Parliament we should try to achieve a national consensus. Scottish football finds itself in troubled times. The list of clubs in financial trouble reads like an excerpt from a hall of fame. More may follow those that have already been engulfed. Others, professional or not, are in debt or at best cash strapped. Let us be clear that football is important. It is about jobs and livelihoods at clubs. It is part of the fabric of the community in towns and cities. It is part of the lives of many fans and followers. Nationally, it is how many people not only derive pleasure, but partake of exercise. Our distinct identity as a football nation is a source of pride, if all too often a source of heartache. Football is part of modern Scotland, transcending class, bridging age and uniting regions. Let us also be clear that the plight of many clubs is a tragedy. Through mismanagement or mere misjudgment, they are in a dreadful situation. However, it is not the responsibility of the taxpayer to bail them out. The game needs to address the situation that has allowed wage bills to exceed income and clubs to live beyond their means. Limited companies may die; hopefully, football clubs will not, and football certainly must not. Public funding for the game is essential, but it must be channelled into promoting the game as a whole and not into subsidising the faults and errors of the few. Scottish football needs to restructure. Over recent years we have seen the game move from being a participatory sport to being a spectator event. The emphasis has been on stadia and foreign stars at the expense of the support and enhancement of the grassroots game. Scotland has pursued the wealth of the English premiership, or Spain's la Liga, rather than copying the development of the game in Norway or Denmark. As a result, we have bankrupt clubs, fewer people participating in the sport and a less successful national team than in comparable small nations. According to the Scottish Football Association, the  number of players in Scotland is 130,000. However, despite its smaller population, Ireland has 180,000 players. Norway, with a comparable population to Scotland, has 325,000 players. As a result, Norway has a fitter population and, more important, a bigger pool of players from which to select its national team. Rather than building football from the big clubs down, we need to construct Scottish football from the grass roots up. That is not rocket science. We have had reviews before. The tragedy is that they have not been implemented. How many bodies do we need to regulate and run football in Scotland? We have the Scottish Football Association; it must be extended from 78 member clubs to represent the whole football family. It must change and evolve, but it is the body that is best suited to governing the game and we must build around it. We do not need a superfluity of organisations from the Scottish Junior Football Association and the Scottish Schools Football Association to the Scottish Premier League, the Scottish Football League and beyond. It is not players hanging up their boots that we need, but some buffers hanging up their blazers.

I fully accept that. As Dennis Canavan might be aware, John Swinney and I met the SFA and it was made clear that those bodies are affiliated. They contribute immensely through the time and commitment that they give, but we also have to address the structures. In the 21 st century, those structures are archaic and they need to be developed. I hope that they will be built on consensus. As I will go on to say, it might be that we need to offer some carrot as opposed to too much stick. We need to get more people playing the game and fewer people administrating it. We cannot replace the blazers with bureaucrats or players with politicians. We know what needs to be done. The plans exist and have done so for years, ever since Ernie Walker's time. If any additional review is required, it should come from within the game and should be done by the Dalglishes and the Laws or some of the countless other sporting legends. What is needed is the will. As Mr Canavan commented, the role of the Parliament should be  to say that funding is contingent upon change—we must say, "We cannot make you, but if you are to receive public funds, then change you must." We are in a new millennium and the time has come to change to meet it. Action must also follow on from structural streamlining. A reconstituted SFA must enforce licensing schemes to address financial mismanagement. Broader ownership of clubs must be sought. Clubs should be for the pleasure of the many, not the privilege of the few. Community involvement must grow. Football has as much to contribute to our future as it has to our past, but to do that it must adapt to changing times. Football is our most popular sport and it has a great deal to contribute to the health and welfare of not just our young, but of all generations. The streets are busy with traffic and football fields are being sold off to developers. It is our duty to make the game affordable and accessible to all. Public funds must fund and provide public facilities. The PlayStation generation must be afforded the chance to become a footballing generation. I am not prepared to accept either of the amendments that have been lodged. As far as the Tory amendment is concerned, I think that the "home international championship" that it mentions belongs to the previous century. In any event, the fixture lists for the Scottish international team should be chosen by Berti Vogts, not pre-selected by any Tory amendment. Moreover, the Tory party's proposals on drinking in stadiums are entirely counterproductive. The Nicholson committee's report is currently under review. I and other members have had private discussions with the minister and his colleague and it would be wrong to supersede them and pre-empt where they might take us. More important, one of the results of this debate should be that we encourage more people to participate in football instead of giving more people the opportunity simply to have a drink while they sit on their backside.

Not at the moment. The Scottish Socialist Party's amendment deletes a great deal of the meat of the motion that has been discussed and agreed between the minister's parties and my own party. As such deletion would negate any recognition of the requirement for change and to invest at youth level, I am not prepared to accept the amendment. Our approach should be "one nation—one association". We must restructure. Although we must do what we can for the clubs in trouble, they must find their own level. We must reclaim the people's game for the people and make it  affordable and accessible to all. We must build from the communities up, not from the big clubs down. We must provide facilities for all, not a fabulous lifestyle for the few. Let us follow the Norwegian and Danish model, not the English or Spanish one. Let us create a healthier population, a viable professional league and a more successful international team. I move, That the Parliament notes the crisis faced by Scottish football; recognises football's significant contribution and potential impact in terms of its economic, social and health benefits and its role in our culture and identity; sympathises with the backroom and playing staff of those clubs worst affected; calls on professional football clubs to work with their supporters to harness the emotional and financial investment they make in their clubs; calls on the football authorities and clubs to ensure better business planning and financial management; believes that public funding for the game is essential but not the bail out of individual clubs; welcomes current and proposed financial support from the Scottish Executive but calls for such support to be matched by structural change; calls for the Scottish Football Association (SFA) to be a more integrated governing body for the game; calls for a review of the professional league structure in Scotland and the criteria for membership, and further calls for the SFA to regulate and develop participation by all ages and at all levels from grassroots in the community through to the national team.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to assist schools in the provision of transport to museums and visitor attractions. (S2O-1216)

The minister will be aware that one of the principal difficulties for schools is the cost of hiring coaches and other buses to take pupils to museums and visitor attractions. Does he agree that such visits are important for the educational development of our young people and their understanding of our culture and history? Will he consider whether we should extend the fuel duty rebate—which has been renamed the bus service operators grant—not simply to scheduled routes, but to important routes that allow our children to learn and experience their culture?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken to promote the learning of English as a foreign language as a reason to visit Scotland. (S2O-1172)

I thank the minister for that response. I advise him that in order to compete not only with America and the antipodes, but with Ireland, Malta and south of the border, we require information as to who is coming, why they are coming, how much they are spending and what markets are available to be targeted. Will he ensure that such a study is carried out either by his department or by some other organisation to ensure that we have the basis upon which to build a strategy?

Does the minister accept that the burden falls not only on local community clubs but on national organisations that are trying to develop sport at a  grass-roots level? I refer him to the situation that is faced by the Scottish Rugby Union at Murrayfield. While trying to support local sport, the SRU has seen its sports development funding fall by 36 per cent from £700,000 to £450,000 but its rates bill rise by 42 per cent from £494,000 to £710,000—it now finds itself £260,000 worse off. Will the minister recognise the need for rates relief for organisations that are trying to pursue sporting excellence not only at a community level but at a national level?

Albert Sorel said that politics divides those who seek to change the world to suit their ideas from those who seek to modify their actions to suit the world. The debate encapsulates that. Those of us on the SNP benches classify ourselves in the former category, but it is clear that the Executive members fall into the latter category. Rather than  drive forward with an agenda that would give Scotland a prosperous future in a new millennium, they sit back and allow events at home and north and south of the border to affect us; indeed, to buffet and, ultimately, to damage us. If "do less, better" is the Executive's maxim, the public's exhortation is, "For God's sake, do something." To do nothing is most certainly not an option. There are several aspects to the debate. The first is the question of voting in the Parliament in England, which was raised in particular by members on the Tory benches. Let us be quite clear that it is the duty of every Scottish elected representative, no matter how high or how humble, to defend Scottish interests. It is their duty to do so in every chamber, at every opportunity and in every forum or jurisdiction. To vote against top-up fees is not only to defend Scotland's students and universities, but to defend all Scotland's economic interests. For Scottish MPs to fail to vote would be an abdication of responsibility and to vote for top-up fees would damage and undermine their constituents and their country. Another aspect is the question of whether tuition fees have been abolished. I do not want to mull too much over the private grief between the Liberal Democrats and their Labour colleagues. The fact of the matter is quite clear: Sam Galbraith's statements are irreconcilable with those that were made by members on the Liberal Democrat benches and—in particular—by the minister. The fact of the matter is that if Sam Galbraith is telling the truth, the minister most certainty is not. All of us know about the shameless deal that was put together by the Liberal Democrat and Labour parties and it is quite clear that, in this respect, the deal is a sham. In fact, in this case, the old adage, "they speak with forked tongue" has been shown to be true. What can be done? Two quite different positions were put forward by Mr Jackson and Mr Baker. Again, their positions showed how irreconcilable are the differences not between the views of members of the coalition parties, but between the views of members of the same party. The fact is that it is quite clear that the changes down in England will affect us. I say to the Executive members that either they should accept change and become masters of their own destiny by taking fiscal responsibility or continue to throw money here and there out of the limited pocket money that the Executive is allowed. The sticking-plaster approach is fundamentally affecting the Scottish economy. An article in Tuesday's Financial Times showed clearly that the successful cities in the European Union and beyond are those that invest in their education and which do so through taking fiscal  responsibility. I suggest to the members who are giggling on the Liberal Democrat benches that if they have not read the article they should do so.

No. I do not have time. The successful nations and successful regions and cities that were mentioned in the article are not Nottingham, Newcastle, Manchester or other English regional or metropolitan areas; the most successful city was Stockholm, followed by Helsinki, followed by Copenhagen—all of which are cities in small nations that follow their best interests. Rather than do that, members in the Liberal Democrat and Labour benches would have us follow the method that is taking those regional areas in England into economic penury. We should follow the examples of the Scandic nations. I refer to a meeting that was hosted by the Association of University Teachers in which the Finnish Minister of Education, Mr Heinonen, addressed the subject of higher education in a small European nation. He said about Finland: "At the moment, higher education and research are the very essence of the Finnish national strategy devised to redefine our position in the new international setting and globalized economic environment." That is very much a smart and successful Finland. He set out the goal—which is ambitious in comparison to ours—of providing higher education for 60 to 65 per cent of the relevant age group. We pat ourselves on the back because we achieve a figure of 50 per cent. They wish to drive considerably further forward. The conclusion that Mr Heinonen came to was that for a small nation to maintain a high-quality higher education system, government must invest heavily in it because external funding from business and industry is not nearly as easy to obtain as it is in bigger national economies. That is still the only survival strategy for a small nation to compete successfully in the production and utilisation of knowledge. That is why Finland has refused tuition fees, that is why it continues to support its students and, indeed, that is why it wishes to increase its student population percentage. We are at a time in Scotland when we are looking back at our history. On Friday night we can watch "Scotland's Empire" and we can read Tom Devine's book and Arthur Herman's "The Scottish Enlightenment: The Scots' Invention of the Modern World". We praise what we have done, and if we asked those academics why we what we did, they would say that the driving force was that our people were educated. Our people became, to an extent, the cadre of the British empire. When they hit the foreign shores of the new world and  elsewhere they were able to drive forward because we invested centuries ago in education, when other countries had not even thought about such a thing, we had the Education Act 1696, which conferred literacy and numeracy on our people. We did that and we reaped the benefit. Other nations that did not have the same literacy levels paid the price. Centuries on from that, we could learn from our forefathers: we could invest, as they did, not just in literacy and numeracy but in higher education, because in the new millennium, higher education will be ever more vital. Indeed, it could be argued that higher education is comparable to literacy and numeracy in the 17 th century. We will not be able to replicate what our forefathers did unless we invest in our education system at the basic and higher levels. If we do that, instead of follow the downward track of the English metropolitan cities, we will drive forward while emphasising our correspondence with the success that is being delivered in the Scandinavian and other small nations. To do that, we require fiscal autonomy. We should take charge so that, rather than react to events, we will be able to dictate events and follow the successful Finnish model.

The minister will be aware that one difficulty that ScotRail customers face at Haymarket, Waverley and Glasgow Queen Street stations relates to the availability of taxis, as Railtrack imposed substantial charges on taxi drivers who use  stations. Since that organisation has been replaced by a not-for-profit, publicly owned body—Network Rail—is it not time that charges ceased and that taxis were encouraged, not discouraged? Will the minister make representations to Network Rail that such charges should cease?

As is usual, I congratulate Bristow Muldoon on securing  this debate. SNP members would sign up to many of the points that he has made. I want to make two preliminary points in support of the motion. Everyone accepts that the status quo is not an option. We cannot go on as we are and action must be taken. Having said that, our position is that the proposed scheme is not acceptable and will be detrimental, not just to the interests of the city of Edinburgh, but to those of other areas. Bristow Muldoon is to be congratulated on bringing this matter to the chamber, because it is of significance not just to the areas outwith the city but to many that are located within it. The issue must be discussed and debated. I want to comment on four issues, some of which Bristow Muldoon has raised. First, there is the question of democracy. To date, this scheme has been railroaded through to some extent. As other members have said in previous debates, it has been suggested that there is public support for the scheme, although it is quite clear that figures were massaged and manipulated. Comparisons are made with London. However, to be fair to Ken Livingstone—love him or loathe him—he fought an election on the basis of imposing road tolls and is entitled to do that. That is a democratic mandate and Stephen Norris and others have had to accept it. No mandate applies here. There is also the question of structure. There is a Greater London Authority and a transport authority in London. We do not have that here in the east of Scotland. We have SESTRAN, but we do not have the facilities to deal with other aspects. The problem is that we have not brought with us the outlying areas, as Bristow Muldoon and others have said in previous debates. Indeed, we are unable to address many of the problems that are brought about by local authorities taking unilateral action that impacts on other areas. A proposal to extent the Straiton shopping development will have a significant impact on the city of Edinburgh that will be detrimental to traffic flow and, arguably, will increase congestion. We do not have such a structure as an east of Scotland transport authority that allows us to address those matters. Before we introduce any congestion scheme, there has to be a regional transport authority that can deal with it. Such an authority should have the appropriate powers for transport and planning, because planning decisions can impact on transport. Bristow Muldoon was correct to point out that London has significant advantages in public transport. It already has a tube system and it has increased its bus fleet. Most important, it has a regulated bus network. Until such time as we have a democratic mandate and a structure and have  managed to upgrade our current public transport system, the proposed scheme is wrong. The scheme would have a significant effect on business and the retail sector in Edinburgh. Comparisons are made with London, but that is not comparing like with like. If someone is considering shopping in downtown London on Bond Street or Regent Street, they do not say that they will not pay the congestion charge and go to Milton Keynes or Leicester. If someone is considering coming into Edinburgh, they might very well say that they will not pay the congestion charges but will go to Macarthur Glen, where there are no parking charges, or to Glasgow, where, although parking is charged for in many of its car parks, there is no congestion charge. There is a significant likelihood that business in the centre of Edinburgh will suffer. It is already accepted that the retail sector there is not as good as it should be, and certainly, given its vista and locality, Princes Street is not punching its weight. We have to take cognisance of that. For those reasons, although we never say never with regard to congestion charges because it might be that an appropriate scheme could be developed, we think that this scheme is not appropriate. It would be detrimental to the city and to outlying areas. We must address the issue of structures and create new structures in order to upgrade our public transport network and we must ensure that the scheme does not impact on and damage the city-centre economy.

Will the minister consider a review of the decision not to provide a minor injuries clinic in the city centre, to ensure that ambulances and, indeed, police vehicles are not used as a taxi service on various dates to Little France?

It gives the Scottish National Party great pleasure to support the motion and to endorse Mr Butler's words and the minister's ambition. We have been critical of the fact that, although much rhetoric has been expended in Parliament, there has been little delivery, so it is satisfying to participate in a debate on something on which we are making progress. As Bill Butler and the minister said, the bill is of significant moment not just for the wee county, but for the whole country. The venture has significant effects elsewhere, because it is not simply about providing a passenger service for Alloa, which is long overdue, or indeed about providing freight and coal access to Longannet. The railway will also free up capacity and improve services in places as diverse as Fife—on the Fife circle—and Ayrshire. It is perhaps too grudging to say that the link is long overdue, but at least we have reached this point. I have a point about procedure. Mr Butler and the committee deserve a great deal of credit, if not sympathy. However, we will have to review and revisit whether we are using the best method of delivering major rail infrastructure projects. The procedure for the link project is rather an anachronism when the construction of the M74 is dealt with by a public inquiry. A major infrastructure project such as an airport would also probably be dealt with differently. Why are we dealing with road and rail projects differently? As we approach the introduction of a bill to launch the tramway in Edinburgh, we face being sucked into having never-ending committees to deal with matters that should be dealt with differently. I pay tribute to the committee's work, but we must think about whether using an antediluvian process that is a hangover from Victorian days—indeed, it is a hangover from Westminster—is the best way of delivering major rail infrastructure projects.

Such matters should be non-contentious and non-partisan. Finding the best possible way of dealing with such matters is in the interests of the Parliament and the country. I do not have any particular views. Perhaps the issue is within the remit of the Procedures Committee; if so, I hope that the committee will deal with it. As I said, an anachronism must be addressed, especially if we are to deliver on other rail projects that the minister and the Executive are committed to and are ambitious to implement. We must find a better way of dealing with matters. I think that members will find that there will be a spirit of consensus not only on the projects that we hope will be delivered but on the procedure by which they can be delivered. In addition to outside criticism about planning, there will be justifiable criticism within the Parliament if we are left with such an antediluvian delivery framework. We require to consider some points of clarification and concern. Some of those points are specific matters and some are general. On general matters, who will deliver the project? Will the Scottish Executive or transport Scotland deliver it? Clarification is required. If transport Scotland is to deliver it, will it have the appropriate powers to do so? We also need to know who will operate the rail line. An assumption is being made that Network Rail will operate it, but so far I have not heard Network Rail confirm that it will. We simply assume that it will operate the line because it operates almost every other line, apart from lines such as that from Bo'ness to Kinneil. There has been no commitment. Given the press leaks earlier this week about Network Rail retrenching various aspects of its work to Leeds—I know that the minister is concerned about that—we cannot necessarily rest assured that Network Rail will fulfil the ambitions of not only the Executive but the Parliament. We must have some control. Transport Scotland should not only deliver the project, but perhaps operate the line to ensure that there is joined-up delivery and joined-up transport. The minister correctly touched on that issue in respect of Rosyth and other work. On specific matters, we should recognise that the Rosyth link is important, as the minister said. I appreciate that there are difficulties in ensuring that the line goes to Rosyth, but we are in danger of making a grave mistake if that short link on that short journey is not made now. I understand from the rail sector that the bulk of the costs for extending the line into the port of Rosyth relate to signalling and that the cost of the rail infrastructure in fairly minimal. If a little bit extra is not spent now  to take the line into Rosyth and to give us the critical nucleus of a transport hub there, costs will be significantly more, because people will have to go back to the beginning to rejig and rejuggle all the signalling. That is where the major costs lie; they do not lie in the physical infrastructure and the provision of the line. We must consider extending the line to Rosyth. In respect of Clackmannan, it is not just the provision of a rail link for passengers to Alloa that is important. We must ensure that, rather than simply allowing passengers to go from Alloa through Stirling to Glasgow, we consider creating the opportunity for people from Alloa to go eastwards towards Dunfermline. Work is available in Dunfermline and, in many cases, there is a shortage of labour. We must consider how to move passenger services east as well as west and how to allow Clackmannan to benefit from the creation of loops so that places such as Cambus are not denied access to freight. The minister touched on that matter. Again, we are talking about a short distance, but there would be significant gains. I have spoken about specific and general matters that must be addressed. However, fundamentally, we support the project, which is long overdue and very welcome. We must find new methods of ensuring that we deliver similar projects in due course, as we need to speed up the delivery of those projects that have so far not been delivered in modern Scotland. We pay tribute to all those who have worked hard and endeavoured to deliver the project so far.

The First Minister will be aware of a study from Highlands and Islands Enterprise that showed that  the annual climatic cost of a year's worth of travel to and from every airport in the Highlands and Islands is less than that of one day's worth of transatlantic travel from Heathrow. On the distinct needs and wants of the Highlands and Islands, given that the airports in the Highlands and Islands receive an annual subsidy of £24 million, of which £2 million is spent on security, is it not about time that appropriate security for the likes of Barra and Benbecula is decided locally, rather than have foist upon those airports the security that is necessary for Birmingham and Bristol?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Strategic Rail Authority. (S2O-886)

That precedes the minister's lunch meeting with my colleague, but there we go. On the speculation about the SRA and the upgrade at Waverley, can the minister assure the Parliament that the work will address both capacity and access, that it will not be done piecemeal or on the cheap and that it will produce a first-class station for a capital city? Will he also assure us that the upgrade will be paid for in full by the United Kingdom bodies responsible, which have, after all, funded out of UK taxation—the projects  are paid for by us as well—the Leeds and Manchester Piccadilly upgrades as well as a £1.4 million high-speed rail link from the channel to London?

We have had a wide-ranging and consensual debate, which, given the topic, is how it should be. There  has been a considerable amount of special pleading on behalf of individual areas and specific libraries, but that is understandable. It is right that the debate should have been wide-ranging, because libraries are not static; they reflect the society in which they operate, the time and the medium that are available. That is why the points that were made by Karen Whitefield and other members about the provision of mobile libraries are reflective of the times. The rise of IT and other matters also reflects the era in which we find ourselves. It is appropriate that the debate should have been relatively consensual. Although my colleague Roseanna Cunningham was correct to point out that we require more than platitudes, there is an acceptance that we are going in a specific direction and there is agreement and harmony in the chamber about recognition of where we have got to and the importance of what has been achieved. However, we require to advance and perhaps the difference of opinion will be about the emphasis and provision of resources. The points that my colleague Andrew Welsh made are important. We need to ensure that we do not overload requirements on local authorities and that we balance requirements relating to local democracy. Funds might be provided to local authorities, but if they are required to scrape around to meet other requirements, there is a great danger that funding to libraries will be cut. Accordingly, we must ensure that resources are provided and that local authorities are not put in an invidious position. The Parliament must not pass the buck to local authorities. Brian Monteith mentioned the role of the private sector. I have no objection to a role for the private sector, but public libraries must be publicly funded. There might be a role for private philanthropy—doubtless there is such a role—but there should be no requirement for it. We should not allow public libraries to be funded by private philanthropy any more than we should allow our national health service to be provided for by the national lottery. At the end of the day, we are talking about a state matter and delivery at local level. We must recognise that libraries and literacy—of which libraries are a component part—are part of the great formation of the society in which we live. They are important to the communities in which they operate, as numerous members have said. Their contribution to Scotland's social and economic situation and where they can take us are also important. I subscribe to the philosophy of the two Rs—that running is the basis of all fitness and that reading is the basis of all knowledge—and I try, in a minimal way, to take both types of  exercise. It is fundamental that we allow for such exercise. Those who have read Arthur Herman's book on the Scottish enlightenment might perceive its perspective on the Act of Union as revisionist. They will recall that he said that the single most important act to be passed by any legislature in Scotland was the Education Act 1696, which allowed direct access to the word of God and allowed Scots to have direct access to markets and the new world. We must bear that in mind. We must consider the circumstances in which we find ourselves. I am mindful of the words and the wisdom that have been provided by Professor Henry Milner about civic literacy, the importance of the written word and libraries. I am a disciple of Professor Milner. We should applaud our libraries, but remember good practice elsewhere, particularly in Scandinavia. In Sweden, for example, every child is provided at birth not only with a gift of membership of their local library, but with a book that their parents can read to them to try, by that interaction, to encourage reading. I am also conscious, from Professor Milner, that we are at a juncture. We should decide whether to go down the Australian and United States of America road or the Scandinavian road and we should decide whether to recognise the importance of public support not only for public libraries, but for other media. It is important that we take cognisance of that matter. I am conscious of time, but want to make a final point, which other members have touched on—the importance of modern Scottish literature. Such literature is important for our society because it reflects who we are. At one stage, there was a difficulty in Scotland, in that literature seemed to start with Scott and almost end with Stevenson, although a few worthy authors such as Robin Jenkins were mentioned. There is a great growth in the number of new young writers, but my colleague Roseanna Cunningham and other members have mentioned that the new writers do not seem to receive the support that they deserve. Of course it is important that funding should be available to support new writers, but it is also important that our libraries purchase their books. If we continue to operate under the current laissez-faire system, the free market is likely to drive them to sources that will purchase on a UK or wider basis and there will be a deviation from the requirement to purchase locally. Given that each book or pamphlet that is written is subject to a demand letter by the National Library of Scotland, is it not correct that, if the state seeks to insist that a person should provide a free copy to that library, the state should be prepared to ensure that we publicly acquire new works of Scottish fiction from new Scottish writers and put them in our public  libraries so that our people can read them? It is important to take cognisance of that matter. The debate has been good. Perhaps there is disagreement about emphasis and the pace at which we must go, but we should recognise benefits that have been achieved and that we must build on. There is a wide world of literacy out there that we must support.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to ensure continued European funding for tourism. (S2O-719)

The minister is aware that there is considerable worry among many tourism projects about what might happen after 2006. Projects such as the millennium wheel in Falkirk and Discovery Point in Dundee were provided by matched funding from Europe. What funding is likely to be available for Scotland and what funding might go to competitor accession states in Europe, contrary to our interests? What facilities will be available to access what is currently the matched funding?

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration has been given to the case for capital city status submitted by Lothian and Borders police to the Executive on 5 September 2003. (S2O-677)

Is the minister aware that during periods such as the present, when fireworks night leads into the MTV awards and a major NATO conference, police resources in the city are fully stretched? As a result, Lothian and Borders police are discussing hiring officers from neighbouring forces to cope. Is it not ridiculous that council tax payers in Edinburgh pay not only for their own  force, but for hiring other forces? Is it not time to recognise that Edinburgh deserves capital city status, the same as the old bill of metropolitan London gets?

Market forces.

Does the member accept that, under the Conservative Administration, the motorway and trunk-road network south of the border was completed, which is why the new roads that are being built are entirely novel? Does he further accept that, despite his congratulatory words about the Tory Government, significant parts of Scotland have no trunk roads, never mind motorways?

What powers does the Scottish Executive have to give direction to the SRA, given that that was part of the McLeish settlement? What powers do we have to make the SRA accountable to the Scottish Parliament? Does the member agree that the absence of those powers means that the SRA is unaccountable and could not be guided by the minister even if he so desired?

As the Rev David Sinclair and others have said, today is 5 November. We may have felt entitled to hear and see some fireworks, but instead we have been delivered a damp squib. Never mind gunpowder, treason and plot, it would be worth while if the Executive could have a rocket applied to it. When I first saw the motion, I thought that it was sanctimonious twaddle. Now that I have listened to the minister speak for 17 minutes, I have not changed my view. Indeed, I have a great deal of sympathy with some of the points that Mr Mundell makes in his amendment. What we have heard is retreaded announcements—there are no new funds and no new powers. As Mr Mundell mentions in his amendment, the concentration has been, as at the outset, on rhetoric rather than on action. What we need is delivery, not debate.

Not at the moment. The wording of the Executive's motion is difficult to disagree with, but that is because it is inane and woolly. However, this is an Executive debate—this is our national Parliament and the Executive is our Government. We are entitled to expect better than a debate that we could hear in a student union at Teviot Row or anywhere else. We are in a situation akin to that in "Groundhog Day", because there is nothing new. Apart from a nomenclature change, as one document is substituted for another, nothing that Mr Stephen has said was not to some extent said by Ms Boyack back in 1999. Since then, there has been a plethora of documents and further consultation documents. However, we are not in the first year of the first term of an Administration; the Executive is now in its fifth year and we are entitled to expect better. The criteria for examining its policies and coming to a judgment on them now have to be different. What does the woolly and inane motion—which would be difficult to disagree with, were it not for the fact that we are a national Parliament and not a student union—say? It states that we should agree that the Parliament "recognises the importance of ... proposals ... in A Partnership for a Better Scotland ". As I said, that is not the first document—it is not even the second document. The tragedy is that freight and people do not move on a plethora of documents or consultation programmes; they move on roads and rail. That is where the Executive has singularly failed to deliver after four years. We hear promises about what might come, but we are still waiting even for the public inquiry to proceed on the M74 north extension. The Minister for Transport apparently met Mr Darling earlier in the week, but we still do not have a firm commitment on when the construction work at Waverley station will begin. We do not know whether the state-of-the-art station that we are entitled to expect for our capital city in the 21 st century will be built or, perhaps most important, who will pick up the tab for it. We heard not one word on that—and so on and so forth in relation to other matters that have been talked about but that the Executive is still failing to deliver.

I think that Cathie Craigie would be better addressing such a question to members of the Executive. Apparently Mr Scott is not in the chamber to explain how he can have a different view on the common fisheries policy from that of everyone else in the Executive. That is part of politics, but perhaps when someone is a Government minister they should judge themselves by different criteria. Apparently Mr Scott is going to go down the same path that Mr Watson went down. The Executive must deliver. The motion states that the Executive's intention is "to set up a transport agency to secure delivery of the Executive's major investment programme to expand transport infrastructure". To what agency does that refer? We are told that it is transport Scotland. What will its powers be with regard to rail, air and maritime matters? Apparently, a consultation document has been issued in which we are all invited—the great and good within and without the chamber—to send in answers on a postcard to Victoria Quay, as the Executive does not know what the situation is and hopes to learn something from other people. The Executive talks about delivering major infrastructure programmes. Who will be in charge of Waverley? Will transport Scotland, the Strategic Rail Authority, Network Rail, the City of Edinburgh Council, the Scottish Executive or Transport Initiatives Edinburgh be in charge? We do not know who is in charge and the tragedy is that the minister does not know either. The real problem is that the minister does not know who is delivering which projects. He has had a meeting with the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for Scotland, but he cannot even make an announcement on any of the major rail projects. He has singularly failed to achieve any gains or wins or to get any dosh for Scotland.

Everybody in politics is aware that the Executive is judged differently from those who are not in the Executive. The Executive has had four years. We are here to discuss what the Executive has done in four years and where it is going in the next four years. As I said, the tragedy is that we are waiting and the Executive has suggested that we should send in answers on a postcard to Victoria Quay.  The motion mentions "the proposals to enhance the schemes of concessionary fares to benefit elderly and disabled people". The Labour party ran into the election saying that the scheme was wonderful, which is why Labour should get people's votes—it must be said that credit was claimed for Labour and not for the Liberal Democrats. Now we are told that the scheme needs to be enhanced. Is it true, then, that the scheme was not so wonderful? Again, there was a postcode lottery whereby Strathclyde had a wonderful scheme, but the scheme in Clackmannan was pretty poor. If one was fortunate enough to live in Campbeltown, one could travel to Girvan, but if one lived in certain other areas, one could not even get access to, for example, the city of Edinburgh or beyond. We were then told that we needed transport Scotland to deliver the scheme. Lo and behold—Wales already has a full concessionary fares scheme. There is no authority called transport Wales and the Assembly does not even have the powers of a Parliament, yet Wales can deliver. That leaves me with a conundrum. Is the Welsh Executive more able than the Scottish Lib-Lab Executive, or is the latter less competent than the Welsh Executive? I am not sure. The motion also mentions "the proposals to enhance the ability of local government to serve the travelling public". That has apparently fallen on deaf ears with SPT. Whatever the minister might say, SPT is certainly not satisfied; indeed, it is most unhappy. If the minister has not accessed the briefing that was e-mailed to all MSPs, I suggest that he do so, as SPT is deeply worried. We should not undermine SPT, but seek to build on such arrangements for other areas. The Executive is failing to deliver in terms of the motion. What about my amendment? It must be recognised that we have cause for concern. In four years, we have seen no massive construction—indeed, we have seen no construction at all. The number of miles of track that have been built is de minimis. The amendment mentions the new agency. We accept in theory that there should be a new agency, but, in practice, if the agency does not have control over rail in particular, it will be neutered from the start. If it does not have control over aviation and maritime policy, perhaps the minister will tell us whether it will be able to deal with problems that might arise in the Highlands and Islands when new criteria relating to security are introduced in April 2004. Will that be a matter for the big boys down at the Department for Transport while the wee boys at Victoria Quay will not be able to touch or even consider matters?  Unless the agency has powers over maritime matters, rail and aviation, there will not be an integrated or holistic policy. There must transparency, accountability and direction. Currently, the Strategic Rail Authority basically has carte blanche to do what it wants to do. That is why the minister has been humiliated—to put it mildly—on several occasions when the SRA and Network Rail have blandly made pronouncements that have had catastrophic effects for passengers in Scotland and for freight. The minister has simply had to accept decisions. Unless we get control of the SRA's powers, we will not be able to progress matters. The same applies in other areas. We require powers across the board. We must not undermine SPT. People in many areas have looked at SPT and wished that it could have been replicated in their area. We should be not levelling down, but levelling out, by giving powers to the likes of the south-east Scotland transport partnership, the north-east Scotland transport partnership and the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership, and by providing them with the funding mechanisms that will allow them to deliver what people in the west of Scotland have been fortunate enough to take for granted for almost a generation. We need to match our European competitors, because that is where this country is failing and where the Executive is fundamentally letting us down. The minister talked about proposals for a tram scheme, for which £375 million has been promised. However, we know that that money is not index linked. The scheme will not be able to afford to build lines 2 or 3, even if line 1 goes ahead. The Republic of Ireland has just shown its ambition by starting work to deliver a metro system, which will be the biggest single item of expenditure in the history of the Irish Republic. However, the Executive is talking about seeking to upgrade a concessionary fares scheme—perhaps we will have a wee bypass here or add a rail line there. Unlike us, the Irish Republic thinks big and acts big. Until the Executive is prepared to take responsibility, Scotland will be left second rate and unable to compete with its European competitors. That is why I move amendment S2M-541.4, to leave out from "and the proposals" to end and insert: "; notes with concern the underperformance of the Executive on major transport schemes to date; notes that for the new agency to be successful there must be transparency, accountability and direction for Scotland on all aspects of transport policy whether road, rail, marine or air, and recognises that the new agency should be strategic and should not undermine the role and function of Strathclyde Passenger Transport nor any future statutory regional transport authority elsewhere in Scotland and that  the performance of the agency should be monitored to ensure that it delivers improvements to allow Scotland's transport system to match those of its European competitors."

Will the minister give way?

Given the emphasis on transport Scotland's delivery of infrastructure builds, what is the role of Transport Initiatives Edinburgh, compared to that of transport Scotland, with regard to the construction of the rail link to Edinburgh airport?

This has been a strange debate. We have a principal motion and three amendments thereto and yet they have rarely interacted and we seem to have been shadow-boxing around the issues. However, we might be disparaging if we said that today's debate will not be one of the highlights of the Parliamentary calendar. Aside from the special pleading for individual cities, we can take a kinder view and say that valid points have arisen from the debate. There was no contrast between the points that were being made because there was a great deal of consensus, and because many members were talking about two distinct documents. The Executive's motion is obviously about "Building Better Cities: Delivering Growth and Opportunities", while it is quite clear from our amendment that the SNP is talking about the "Review of Scotland's Cities—the analysis". We take the view that the "Review of Scotland's Cities—the analysis" is a fundamentally important document, and that if we empanel a body of experts, it is important that we should take cognisance of that. That is why I highlight Fergus Ewing's mention of the comments made by Professor Ivan Turok from the department of urban studies at the University of Glasgow who indicated that the "Building Better Cities: Delivering Growth and Opportunities" document was a "modest response" to the range and intensity of the challenges facing the cities. He added that the document had "surprisingly few concrete recommendations and proposals" and said that the £90 million investment over three years was inadequate. Although it was right that the review was  initiated—by Henry McLeish in December 2000—we believe that the Government's response is, as Professor Turok said, inadequate. That might be one of the reasons why there has been a failure to engage in debate. It is also quite clear that, although parties and participants made individual points, there is agreement. Many of the points made by the minister are not in dispute. Who could possibly dispute that cities matter, people matter and that planning is fundamental? Besides his interesting travelogue, the most important and valid point made by the minister was in his intervention on Mr Monteith, when he went on about the importance of city regions and co-operation. That has been addressed by others in the debate such as Mr Monteith, Ms Deacon and Ms Boyack—I apologise if I have missed anyone out. We must acknowledge that our cities are particularly small. We must consider competitor cities. In Denmark and Sweden, Malmö and Copenhagen—in different countries and with different currencies—are conjoining to co-operate because they recognise that they must have critical mass to compete with urban metropolitan areas in countries such as France, Germany and England.

I hope so, but if we are going to be successful, we must ensure that our cities fight individually and stand together. Co-operation between individual cities is important and Edinburgh and Glasgow either hang together or, as others have said in debates elsewhere, they will fall apart. It is important that we acknowledge that. Mr Monteith made points that many of us would not disagree with as he gave us a valid view of cities. Given his predilection for football, I was surprised that he failed to give the ubiquitous Brechin a mention during his tour of cities that had not been mentioned. No one would disagree with Mr Ballard's points on the importance of the environment. At the end of the day, cities are not just about the quality of jobs and the economy. They are about the quality of life for the people who live in them. Of course, we must acknowledge that cities are not just about building houses and creating jobs. We must ensure that the jobs are sustainable and that they are not detrimental to the environment, that the houses we live in are fit for purpose, and that our quality of life is acceptable. Robert Brown also made valid points because  manufacturing is important and that is where we have to distil the consensus within the chamber. Mr Ballard's points were valid and important, but Mr Brown's points about manufacturing were equally important. If we are to implement a strategy, we have to conjoin those two views and get a balance. I am cognisant that others have referred to Edinburgh and that is important, but we must recognise that we should not be comparing cities just within Scotland. The city of Edinburgh's competitors should not be perceived as Glasgow and Dundee. If it is to succeed in the 21 st century the city of Edinburgh must compete with Helsinki, Dublin and Copenhagen. Those are the competitors. The tragedy is that Edinburgh may be punching above its weight when it comes to Glasgow and Dundee, but it is losing out significantly in terms of its competitiveness with other places in Europe. We need to take cognisance of that. Points made by Margaret Smith, and to some extent by Susan Deacon and others, were also valid. They said that Edinburgh, to some extent, is a victim of its own success. The development and driving forward of the economy is resulting in problems with infrastructure, skills shortages, a lack of affordable housing and transport problems. At the same time, under this Executive, Edinburgh is paying the price for its success. It is perceived that because Edinburgh is doing well it does not need any further assistance, which means that it is not being backed properly. The £23 million being put in by the Executive over three years does not meet the need identified by the City of Edinburgh Council for more than £200 million over 10 years, not for the whole city, but simply for affordable housing. The outcome of this debate should be to bring matters together. We endorse the review. We do not believe that the critique and overview by the Executive meets or benefits it.

I congratulate the member on her motion. In our much-maligned institution, members' business debates have the important role of allowing the discussion and airing of matters that might appear on the surface to be of relatively minor importance, but which in fact have significance for sections of the community; indeed, they might even have significance for the whole community without its realising that. Mrs Mitchell has done a service in securing a debate on a matter that I know to be of concern to the haulage industry and to those on whom it impacts. She will have heard from constituents about the difficulties that they have had in transporting heavy goods and abnormal loads; such difficulties have also been narrated to me. It is unacceptable for it to take days to move  abnormal loads from central Lanarkshire to the south coast of England. That impacts not only on the haulier who is moving the load but on those dispatching it and—perhaps more important—those who receive it. Such a situation slows up the wheels of commerce and industry and impacts not only on the road haulage industry but on our society's economic life. We must take cognisance not only of what senior police officers say but of what the Scottish Police Federation says. The federation's worry about private escorting is that the police will have to attend if anything goes amiss or awry. However, I find that a disingenuous argument. Nightclubs have bouncers, but we expect police to attend if an incident escalates and becomes serious. We recognise that it is often in the best interests of licensed premises to have private security but that it is certainly not in the best interests of society to put a police officer outside all licensed premises. We simply cannot do that. We should recognise that, in a much more complicated world, it may be possible to outsource the escorting of abnormal loads to a private contractor. We should consider the matter closely. As Mrs Mitchell correctly said, we must ensure that that there are guidelines and that those guidelines are uniform across local authorities and police forces. Most important, we should recognise that the escorting of certain abnormal loads should remain within the jurisdiction of the police. However, we must accept that the status quo is not acceptable and that we cannot go on as we are. There must be a method of driving forward the proposal for private escorting services. That is why the discussion between senior police officers and others should be taken into account. We should perhaps monitor what is happening south of the border and take cognisance of what the Highways Agency is doing. Given the interaction that takes place—for example, loads that start their journey on the M74 will impact on the M6—it would be ludicrous not to consider what direction the Highways Agency is taking on the issue. The motion deals with an important issue, although it might not appear to be so—as the poor turnout for the debate seems to bear out. However, the issue is fundamental not only for the haulage industry but for all our society. Mrs Mitchell is to be congratulated on driving forward the issue. As I said at the outset, perhaps our Parliament should occasionally give itself a pat on the back for allowing matters that might not have any other outlet or means of ventilation to be debated in members' business debates. I hope that the minister takes cognisance of what Mrs Mitchell said about the on-going discussions. I hope that he can ensure that we can debate the issue and try to work out what is in the  best interests not only of the hauliers and the police but of broader society. Again, I congratulate Mrs Mitchell on her motion. Those who have not partaken of the debate have missed out and will perhaps realise in due course the importance of what has been discussed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what funds have been committed by the Strategic Rail Authority to rail projects in Scotland. (S2O-557)

As the minister will be aware, £1.3 billion was spent opening the high-speed rail link from London to the channel tunnel. Given that trains were purchased for a direct link from Scotland and that Scotland was promised a direct link to the channel tunnel, and given also the statements that were made by the Executive, will the minister tell us when Eurostar services from Scotland direct to Europe will commence?

I should declare an interest, not only as the transport spokesman for my party and an MSP for the constituency, but as a resident of the locality that is involved. As is usual, I congratulate the member on securing the debate. The issue is important not just for those of us who are residents of Edinburgh. Edinburgh is to some extent the economic dynamo of Scotland and if it is to continue to fulfil that function, it is fundamental that the city's infrastructure should allow it to do so. The status quo is unacceptable. The problem is that matters have to some extent been superseded by the debate on congestion charging. It is thought that either opposing or granting congestion charging will somehow resolve matters, but that is not the case. We require short-term action, but we also require a long-term vision. I accept that it is one thing to be critical of the Executive or the council, but quite another to propose sustainable and appropriate solutions. As MSPs or as councillors, we cannot always be critical without putting forward adequate proposals. As Mike Pringle correctly said, transport is important not only because of what it does for the city but because of what it does for our society and for our economy. I think that all members recognise that Edinburgh is doing well, but if it is to do better and if we are to avoid running into pitfalls or potholes, it is imperative that we address transport issues. Members of the work force must be able to access the city if, as in many instances, they are unable to live there. We must also recognise that we have to have a vision. One of the great problems is that we have been dealing with matters on a piecemeal basis and have been reacting to events. We must now ensure that we create a transport solution for Edinburgh from now until 2010 and far beyond that. It must be a two-way process, because there is a high road and a low road. The high road is about where we want to get to. I will leave aside congestion charging—I take the view that to some extent trams are contingent on congestion charging, whatever Transport Initiatives Edinburgh may suggest. The fact is that no tram scheme in the United Kingdom pays its way, so how are we  going to fund trams if not out of the coffers of the rates, which is a restricted area, or from congestion charging? Of course, we aspire to a tram scheme in the same way as we aspire to a south suburban line, the Borders rail line and other projects. Many of those are far bigger infrastructure projects, which will take time. We must ensure that we project forward and deliver them within a definable time scale.

Our commitment has always been to infrastructure improvements in Scotland, but we have never got into the argument about one improvement against another. The Government decides which improvements should go ahead. I think that it is important that we upgrade the Aberdeen to Inverness route and that we introduce the Borders railway, but to suggest that we are agin one and for another is false. The matter comes down to governance, which is about priorities. Our view is that the Borders railway is essential, although whether it is our number 1 priority is debatable, given that we have other important rail links and the M74 north extension to consider. However, we view the Borders railway as important and to suggest otherwise is fallacious. There is a low road. Not all public transport improvements need to be large sexy schemes or have to involve great investment. As Mike Pringle said, improvement in the existing bus network is a priority and money has already been put into that. The bus link to Edinburgh airport has shown us what can be done to change people's attitudes towards bus services. Investment in the bus network would enhance the situation. That ties in with park-and-ride facilities and with enforcement. We must take lessons from Transport for London on that. As well as ensuring that the measures are in place, we must have enforcement. For example, we must ensure that those who impinge on bus lanes are prosecuted. We need a vision for the future, but we must also introduce relatively cheap and speedy short-term measures.

I thank the minister for her willingness to meet local MSPs. Is she aware of the added strain that is felt not only by the force as a whole but by individual  serving officers? Does she accept that the result of the increase in work load is that there are too few officers and that they are required to do too much work? That is evidenced by the high sickness and retirement levels in the Lothian and Borders force.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the board of VisitScotland. (S2O-429)

I am grateful to Mr Wilson for that answer and I appreciate that he is standing in for his colleague. I advise Mr Wilson that a fortnight ago, when I challenged the reductions in expenditure on the VisitScotland budget by 18 per cent last year and 12 per cent this year, Mr McAveety disputed the figures. Given that Mr Peter Lederer, the chairman of VisitScotland, has said that it is make or break time for the industry and that "we need a big step change ... VisitScotland should have its £30 million budget increased", will Mr Wilson ask Mr McAveety whether he will review his position on the funding—or lack of it—of VisitScotland?

I agree with the comments that have been made by previous speakers, especially Sarah Boyack's comment about the adoption of a premises-by-premises approach, as opposed to an holistic approach by area. In many areas of the city of Edinburgh, there has been a lack of vision as to just what sort of city centre is desired. That question requires to be examined not just in relation to individual premises. Like others, I welcome the Nicholson report and the Executive's initiative in commissioning it. I regret that the hares have been set running as regards the idea of 24-hour operation, which is unfortunate, unfair and fundamentally untrue. The report should be discussed and debated not just by MSPs, but by representatives of all sections of society in all areas. It is not simply about licensing hours or regulation; it is about our fundamental attitudes to alcohol and about the perception and role of licensed premises in society. It is a question of how we view our society and how we wish others to view us. That will require an in-depth and intense discussion. We should take an holistic approach to the report, because Sheriff Principal Nicholson and the rest of his committee have considered matters in an overarching fashion and it would detract from their report if we were to start isolating individual issues here and there instead of considering the sum of the parts. I wish to address two particular areas: tourism and Murrayfield stadium. We have been having a continuing debate regarding tourism standards in Scotland. That manifests itself in two ways in particular. First, there is the care and comfort that is provided both to visitors and to our own people who care to utilise premises such as hotels and, in particular, licensed premises. Secondly, there is the availability of facilities for, and our attitude towards, children.  There has been a great deal of public criticism lately about the quality of service that is provided in Scotland. A great deal of that criticism is unjustified, although some of it most certainly is justified. It is partly a question about how we view people who work in the licensed trade. On the continent, where standards and service are often viewed as being higher than standards here, people who work in the sector are viewed as professionals. In this country, work in the licensed sector is perceived as being low-skilled and low-paid employment. We cannot, even through any legislation that might arise from the Nicholson report, necessarily address the question of low pay, although we can address the issue of a low-skilled work force. If we address professionalisation, that would enhance the situation and improve the quality of service. If we succeed in professionalising the trade, the resulting improvement in quality of service will benefit the tourism sector. Both Nicola Sturgeon and Sarah Boyack commented on the children's access to pubs. I have commented before today on the problem of children's certificates in this city. It is absurd that, on our main tourism drag—if I can call the Royal Mile that—only one licensed premises has a children's certificate. That is not what tourists who visit Holyrood palace at the bottom of the Royal Mile or the castle at the top are looking for.

I accept fully what Sarah Boyack said, as the report covers those points. There is no suggestion by the committee that every pub should be open to children. It is clearly a question of which pubs want to open to children and which could appropriately do so. There has to be a change in how we perceive the issue and there has to be a lightening up of how the legislation is enforced. I understand that to an extent the problem is not with the legislation but with its interpretation, especially by licensing boards. We have to address the issue of children in pubs if we wish to create a cafe-bar culture, although we could not create such a culture everywhere, because not every premises would be suitable for that, nor indeed would we want every licensed premises to reflect or replicate what exists on the continent. However, we must try to encourage that culture in many areas, not just in relation to having  a family-friendly environment and access for children, but in terms of a general change away from the forbidden-fruit culture that we have had in Scotland. That would have an effect on professionalisation and it would improve the quality of service. I make a plea to the Minister for Justice to view Murrayfield stadium as separate. Although I have been arguing for an holistic approach, I believe that Murrayfield is distinct. I ask the minister to accept the representations that other MSPs in Edinburgh have made—I see that David McLetchie is about to speak—and in particular, the representations from the Scottish Rugby Union, which requires a level playing field on which to compete. Murrayfield is distinct in that it came voluntarily within the ambit of the legislation. There is no suggestion of any trouble at Murrayfield. There is certainly no suggestion that there is trouble at the Millennium stadium or at Twickenham, both of which serve alcohol. The SRU has to compete on the international stage, not just in the rugby world cup, but in attracting events to Murrayfield. In order to do that, it needs at least to be able to match what is provided at the Millennium stadium and Twickenham, never mind in other stadiums. I ask the minister to take on board the SRU's representations, to consider subordinate legislation and the very minor step that would be required to allow Murrayfield to compete, and thereafter to consider the report in an overarching fashion.

I concur with the minister's comments on the success of the tourism industry this season. I suggest that we should reward success rather than punish it. Why is funding for VisitScotland down 18 per cent this year and why will it be down 12 per cent next year? Should we not support and fund our tourist board rather than leave it underfunded?

While I welcome the minister's comments, I express surprise, given his answer to a written question last week. When the minister was asked about the information that he had on the capacity and usage of lines between Edinburgh and Aberdeen, he said that the information was not held centrally. When he was asked what direction and guidance the Executive had given to the Strategic Rail Authority regarding capacity and usage on that line, he said that it was not a matter for the Executive, but for the Strategic Rail Authority. How can the minister make bland promises when he does not know the existing situation on the line, and he has no control over future events?

First, I congratulate my colleague Sandra White on securing this debate. I intimate that my colleague Fiona Hyslop tenders her apologies. She is elsewhere. I agree with much of what Robert Brown and Bill Aitken said. There are two important items that I wish to touch on. The first is the importance of aviation and the second is the importance of a national strategy for Scotland. Aviation is not simply about leisure and pleasure, which is where I disagree with Chris Ballance. It is also about the economy. It is about inbound tourism and it is about outbound  business. I am aware of representations that were made by him and by AirportWatch earlier today. I accept that unrestricted air traffic growth is not acceptable. It is simply unsustainable. We need to balance the needs and wants of our economy with the sustainability of our environment. I accept that that is what Chris Ballance said.

I am sorry, but I cannot, because of the time. The tragedy is that the debacle over the east coast main line has caused unmitigated growth in the number of flights to London. For example, easyJet has 106 flights per week to London from Edinburgh, 83 from Glasgow, and one to an international destination. We require to ensure not that it is a case of growth in any which operator to any which airport in London, but that flights to London are reduced, except where people are interlining, because the points that Robert Brown and Bill Aitken made are clear—we cannot expect flights to Rio de Janeiro, but we can expect flights to many major European cities. We should offset the growth in direct flights by improving and enhancing the east coast and west coast main lines. We also accept the benefits of what has been announced with regard to the west coast main line. Examples from the continent of what can be achieved are clear. Nobody in their right mind would take a flight from Brussels to Paris; they would go by train. There is no necessity to go to Charles de Gaulle airport or Beauvais airport to access Brussels national airport. People would think that someone who did that was stark raving bonkers. What people do is go by train. We must remember that we are an island community, we have remote communities within our country, and we are on the periphery of Europe. For those reasons, and for those reasons alone, we require a major aviation network—not, as I said, simply to support more and ever-growing routes to London, but to support routes elsewhere. A national strategy is important, as our route needs and wants are not the same as those of London. The important point to BAA is where Heathrow stands vis-à-vis Charles de Gaulle, Schiphol and Frankfurt? Our interest is not simply in ensuring that Heathrow remains number 1, as opposed to number 5. Our interest is in maintaining and enhancing access to each of those airports. That is why we need a national aviation strategy for Scotland that is distinct and separate from that south of the border. Of course, we will continue to interline mainly through major airports such as Heathrow, but we need direct access to airports other than Heathrow.  I will not go into the BAA monopoly—I have waxed lyrical about that before—but I support the motion.

Will the minister give way?

Given the minister's intimation that he will not seek any more powers from the Parliament, will he tell us how much has been guaranteed by the SRA for investment in rail infrastructure?

I welcome the new minister and the commitment that he made to the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line; I am sure that that will be well received within and without the chamber. The election has passed and the coalition has produced a statement in the form of its partnership document. We cannot disagree with the coalition's democratic right to deliver that agreement, or with its contents in relation to transport. I doubt if there are any intentions in the agreement that do not have the universal support of the chamber. I confirm that the minister will have our full support in seeking to deliver and he is correct to emphasise delivery. We have two caveats, the first of which is that this time, the Executive must deliver. The previous parliamentary session was plagued and marred by discussion, debate, studies and consultations, but very little was delivered. Whether in road miles or rail track miles, the Scottish public was short-changed. We must make progress and we must deliver—for the sake of the Parliament as well as that of the Executive. I welcome the fact that the new minister was not one of the serial spinners who were given ministerial appointments during the previous parliamentary session and he is entitled to be given the benefit of the doubt. Secondly, we must make progress and there are two key ways to do so. Minor changes can be made at little cost. As the minister is aware, not all benefits are dependent upon substantial capital investment. For example, there must be proper enforcement of bus lanes and other road traffic regulations. The bureaucracy that plagues local authorities must be eased so that they can deliver on that. If the minister is not prepared to take on board support for re-regulation of the buses, which we believe is a prerequisite, the Executive and the Parliament must consider how to improve quality  contracts because they are not delivering at the moment. The minister also spoke of walking and cycling; modest support for those could go a long way. The major aspect remains that the Parliament's existing powers are unable to deliver. If we accept what the minister said about having to deliver on the transport plans, that raises the question of how we are to do that. We understand that the minister has a budget of £3 billion to spend over the next 10 years. When the claims on that budget have been quantified, they appear to amount to almost £2.33 billion. That will leave £700 million to fund the annual ScotRail franchise and the yearly maintenance of our roads network—both are sadly deteriorating and, as has been stated before in the chamber, have been underfunded—for the next 10 years. I suggest that there is a great danger that those figures do not add up. I appreciate that the minister did not have time to elaborate on the concept of the Scottish strategic transport authority, but we believe that it is essential and a prerequisite for making progress. The first five items referred to by the minister as high-level commitments are all rail projects. Each has a substantial cost and each falls within the ambit and remit of the Strategic Rail Authority. If we are going to create a transport authority to deal with Scotland, why should it deal only with the national concessionary fare scheme? Why should it not be given charge of the purse strings that are currently held by the SRA? Why should it not be the democratically elected Parliament and Government that decide who holds the purse strings and controls expenditure on rail projects in Scotland, either directly or through the transport authority? That would mean better accountability to the Parliament and it would allow the minister to give instructions, as opposed to giving directions and guidance as he does at the moment. We need the powers of the Strategic Rail Authority in respect of the internal Scottish rail network to be given to the Scottish transport authority so that we can better deliver. The same applies to flights. I appreciate the minister's comments on the Highlands and Islands. We fund Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd and are responsible for it. Why, then, should we not be responsible for the civil aviation safety regulations and the Department for Transport security regulations, because those regulations are impacting severely on the cost of landing and fares? If we wish to increase usage and reduce costs—which is imperative if we are to increase usage—this Parliament should have those powers. That is not constitutional change for constitutional change's sake: it is a matter of  allowing the Executive and the Parliament to have a better, democratically accountable, transport network, and to have the powers to deliver the same. We welcome the minister's comments. We will support him, but he must deliver, and to deliver, he needs powers. This is not a constitutional debate; it is about delivery and taking the powers to deliver what our people demand and are entitled to expect. I move amendment S2M-130.3, to insert at end: "notes that the delivery of tangible improvements within defined timescales is essential; recognises, furthermore, that in order to achieve these an integrated and inter-modal public transport network is required, and therefore calls for the transfer of the legislative and financial powers to the Parliament that are necessary to address fully rail and aviation services in addition to bus and ferry services in order to ensure the delivery of the network sought."

I welcome the minister's announcement about the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, but will he advise members whether a tolling arrangement will be imposed on it?

As Fiona Hyslop said, the problem that the Executive seeks to address today offers the Parliament an opportunity to address a broader malaise in our society. Robin Harper made an apt point about the general health of our children and, as someone who travels extensively, I have to say that I am frequently amazed at how much healthier children in foreign parts are compared with our children. I am not speaking only about children in warmer climes. In Finland, which has similar climatic conditions and size of population to Scotland, the children are generally healthier and fitter than ours. School meals are not necessarily a panacea—broader social and health problems have to be addressed—but they have to be factored in. School meals are an important part of an all-round education that involves not only scholastic elements but lifestyle elements. Free school meals are essential for many. They are welcomed—even if denigrated—by generation upon generation of schoolchildren.

I have no doubt that it is significant. As I said, free school meals are only one ingredient of the health of Finnish schoolchildren. There is a variety. We must take  cognisance of that. Mr Monteith's point is well made, and I accept it. I will make three points in support of Fiona Hyslop's amendment: the provision of meals to those least able to afford them; the provision of a nutritious diet and an education in such for all, not only those who are in receipt of the free meals; and the requirement to ensure value for money not only in the provision of the meal, but for the public purse. It is appropriate and logical that we should deal with those points in reverse order. It is self-evident that public funds are limited. They are not infinite. We cannot simply inject more money to achieve better value for many, as we know from many areas of the public sector. Significantly more funds are being added to budgets, but little discernible change results. We must consider how to provide the best quality and best value. I have listened to the debate—the spat, if I can put it that way—on universality versus means testing. In the main, I believe in universality, but there must be limits. Unless we are prepared to impose crippling general taxation, we must accept that universal benefits cannot be available to all. I would welcome that being debated in the Parliament, because we must move the Parliament from being simply one of spend, spend, spend to one that spends what it taxes and raises. I hope that the Labour members in particular will realise that, until we have all the powers of financial independence, we will have difficulty addressing matters such as free school meals by any means other than holding out the begging bowl to Westminster.

Not at the moment. I will come back. On the provision of a nutritious diet, I accept that a stigma has been attached to school meals, but I also accept that that can be addressed in a variety of ways. Murdo Fraser touched on the fact that there is, in many instances, a deeper malaise. The fact that many children refuse to take school dinners is due in large part to a cultural divide. It is not that they simply dislike what is provided, but they prefer to go out of the school. That may not be what we wish or in their best interests, but it is what they do. I do not accept that the problem would be solved simply by providing free school meals and requiring the children to be in school for them. We need to go beyond that. There is the question of resources and how we would cope with the disciplinary demands to which the requirement would give rise. It is not simply a matter of requirement. We must address the question of the ingredients and where we go from there.  I am open minded about the best method of provision. I accept that, as the minister said in his opening speech, there have been successful attempts. Cathy Peattie mentioned the breakfast clubs in Glasgow, which give substantial added benefit. There is a good argument that breakfast is the most important meal of the day for a child who is being educated—especially a child from a poor background, who might not have received any breakfast.

I have no doubt. I do not know the detail of the scheme, but I accept its benefit. I also accept that free fruit is important, as it not only provides the sustenance that is required for the individual child, but is a way of moving our society towards a change in culture and lifestyle. It is much harder to legislate for a change in culture than it is to legislate for many other things. Provision for those who are least able to afford school meals is a key aspect. If we fail to provide for them, there is no alternative for them. I am open to persuasion on whether that is best dealt with by universal provision, a combination of breakfast clubs and free fruit or whatever else—subject to the requirement that cognisance must be taken of the financial constraints and limitations that exist. The amendment in Fiona Hyslop's name seeks, first, to make provision for the least able. That is essential and must clearly be at the top of the agenda. Secondly, we must seek to change the attitudes of children from all classes and across all parental wage barriers. Thirdly, we must take cognisance of best value, not just in terms of the meal being provided, but in terms of what we are providing as legislators, charged with responsibility for the public purse.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the commencement date will be for the construction of the Edinburgh tram network. (S2O-39)

Can the minister tell Edinburgh's pensioners whether they will ride on the trams under the concessionary fares scheme for travel on buses or whether they will be restricted to the second-class scheme that is available for travel on trains?

I preface my remarks by saying that they relate to  the nature of the office of Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport and to the structure of the Cabinet, not to the ability or competence of the minister involved. Frank McAveety is one of the most convivial members; he served ably and competently as a deputy minister and I am sure that he is perfectly capable of doing the job. My objections are twofold. First, I object to the creation of a hybrid—ministers who attend the full Cabinet, but who receive the pay of a deputy minister. Secondly, I object to the nature of the post—the absence of key powers means that the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport will be unable to do the job properly. On my first objection, Mr McAveety has been elevated to the Cabinet from his position as a deputy, but is he a senior junior minister because he is in the Cabinet, or a junior senior minister because he is not on full pay? He is not a junior junior as he is politically within, but he is not a senior senior as he is financially without. What powers do the new breed of ministers possess? Is voting salary weighted? Are the new ministers politically as well as financially worth less around the Cabinet table? Are they on trial? If they deliver, will they be promoted and receive full pay and status? The corollary is that if a current senior senior minister fails to deliver, they could face being reduced to a senior junior, which might cause a ripple of fear round the Cabinet table. My second objection is about the powers of the new minister. The full list and job description are clear. The position moved from being a deputy post in the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Department at the commencement of the previous parliamentary session to being a full Cabinet position and has now been reduced to a hybrid post. Does the position have the powers to deliver what is necessary for the tourism industry, which, after all, is our biggest industry? Does the position have the powers and financial levers to deal with marketing, training and accessibility? Reserved matters are fundamentally important, but let us leave them aside and address some generalities. Do business rates fall within the domain of the new minister? No. Does training fall within his domain? No—it appears to remain with Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the enterprise network, which are within the responsibility of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Department. However, everyone accepts that training is important if we are to improve the quality of service. Accessibility is fundamental for our island nation because we require visitors to come and we cannot simply move visitors about. However, the responsibility for transport is elsewhere. Let us consider some specifics. One of the most important accessibility issues for tourism in the  north is that of landing charges and the disincentive for low-cost carriers or other operators to operate reasonably priced flights in and out of Inverness airport, never mind other airports. However, Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd does not appear to fall within the new minister's remit, but remains elsewhere. The Scottish National Party supported the route development fund, which was initiated in the previous session. However, that fund was announced by Lewis Macdonald, as Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. Who is in charge now? Is it with Mr Macdonald and enterprise, with Mr Stephen and transport or with Mr McAveety and tourism? Who is in charge of the route development fund and its impact on tourism? The proposals seem to have been fixed by the master fixer to reduce the Cabinet, but it is a short-term fix that will unravel. To describe the proposals using a Scottish term from the fishing domain, they are a typical guddle. I move amendment S2M-52.3, to leave out "Mr Frank McAveety".

Listening to the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, I was reminded of Harold Macmillan's phrase: "You've never had it so good." My colleague Andrew Wilson ably showed that that is not the case, from the point of view either of people in our society as a whole or of the business community. The other Harold Macmillan phrase that springs to mind is his criticism of the Tories for selling off the family silver. That reference was used against a Tory Government, but it could equally be used against the current Lib-Lab Administration, which is selling off schools, hospitals and other parts of the public sector and leaving us to pay for years to come. Mr Davidson will be keen to know that we support an aspect of public-private partnership: the harmony that must exist between the state and  the private sector in driving forward our economy. We recognise that the dynamo for the economy will be the business community. However, the state has a clear and pivotal role in providing the transport and telecommunications infrastructures and the skills. As I and other members have said before, it is not the responsibility of an employer to ensure that a worker is literate or numerate; that is the responsibility of the state. It is not the responsibility of the employer to ensure access to broadband; that is the responsibility of the state. It is not the responsibility of the employer to ensure that goods can be taken to market; it is the responsibility of the state to ensure that we have adequate road, rail and other networks. That is where PPP has to come in, not in the context of selling off our schools and hospitals.

Not at the moment. We must recognise that we have to go for growth. It is fundamental that we have a consensus. Nobody owes us a living. We are a small nation and we must recognise that we have to punch our weight. Sadly, we have not been punching our weight and people in all strata of our society have paid a price for that. Transport impacts and impinges on our arguments for cutting business rates. We are a small, geographically peripheral nation that is distant from its markets. We have a difficult terrain on our mainland and we have remote island and Highland communities. We must provide adequate transport and telecommunications infrastructures and we have to punch above our weight in many areas if we are to compete. We have not been competing because we have not been punching above our weight. We must take that fact on board. The problem has mainly derived from the stop-startism that is reflected not just in the UK economy, but in how the UK has dealt with transport policy. That approach continued even under the Labour Government down south after 1997. Prescott came in and stopped road building; we passed through Byers and we are now at Darling, starting again. There has been an on-going, stop-start, rail-in, rail-out, buses-start, buses-stop policy. That cannot go on. We require instead to build a consensus to move forward. One criticism that is levelled at the SNP is that there would be a lack of stability if we came to power. However, the current situation is inherently unstable. At present, we have control over roads, but not over rail. We control the Highlands and Islands flights, but not international flights. Those two matters are inherently unstable. We must be able to deal with international flights as much as  we can protect Barra. We must be able to deal with rail as much as we can deal with road, because both are equally important in punching our weight in the 21 st century.

The company has said that it has a car pool and an office building. It does not own one train. That may come as a surprise to the minister, but the trains are leased and leases can be taken over. Yes, we wish to take the ScotRail franchise back, because privatisation of the rail network has been an unmitigated disaster. To its credit, Labour in London has taken Railtrack back into the public sector as Network Rail. The next logical step is to take the ScotRail franchise back into the public sector and to integrate it with the Strategic Rail Authority and Network Rail in Scotland. That would provide not just a better service, but cost savings, because we will stop the proliferation of situations in which three people in three organisations are doing the same job. I must say that there is a great deal of sympathy among the minister's back benchers about where we want to go with that idea, never mind among the trade unions. We must decide where we are going as a nation. We must have a partnership between the business community and Scotland. However, we must recognise some of the fundamental aspects of the matter. As we come to the end of this four-year session of Parliament, it is no good continually to make excuses or for Labour to say that it has had insufficient time and that it was all Margaret Thatcher's fault. The fact is that this session of Parliament is drawing to a close. We should draw a line under it and decide where we want to go.

I am just winding up now. We must stop making excuses, we must start taking responsibility and we must release our nation's potential. I support the SNP amendment.

At the outset, I will say that there was one point, and one point only, on which I agreed with David McLetchie—Trish Godman quite correctly touched on it, too—which is that we must be wary of strident anti-Americanism. Nobody has asked the prairie farmers in the American mid-west, the black community in Chicago, New York or anywhere else in America or the Hispanic community in the southern states whether the military action is being taken in their name. The action is being taken in the name of George Bush and his oligarchy alone. I do not like to be flippant at this time. I do not want to condemn or make jokes about a President who is an actor, but it may be time for Martin Sheen to take power from "The West Wing" into the White House. However, let us avoid being condemnatory of the American people; the action is being taken not in their name any more than it is in ours. There has been criticism of the UN. The attacks have come from all sides: from those in the UK-USA alliance who seek to bribe, cajole and threaten the poorer, weaker countries; from those who are sceptical that the poorer and weaker countries can last the pace and stand up to the threats, prevarication and bribery; and from those who have seen the institutions devalued by what has happened or by the lack of progress over a generation on the Israel-Palestine conflict. We have to remember the historical precedent. After the first world war, we came together and formed the League of Nations. When that organisation was undermined, it collapsed and the world fell into a conflict that was total war. We thought that we had learned as a result of that and we set up the United Nations because we wanted to learn—the watchword was "Never again". The way in which we are going now undermines the United Nations. I am not the only member to have used these words in the chamber: "Those who refuse to learn from history are condemned to repeat it."  God forbid—not in our name. We should also stop the criticisms of the European way, which to some extent we heard from the First Minister. Along with other members, I listened to Pat Cox and I recall his congratulations for the European way. There are those who criticise France, Germany and wherever else needlessly and blindly. As Pat Cox said, we should compare and contrast the way that supports the International Court of Justice with the way of Guantanamo bay. I support the International Court of Justice. The United Nations must be pulled in. The old European way is much more sensible and much more conducive to European peace than the way of Guantanamo bay is, which sees detention without trial among other things. What can members do? There are those who say that we should not discuss the military action, but thankfully we have moved on from that stance and from asking what an independent Scotland would do. We need to look at what a devolved country can do if it has the will to act. Let us consider Quebec, a province that the First Minister maligned and denigrated. The Quebec National Assembly discussed the matter on Tuesday in a debate on a motion without notice. The motion said that the Assembly should "declare its opposition to possible military action that would disregard the Charter of the United Nations and international law ... ask the Federal Government, on behalf of Quebecers, who expressed themselves in favour of peace, to not intervene in Iraq without the approval of the United Nations ... commend the concerted effort of the citizens' group ... and applaud the attachment of Quebecers to peace." The motion was presented not only by the Leader of the Opposition, but by the Prime Minister and a member of the Assembly, and it was passed unanimously. The First Minister has denigrated the province of Quebec and maligned its Prime Minister, but Quebec has shown what can be done even in a devolved chamber. The military action is not in the name of Quebec and it must not be in the name of the Scottish Parliament or the Scottish nation.

The tenor of the debate has been, "Whose Government is worse than ours?", as the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive trades punches with the Tories. The Tories are trying to conjure up imagery of 18 glorious years. Mr McLetchie waxed eloquently about crime and law and order. That was from a party that cherishes the United Kingdom, but presided over the worst urban riots seen south of the border in centuries. The streets of Toxteth, Handsworth and Tottenham testified to that in the 1980s. The Tories set the United Kingdom on a path following the right-wing agenda of the USA under "Reaganomics" and the trickle-down economy. All that failed, bringing social discord and tension. I expect no better from the Conservatives, but the people of Scotland were entitled to expect better from new Labour. Mr McLetchie attacks what he describes as a centre-left establishment—we should be so lucky. I see that as an opportunity. One of the strengths of this party should be to create a centre-left agenda to allow our people to prosper. I do not want to see our country continue down the path that we are currently following: that of the USA-UK-Australia model, with all the problems of social inequality that that brings, creating "haves" and "have nots", alienating huge swathes of our society and resulting in crime, ill health, delinquency and alcohol and drug abuse. We have the opportunity to follow a different agenda, based on economic growth, but recognising the responsibility that a state has. There must be a welfare state and it is the duty of a state to look after people irrespective of their income, wealth and power. We should not dismantle the welfare state, as was done in the 1980s and 1990s, and which continues to be done in the 21 st century under new Labour.

Ms Alexander will get her opportunity later. The Scotland that we seek is not based on Bush or Clinton's United States of America; it is based on Persson and Palme's Sweden. We would much  prefer to follow that direction. But what of the Lib-Lab position? They say, "Not our fault, guv; it's all the fault of the Tories' mess." One Scottish Parliament, two UK Governments, three First Ministers later, they say that it is nothing to do with them; it is all the fault of 18 years of Tory rule. There comes a time when the buck stops with those in the Administration. That was highlighted yesterday in the ministerial statement on transport. An Executive is judged not on the brochures and the studies that it publishes, or its manifesto commitments for a future period of office, but on what it achieved during its tenure. Three transport ministers later, three years and 10 months into office, three weeks from dissolution, the Executive was asked—as Mr Mundell mentioned—"How many miles of road have you built and how many miles of track have you laid?" We received no answer yesterday or today. The proof of the pudding is in the eating and the Executive has failed in terms of the tangibles. The Executive had a fair wind as the first Scottish Executive in 300 years. It had the empathy, sympathy and support of the people of Scotland, but all it offers is excuses. The time has come to stop looking back and apportioning blame to what happened in the 1980s and 1990s and to start looking forward to what the solutions are, so that we can compete and prosper in the 21 st century. I believe that that means allowing our country to prosper and to go forward, to release our potential, to stop looking at the problems that we have and to start looking at what we can achieve. That means giving the Parliament the proper powers of an independent nation and that means that we must go forward recognising the necessity of economic growth balanced with a stable society in which a state has a role, duty and obligations. That means having a change in the elections on 1 May to a nationalist Administration.

An Executive is judged neither on the number of brochures published, on studies promoted nor on a manifesto for a future period of office; it is judged on its record. After three transport ministers and three years and 10 months in office, with three weeks until the dissolution of the Parliament, can the minister tell us how many miles of road the Executive has built and how many miles of track it has laid?

I am grateful for the minister's comments. I should point out that I am not about to make a tautological argument; instead, there is a matter of the emphasis that we should put in the bill. I accept that all parties are trying to head in the same direction. However, we should make a bold public declaration at the outset about how we view matters. The minister's comments about the lifetime of the bill are actually an argument for including a reference to broadband in section 1. After all, amendment 2 would give the Executive the power to acknowledge changes in technology. It would be no more absurd to accept that broadband technology will change over 44 years—indeed, with improvements in ADSL, it already has—than to accept that there will be changes in the delivery of water and electricity supplies. We view those issues as fundamental; they have not been left out of previous legislation simply because technology might change. Indeed, in the  period between the enactment of the Building (Scotland) Act 1959 and the passage of this bill, the provision of other public utilities and supplies has varied enormously. I will press amendment 1. My argument is not tautological. I simply want to put down in clear, bold black and white that this Government and legislature believe that broadband is just as vital as any other public utility as far as provision to residential or commercial developments is concerned.

In speaking to amendment 1, I want to ask three questions. The questions are: What are we trying to do? Why are we trying to do it? How can we achieve it? My fourth point will be my response to what I understand to be the minister's position—if I am wrong he will, no doubt, correct me. First, what are we trying to do? The purpose of the bill is to ensure that the Scottish economy can compete in the 21 st century. That is accepted throughout the chamber and by all parties; I am certainly not suggesting that there is any monopoly on the desire to ensure that broadband is rolled out. We must ensure that broadband is rolled out as speedily and as well as possible. The SNP believes that the bill is one method of doing that. Amendment 1 is to some extent not party political. It is an industry amendment. Those who have been advising and assisting me come not so much from the ranks of my political party, but from those who represent the interests of people trying to roll out broadband technology in the commercial world. In particular, I record my thanks to David Flint of MacRoberts Solicitors and to Polly Purvis of ScotlandIS. Why are we trying to achieve the aims? Although it is clear that there is, among those who have political power, a desire to see broadband technology being taken up, and among the populace a desire to use broadband, significant difficulties are being experienced by many in trying to achieve that end. Hardly a member will not be aware of the difficulties, and the problems are not restricted to rural areas or to old houses; they encompass all of our communities—those that are adjacent to major urban conurbations and those in much more rural areas. It is not simply a matter of not having access to broadband technology; some people have the additional problem of being able to gain access only at an unaffordable price. Both elements must be addressed. The SNP believes that the bill is an opportunity to balance the current debate about strategy. Do we achieve roll-out of broadband technology by stimulating take-up or by providing the right infrastructure? It is a matter of balance. We are  stimulating take-up, as can be seen in television advertisements, albeit that they come from the commercial sector, including companies such as BT. However, we are also required to ensure that we roll out the infrastructure for those who want the opportunity to use broadband—those who are excited and ignited by that desire. We need a strategy and, in many respects, we concur with the Executive's strategy. Aggregation of the public sector is sensible and it is the way in which we must proceed. However, when I discuss that with members of the industry, the subject is seen as a no-brainer. We have an opportunity at the outset, as we build developments—whether commercial or residential—to ensure that we do not replicate the mistakes that we have made previously. In the past, we have seen a short-term approach being taken, with short-term savings being made, but we have ended up having to pay more. We can now ensure that we lay the foundations at the beginning. How will we achieve our aims? We are trying to make it clear from the outset that as a legislature we believe that Scotland's future is about being a high-tech, rather than a low-wage, economy. That means that we must acknowledge the importance of rolling out broadband technology, which must be included in any new construction, whether residential or commercial. We must recognise that to achieve that, we will have to empower the Executive in due course. We must also recognise that what might be appropriate for urban Scotland might not be appropriate for rural Scotland, and that what should be compulsory for a certain number of houses in an urban development might not be appropriate for Wester Ross. We must recognise that technology will be different in the future. In many areas of urban Scotland, we might insist upon the use of fibreoptics, but that would be unaffordable for some areas of rural Scotland. However, it could be ensured that some form of wireless technology is provided. Moreover, we must accept that the rate of change in technology is fast. Since the Parliament has been in situ, we have seen changes in ADSL; its ability to deliver broadband technology has improved. We should therefore empower not just the people but the Executive so that as things change and develop we ensure that we see delivery throughout the country. I shall now comment on what I understand to be the Executive's position, which is that it is prepared to accept amendment 2, but not amendment 1. We welcome that because it will allow us to pursue our aims. My view is best explained in an e-mail that I received from those who have been advising me. They say: "an explicit reference is an opportunity to distinguish broadband as more than just a convenience and would  help reinforce the Executive's commitment to strategies such as Connecting Scotland: our broadband future." I accept that if we proceed by simply accepting amendment 2, but not amendment 1, we can deliver. In support of amendment 1, however, I say that it would put the imprimatur of this legislature on the fact that we want to ensure that broadband is rolled out. More important, it would show that we see broadband as being important for our economy and our society as we compete in the 21 st century world. Agreement to amendment 1 would lay down a marker and make it clear that Parliament wants Scotland to compete with other nations, whether Singapore, Finland or wherever. I move amendment 1.

The minister will be aware of reports that seem to suggest that, rather than trying to improve services, the Strategic Rail Authority is seeking to reduce them by instructions that it is giving to ScotRail. Did the minister give directions and guidance to the SRA to do that? If not, on what basis did the SRA act? Is that not clear proof that we need to take the ScotRail franchise back into public ownership?

Is the member aware that BAA proposes to increase landing charges, which will mean that people from Scotland who fly to London will have the privilege of paying for the construction of Heathrow terminal 5, which will cost £3.8 billion? Is the member aware that whatever BAA has put into the route development fund will be offset by what we will have to pay and that those payments towards Heathrow terminal 5 will help to ensure that we always have to fly into Heathrow?

There is a lot of good news in the Scottish tourism industry, but we should not be fooled by the figures for 2002. The 2002 figures simply look good because 2001 was such a disaster, and there are long-term structural problems that need to be addressed. It is fair to say that we welcome the report, particularly because we recognise that tourism is our biggest industry and that its wants and needs are often ignored. That is perhaps part of a cultural hang-up that afflicts our country in recruiting staff and in other aspects of the industry. Scotland and the Scots must recognise that service is not  servility and that tourism is not incompatible with a strong manufacturing base. Many small and large European nations see that as something that is complementary, and perhaps the classic embodiment of that view is the state of California, which has a modern, go-ahead manufacturing economy and which also ensures that its tourism is a high-quality product. The industry must be welcomed for its worth and benefit, and its denigration, in all sections of our society, must cease. Collectively—I mean nationally, rather than from a specific political position—we must stop lecturing and start listening to the industry. We must stop complaining and start delivering and we must stop going on about the bad aspects and start praising the good aspects. There are problems in tourism in Scotland, but the good sectors are far better than those that are failing to deliver, and there is service in California that is just as bad as that in some areas of Scotland. Fundamentally, the debate is about the role of VisitScotland. The fundamental role of VisitScotland must be about selling Scotland. If it will not sell Scotland, who else will? At the end of the day, VisitScotland's duty is to ensure not that it sells the product of an individual hotelier or restaurateur but that it engenders the whole concept of coming to Scotland. The individual operator will sell the specific product, but the requirement for VisitScotland is to sell an interest in coming to our country. VisitScotland must be moved away from being a regulatory body and a tourist police force to being a marketing force for Scotland. There are more than enough bodies addressing a plethora of regulation. We do not require VisitScotland to come in with additional bureaucracy on top of that. It must focus on selling Scotland abroad, just as Tourism Ireland is focused on selling Ireland.

Those matters are dealt with by local authorities. We have environmental health departments and an array of other bodies to deal with those matters. We should compare how Scotland and VisitScotland punch in comparison with Ireland and Tourism Ireland. Tourism Ireland sells Ireland rather than running round policing Ireland. It ensures that it delivers quality. The quality in Ireland is no better than in Scotland, but Tourism Ireland outperforms VisitScotland  considerably. We must move on and accept that. There are important matters to mention in relation to the report, such as the necessity of the industry playing a leading role. That is something that should have been viewed as common sense. If it has not been dealt with, it must be. The best folk to advise and deal with the industry are clearly those who work in it. We must take on board the benefits of such an approach. We support direct air services. I want to talk about two matters in particular in that respect—BAA and HIAL. My colleague Margaret Ewing will speak at length about HIAL—what is happening with the company is a scandal and the Executive and the First Minister cannot shirk responsibility. We are talking about the First Minister's airport—he is the sole shareholder. Everybody now acknowledges the problems with PFIs. There is more than one way to address the matter, but it must be addressed. On direct routes, we support the growth of a route development fund, but we are rather surprised that its purpose should be to lower landing charges. That seems to me to go against the interests of marketing direct routes. We are in danger of subsidising an airport operator that has a monopoly and imposes landing charges that are outrageous in comparison with the charges at airports south of the border, never mind competitor airports elsewhere. Why should we keep that operator in the standard of living to which it has become accustomed? Mr Donald Dowds, who is the chief executive of BAA, does not like the committee's report. If that is the case, perhaps he should consider whether his position as a VisitScotland board member is compatible with proposals to open up and pursue direct services. If he cannot deliver, he should not remain on VisitScotland's board. BAA has failed Scotland and that matter requires to be addressed. The position of the BTA must be addressed, too. We do not see a requirement for VisitScotland to have a plethora of offices. We recognise that VisitScotland, as the national marketing body for Scotland, has the best people to sell Scotland. It is absurd to suggest that Scotland can be sold better by the BTA when the BTA is trying to sell an entirely different concept. As others have suggested, if that were true, Tourism Ireland would be lining up to be taken aboard and brought into the bosom of the BTA. No doubt the Portuguese also would seek to be sucked into the benefits that are provided by the Spanish tourism authority. Nobody with a different product seeks to hand it over to their competitors.

I am sorry, but I am approaching my final minute.  The situation is unacceptable and must be changed—it simply cannot continue. VisitScotland should decide where it wishes to market. I do not believe that the benefits of using the BTA offices are shown in any statistical information. We should also bear in mind who sits on the BTA's board, in the main. The BTA exists to fly people in on British Airways to a BAA airport down in London and thereafter disperse people north. If people are happy to go beyond York to Edinburgh, we may benefit, but the prospect of their going north of Edinburgh—even beyond the Trossachs—is rare. On the area tourist boards, it is simply unacceptable for the minister to say that he has kicked the review into the long grass and that a decision will be taken some time after the election. As in other aspects of Scottish society, the Executive is compounding study by consultancy and reviewing us to death. I have a time line. In February 2000, a new strategy for tourism was launched by the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning—I think that it was Henry McLeish. The decision to launch that strategy was correct. In October 2000, the PricewaterhouseCoopers report was published. In November 2001, Wendy Alexander announced an area tourist board review at the "Scotland united" tourism conference. In May 2002, the ATB review commenced. In September 2002, the consultation period for the review closed. In December 2002, Mike Watson announced at the "Scotland united" tourism conference in Crieff that he hoped to make an announcement on the ATB review early in the new year. Today is 13 February and we have been told that, despite the launch of a new strategy in February 2000 and the fact that we have gone through three ministers, no decision will be made until after the election. That is simply unacceptable. There is unity in the industry on what needs to be done. We need a decision, not a minister who is afraid of deciding and is again postponing, studying and consulting us unto death. He is presiding over the death throes of businesses because he will not decide.

Is the member aware of the report by the Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee, under Gerald Kaufman, on the changes to the BTA and the  English Tourism Council? It appears that the Westminster committee went further than the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee did in its interesting report in indicating its hostility and opposition to the changes that Ms Jowell has announced. The Westminster committee report calls for a properly federated structure for the BTA. In the light of that, does Miss Goldie wish to reconsider whether the Scottish Parliament should go further than the committee has done in expressing our distaste about being boxed in by having to go through the British Tourist Authority?

Will the member give way?

Annabel Goldie denigrates my colleague, Andrew Wilson, for his lack of business experience. Given that her experience as a city-centre senior partner in a law firm reflects mine, and I have never considered myself a business guru, I think that that is rather rich. I want to make two specific points about the debate. We must recognise two matters: first, that there is a fundamental need for economic growth; and, secondly, that there is a need for political consensus around that. As other members have said, it is quite clear that nobody owes us a living. We are a small nation on the periphery of Europe and we need to punch our weight. We have not been doing so, and we have lagged behind as a consequence. As a result, we are paying the price in lowered living standards. We owe it not just to ourselves but to future generations to resolve that problem. That leads me to my second point, on the creation of a cross-party consensus. There are historical lessons. Ireland and Finland have been referred to, not just by me but by other members. We must recognise that their structural difficulties, which were substantial and, arguably, far greater than the ones that we face, were addressed on the basis of national consensus built on political consensus. We must recognise that the matter will not be dealt with by one political party or in one term of Government. It needs longer-term action and it needs consensus across the board. We cannot continue to reflect the UK stop-start  attitude, which got us into such difficulties and gave us the problems that we had in the latter part of the 20 th century. A Labour Government came in to change what had been done by a Tory Government, and being replaced by another Government fundamentally undermined us. We must recognise that economic growth will be delivered by members of the Scottish business community, large and small. It is for politicians to allow them to get on with running their businesses, not to lecture them or tell them how to run them. However, Government must provide the framework to allow those businesses to prosper and to achieve their full potential. That leads me to the role of the state and the Government, whose remit falls in key areas. Education and infrastructure are two examples. I have made it clear in previous debates that it is not an employer's responsibility to ensure that their employees can read and write—sadly we have those difficulties in the present day. It is the Government's job to ensure that the work force is job ready—employers can give specific training, but addressing that problem is a state responsibility. The points that Tavish Scott made about telecoms are also true. The difficulty is that we must have a national strategy. An attempt to leave market forces to deal with telecoms will not work. We must ensure that, in areas of Scotland, there is state intervention—

I am sorry, but I am now into the final minute of my speech. I do not think that I would disagree with Tavish Scott in any way, but we must have intervention by the state in telecoms. We must recognise that transport is important.

It is a matter of getting our work force to their jobs and our goods to their markets. David McLetchie may shout, "Nationalisation!" but the fact is that privatisation of the railways was a failure that everyone in this country is paying for. It was brought about by a Tory Government and has brought misery to commuters, freight and the Scottish business sector in its entirety. We must recognise that it is the job of the state to deal with those matters. That means that we must be proactive. We need transport authorities that can regulate the buses to ensure that we do not have the idiocy that we had in the City of Edinburgh, which resulted in the company that Mr McLetchie's firm supported losing £4.2 million. That is hardly a raving business success. We must ensure that we can get access to the markets,  which means having influence and control over our rail network. Today, we have even found out that the Strategic Rail Authority is trying to instruct ScotRail to cut its services. It is time to take charge of our own railways. I support the motion.

Given the fact that Scotland paid its share for rail projects south of the border, including the rail links to Stansted airport and to the channel tunnel, why is there no commitment from the Strategic Rail Authority to fund in full air links to our cities' airports and the redevelopment of Waverley station, which are equally important to our economy? Which new projects will the Strategic Rail Authority fund in full, and when will those be delivered?

I, too, congratulate my colleague Brian Adam on securing the debate, and I concur with the points that he made. Diesel spills are a matter of significant importance to a minority, but they impact upon the majority in a variety of ways. If I may transgress slightly and deal with more general matters, I point out that, if it were not for the inception of this institution—although it takes a great deal of criticism—debates such as this would have been difficult to secure. The Scottish Parliament, for all the brickbats that are flung at it, at least presents an opportunity for such matters to be debated, for a response to be given by the Executive and for individuals to have their views aired. As has been said, diesel spills concern not just motorcyclists; the problem affects drivers of other vehicles. Difficulties with black ice are, to an extent, similar to those that are experienced with diesel spills, but the effects of spills can be just as dangerous and, because they not caused by the vagaries of the weather, we can do something about them. It is to the minister's credit that attempts have been made to enhance road safety. Indeed, such attempts were also made by his predecessor. Clearly, transport policy is not all about the construction of a road infrastructure, not does it all relate to massive capital investment in roads and rail. Action can be of relatively minor significance, but can have massive ramifications. That brings us back to a point to which my colleague Brian Adam alluded. The issue that we are discussing this evening may affect only a few people in terms of the number of road deaths that it causes, but that is of little comfort to the bereaved whose loved ones have been killed in accidents. However, it is to be  hoped that the problem can be addressed and that action will be taken as a result. We must tackle the problem. The numbers involved may be few, but for the individuals concerned, the effects are significant. Tackling the problem would not require masses of legislation. That is the benefit of dealing with such matters by way of a members' business debate. Brian Adam referred to using the road haulage modernisation fund, and doing that would not require legislative change; much more carrot, rather than stick, would be required. We are trying not just to educate the motorcyclist with regard to the actions that they should take to avoid areas where spillages are most likely, but to target the drivers of the vehicles that cause the incidents in an attempt to ensure best practice. I welcome the fact that the minister was promoting the road haulage modernisation fund earlier today. As Brian Adam said, the fund offers an opportunity to deal with the specific issue of diesel spills and the difficulties that they cause to motorists, but we must promote best practice across the board in response to the knock-on effects of spills in other respects. We must pay tribute to Brian Adam for bringing this matter to the attention of the Parliament. I hope that the Executive will take it on board. We do not need to spend a great deal more money than is already being spent to provide training in a variety of areas. This is a matter of ensuring that those who are involved in the distribution of diesel, in particular, follow best practice. People who work in garages should take steps to ensure that spillages are dealt with. We should follow best practice when training those who use motorcycles—an activity in which I do not claim to participate. The debate offers the Parliament an opportunity, through the democratically elected Executive, to bring about significant change—albeit for a minority—that will have substantial benefits. That will ensure that the Parliament delivers what the people of Scotland voted for.

In view of the extension of the scheme to males who are aged 60 to 64, what additional financial resources will be provided to local authorities to ensure that operators can deliver it?

Is not it absurd that we are sending a cricket team to entertain people in Zimbabwe and a task force to destroy people in Iraq, given that they both have despotic leaders and starving populations?

Is the minister aware of any action taken by the EC on the PSO imposed on the Derry to Dublin service in view of the significant improvement in the road infrastructure in the Irish republic and north of the border?

I congratulate my colleague Duncan Hamilton on securing the debate. The issue is crucial to Barra and significant to other remote and island areas in Scotland. Duncan Hamilton has ably dealt with the specifics relating to Barra; I will deal with the generalities and, to some extent, the principles. It is said that a society can be judged not by how it treats its most powerful or wealthy, but by how it treats its poorest and weakest. The corollary may be that a nation can be judged not by how it treats its wealthiest or most powerful areas, but by how it treats its most peripheral and marginal ones. Barra is not big in size or in population and it is most  certainly not big in political clout or muscle. If the Parliament is to look after it and represent it, we must ensure that it is treated with every courtesy and dealt with on equal terms with Bathgate, Baillieston or any other area. Recent history shows that islands in Scotland can be evacuated. I recall that my grandmother's neighbour was an evacuee from St Kilda. Unless the Parliament ensures that there is a strategy to deal with remote and peripheral islands, members can probably take it as read that at the start of the 21 st century we will see evacuations as living islands die because the lifeblood to their communities is stopped. This is not special pleading. There is no giro or dependency culture in those areas. The issue is about islanders' rights as citizens. Those rights are taken for granted in other areas. However, just because the island areas are on the extremity geographically does not mean that they must be so socially or economically. Nations such as Norway and Sweden ensure that their peripheral areas are brought into the hub and fulcrum of society. Hence, Sweden has the concept of making Sweden round—irrespective of where someone resides in that country, they are entitled to participate in the fruits of that society's benefits and labours. I believe that the concept of and term "lifeline services" is somewhat pejorative. It conjures up images of medevacing out the wounded and the sick, as opposed to providing a service that entitles the communities concerned to participate in the social and economic centre of society. The community of Barra seeks little. People there do not have what most of us take for granted, such as a railway station within a reasonable distance by car if not on foot. They do not even have the systems that people in urban areas take for granted, such as street lighting everywhere. However, to some extent the perception is that the Barra community is asking for another bale-out or dole-out. The fact is that the transport link is their right and entitlement. It is unacceptable that the PSO is lasting only a year. The situation must be treated as it was before, and with good reason: if we undermine the service in Barra, we will undermine other services. As my colleague Duncan Hamilton said, the provision of an alternative, improved and enhanced boat service should not result in the removal of the air service. If we were to complete a rail link to the Borders, there would be no suggestion of removing or undermining the equivalent road links; as we improve road and rail links elsewhere in Scotland, we do not do down the ones that already exist. Barra does not have the alternative road or rail links that other places have. Therefore, we must ensure not only that we  maintain the ferry service, but that we enhance and improve the air service to the island.

The SNP welcomes the report and the debate. As a member who does not sit on the committee, I pay tribute to the politicians and civil servants who sat through the inquiry and—more important—to the members of the public and the industry who gave their time and ideas to benefit and advance the matter and to complete the report. It would be remiss of me not also to pay tribute to the convener, who has an affinity with and affection for the industry that goes beyond simply his past employment in it. I commend the report and see it as a basis for taking work forward. We have received the Scottish Executive's response, and I welcome the matters that have been intimated to date. All parties recognise the importance of advancing the  rail industry not just to commuters' comfort but to the social and economic progress of our country. The report's early paragraphs clearly state that transparency is important. That is a fundamental point. Following the post-privatisation fragmentation of the rail sector, it has been difficult for those in the industry—never mind those outside it—to follow what has been spent, where it has been spent, who spent it and what it has been spent on. Such matters cause considerable difficulty. I will return to some of the points that the committee made. A benefit of the Parliament's committee system is that we can reach accords on various matters where there is consensus in a broad arena of political, social and economic interests in Scotland. That is the basis for driving forward matters on which there is committee agreement. The SNP disagrees with some parts of the report and, to an extent, my colleagues minuted those disagreements in the report. I do not wish to spend too much time on such matters, as they will be the subject of debate in due course as we approach the election. However, my disagreements with the report relate more to the pace and extent of development and—perhaps most important of all—to the level of authority to be given to the Parliament and the Scottish Government. We will doubtless return to that matter in the prelude to 1 May and it will be debated in arenas other than this chamber; however, it is important that I outline for the record the parts of the report with which the SNP disagrees. Paragraph 39 of the report mentions stability over the next five years. We believe that stability is a good thing, but the present situation is unstable. A window of opportunity exists that allows us to rethink radically in order to lay the framework for developing the strategy that has, to an extent, been enunciated and encapsulated in the report. We have seen Railtrack change into Network Rail and the minister commented on the ScotRail franchise. A change in the length of the franchise from 15 years to seven years may not have been put into the framework document, but it was certainly anticipated that we were looking at a lengthy franchise—indeed, the previous minister alluded to that. The possibility of an extension of six months, which the legislation allows, has been acknowledged. Most important of all, within the past two days, Network Rail south of the border has acknowledged and taken into public ownership—if I can put it that way—some of the engineering and care-and-maintenance facilities on the London to Reading line, as it has recognised that privatisation has not worked. We do not believe that stability exists, but an important opportunity exists to drive matters forward.  We believe that the situation in which a public operator—in particular the Scottish Government or United Kingdom Government—is precluded from bidding for franchises is absurd, particularly when it is okay for German, Danish or French railways that are wholly owned by their Governments to be operators within the UK or Scotland. It is bizarre and absurd that we trust the public sector of a foreign country, rather than one that is in our own domain and jurisdiction. However, such matters are for the future and it would be churlish to concentrate on the negative as opposed to accentuating the positive. Transparency is vital. It is also important that we have accounts from the SRA. Mr Bowker did not bless us with his presence at the last Rail Passengers Council meeting that I attended with other members, but when I asked his colleague whether he could provide accounts for the SRA in Scotland, I was told, if I recall correctly, that the SRA certainly did not produce such accounts and that, apparently, it was not possible to produce them. There is a separate Scottish franchise and a separate rail division, and it is incumbent on the SRA to provide us with separate accounts so that democratically elected members of the Scottish Parliament can see what money comes in and what money is spent. That is important. Paragraph 42 of the report, which deals with passenger transport executive models, is important. I do not believe that all PTEs need to mirror the bureaucracy that may exist in Strathclyde, but we need to enhance and empower the south-east Scotland transport partnership and the north-east Scotland transport partnership, for example. At the end of the day, the board of the newly constituted Forth Estuary Transport Authority has more powers than such partnerships, although they cover a wider area and are arguably as important. Such matters must be dealt with. Perhaps the most important part of the report is in paragraph 119, where there is an acceptance that the Executive must be the major driver. The only way in which we will be able to make progress on the railways is when we, the democratically elected representatives of Scotland, take the matter within our grasp and drive it forward, subject to the scrutiny of this Parliament. I welcome the report. It provides us with a framework within which we can make progress on the matters on which we are agreed. There are issues relating to taking the matter further or making progress faster, but those will be dealt with in the election campaign and I commend the report as it stands.

Does the minister accept that, rather than simply being a local road, the A8000—on which an average of 29,000 vehicles a day travel—is of fundamental importance to the economy of east and central Scotland, never mind to the success of the Superfast ferry? Is it not about time that, rather than abdicating responsibility for construction to FETA and abdicating responsibility for payment to the hard-pressed commuters and motorists who cross the Forth road bridge, he and the Executive took charge and got the road built?

I declare an interest at the outset: I am a former practising solicitor. I have ceased to practise and have no financial or business interests in my former firm. Indeed, I think that my membership of the Law Society has lapsed, although I was a member for 20 years. Most of our debate has dealt with complaints. However, as other members have said, the bill is about more than that. To some extent, it is about addressing anachronisms. Roseanna Cunningham was right to say that one of the benefits of this Parliament is that we are able to address a gap or oversight more speedily than could have been achieved were we still required to go through Westminster. The downside is that the bill will receive much more public scrutiny and will, to some extent, be more in the public glare. We can argue that we should accept that that is a much better situation. However, some matters clearly require to be dealt with, such as the inability of the Law Society to delegate. It might be that that preclusion has come to the society's attention belatedly, but it requires to be addressed because the bill requires to deal with more than complaints. The bill is about enabling provisions—we must wait to see whether the Law Society deals with matters in a way that the Parliament and the public regard as satisfactory. I have always believed that the position of the Law Society was to try to ensure that matters are dealt with on the basis that, if it does not address matters adequately, others will. The driver has been the knowledge that if the Law Society fails to deliver what is acceptable to the public and to parliamentarians, other measures will be brought in over and above its head, whether the society likes it or not. That is the imperative that drives the Law Society. Lay membership is to be welcomed, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and others mentioned. There are arguments for and against it, but the bottom line is that justice must be done and must be seen to be done. In the circumstances, it is necessary that we accept lay membership.  On a more general note, it is perceived that lawyers belong to only one genre, but it was not simply our political affiliations that divided David McLetchie and I before 1999; the Law Society is a broad church. The clientele who graced Mr McLetchie's offices were unlikely ever to darken the door of my offices and vice versa. Lawyers tend to associate with others and I have no doubt that practising solicitors in Mr McLetchie's offices were as likely to associate themselves with accountants as the solicitors in my offices were to associate themselves with procurators fiscal or social workers. The legal profession is deep and wide. In the latter part of my career, I was represented less by the Law Society of Scotland than I was by the Edinburgh Bar Association and, perhaps more important, the Glasgow Bar Association, which stood up for legal aid lawyers, although I remained a member of the Law Society of Scotland. My final point was touched on by Helen Eadie. There is a perception among the public that if we make sure that we take away the complaints procedure from the Law Society and give it to an independent body, things will be much better and fairer. There is an argument in favour of that proposal, but there is an equally valid argument against it. The reason for taking that action is that the Law Society would change. At present, if a complaint is made against a solicitor, the Law Society is duty bound to investigate it, irrespective of whether the complaint appears to be entirely spurious and nonsensical. The Law Society is required to give the complaint due consideration, to inform the lawyer, to ask the lawyer for comments and views and to process the complaint as if it were fundamentally correct. If that process were taken out of the hands of the Law Society and given to an independent tribunal, we would find that the Law Society would change. If I were a practising solicitor against whom a complaint was made—I may return to practice at some stage, perhaps following the upcoming elections in May, depending on what happens—I would be the first to go to Douglas Mill and Michael Clancy to say, "I pay your wages, so whether the complaint has any legitimacy, you represent my interests and I want you to stand up for me." At present, the Law Society is impartial in such matters. If that were to change, the Law Society would veer more towards the position that is taken by the Medical and Dental Defence Union of Scotland. As somebody who has dealt with that union through representation of clients and constituents who have made complaints against doctors and dentists, I say that if people think trades unions are formidable, they should see the powers that are brought to bear when a complaint is lodged against a doctor or dentist: the shutters come down and it is difficult to gain access.  The nature and ethos of the Law Society would change if the complaints process were removed. We are heading towards the correct balance—complaints should be dealt with in-house, but with the provision of including lay representatives in the majority to ensure the problem is dealt with. The grass would not be greener if we removed control of the complaints process from the Law Society and the Law Society was to change. It would still process spurious complaints, but not by dealing with every complaint and not by subjecting every matter to the laws of defamation. If that were the case, I would be saying to the likes of Douglas Mill and Michael Clancy, for example, that such a letter of complaint was potentially defamatory and that I want it dealt with as opposed to having it considered with all due scrutiny. I am more than happy to support the bill and to see matters develop within the domain of the Law Society.

Will the First Minister confirm that the costs of the Waverley station redevelopment, as a major infrastructure project, will be met by the Strategic Rail Authority and not by the Scottish Executive through the ScotRail franchise or from the block grant?

Resources and not rhetoric are at the heart of the  debate—that will be realised if one considers the children's panel system, which is much maligned, although I believe in it. The Scottish Committee of the Council on Tribunals has focused on that issue and indicated that resourcing, rather than structures, is the problem. The Tory amendment highlights youth disorder. I do not seek to make light of youth disorder—all members accept that it is a serious problem—but the amendment does not mention the other equally valid and important aspect of child welfare. What is involved is not just retribution, but reform, and not just punishment, but pastoral care. The children's panel system is strong and is to be valued because it is holistic, not a glorified youth court. We should never forget that the children who are involved are in the majority; offenders are the small minority. The children whom we are discussing might be less demanding, but we ignore them at our peril. The debate is all about resources. There is consensus in the chamber about the system and the structures that we need and about what needs to be done, but what matters is not the rhetoric, but the reality. It is universally accepted in the chamber that the issue needs to be raised up the league of political priorities. That is part of politics, which is the art of the possible and involves balancing needs, whether conflicting or otherwise. I accept the argument that "It's the economy, stupid". No one owes us a living. No economic growth equals no funds for services, whether they are for children or for anyone else. Less national income would mean that the Parliament, its committees and the Executive were presiding over the diminishing stock and balancing cuts, rather than spreading the bounties. However, what is important is interlinking social and economic matters—we must all get that across. We live in a knowledge age. The economic driver and dynamo of our society is not ownership of the means of production, but the knowledge that individuals generate. Andrew Carnegie's steel mills could have been nationalised, but Bill Gates's brain or inventions could not be. Scotland faces demographic time bombs, a shrinking labour force and immigration arguments. At the same time, we preside over tens of thousands of youngsters who are marginalised, alienated or excluded—or whatever adjective we care to use—from our society economically, socially and in other ways. Those youngsters leave school lacking not only qualifications in basic matters, but social skills. We must address that collectively. Some youngsters are born to fail and to a life of delinquency, drug dependency and early pregnancy. The cycle will continue generation after generation into the millennium. That is a loss  not only to those individuals, who fail to achieve their potential, but to the nation, as we fail to realise our potential. We badly need those individuals' skills and talents. We must address that matter. Those people come from the same stock that left Scotland's shores generations ago, often in penal servitude. They were branded surplus to our nation's needs and wants, but the old world's loss was the new world's gain. We need to build consensus that we require to bring on board all the marginalised children. That is not about being preoccupied—although that is appropriate at the moment—with dealing with the small minority who are involved in a considerable amount of crime and delinquency. We must deal with the greater number of children who are being marginalised and alienated, but who have much to offer. Their loss is our loss. We must have consensus on that. I do not consider that a partisan matter, but I differ from the Tories, who fail to acknowledge that the children's panel system is intended not simply to dispense punishment, but to address the individual child's needs and wants. That is why we need consensus. The consensus is being built, but the rhetoric must be matched by the resources. We must get that across not to members who are in the chamber now, whose participation in the debate shows that they accept the social necessity, but to society, which must be shown the economic benefits. The present situation cannot continue, because it is a drain on resources in policing, prisons and elsewhere. The benefit of extending and supporting the existing structures and of resourcing them properly is that we would gain and make substantial savings in other aspects of our lives. The chamber must get the message across that we are not balancing social needs with economic drive. It must be recognised that the two matters are fundamentally interlinked and that we must harmonise and unite them.

Quoting selectively from history is always difficult and dangerous. John Young mentioned Rome, Napoleon and Hitler as historical analogies. I prefer to use the Hanseatic league and Charlemagne's holy Roman empire as better analogies of the sort of European Union that we hope to create. We have to recognise that the argument about the UK and Scotland remaining in the European Union might be set, as Sarah Boyack said. The debate now is about the type of union that we want to create and whether it has a social aspect or whether it is simply a free market. I certainly do not believe that the free market can be allowed to remain unregulated and uncontrolled. We require there to be a social dimension to Europe. Our society is at an historic juncture. We can either go in the direction of a north European democracy, to which I think our membership of the European Union would add and from which we would gain a great deal, or we can go down the road taken by the United States, the UK at present and, indeed, Australia, which would present significant problems. Where the societies and economies of those countries are going holds no allure for me. We have growing disparities of income, wealth and power; we have the dislocation of political aspects, such as lower turnouts in elections; and we have myriad social problems.

Not at the moment. The fact of the matter is that going into Europe offers great opportunities. It is about making a choice that is not simply about better economic fortunes for ourselves, but about what sort of society we want to create not only for ourselves but for the whole of the European Union as it is and as it expands. That we will go in that direction is probably an historical inevitability. It would be better if we were to go willingly rather than grudgingly and if we were to go sooner rather than later. We must go in that direction. My colleagues have made points about independence in Europe with which I fully agree. It is a pity that Wendy Alexander is not in the chamber. Her view is that the issue is about interdependence rather than independence. It is about both independence and interdependence.  That raises the question of fields and levels of responsibility. In the 21 st century Europe in which we live and in which our children's children's children will grow up, some matters will be dealt with at a European level and others, such as those affecting a small island such as the UK, will be dealt with on an inter-island basis. I submit that it is better to have matters dealt with on the basis of equality than to be dictated to. Some matters, such as whom and what to tax and what to spend the revenue on, will remain within the control of the democratically elected representatives of our nation state.

No, I will not take an intervention. In the new European Union that will develop, it is not a question of independence or of interdependence; it is a question of both. It is a question of fields and levels of responsibility. How should we play an active part? We can participate or we can spectate. At present, as Scotland is not an independent member of the European Union, we are simply spectators. I do not want to use inflammatory language about being bag-carriers, but we cannot participate to any great extent. We can go to a convention, but we cannot vote. We do not have the right to participate in consideration of whether there should be qualified majority voting on this, that or the next thing. If we are to play a part in the formation of a new Europe—which might not be the same as the Europe that we are discussing or actively seeking at the moment—and to participate in the journey that Europe is undertaking, we require to be represented as an independent nation state. Although I hope that we participate in the convention as fully as we can, ultimately, if we are to make the best of Europe—which is essential for our society and for future generations—we must participate in such events as an independent nation state. We should not necessarily seek greater powers, but we should not accept fewer powers.

I want to deal with one matter that does not appear to be referred to in the bill but which I believe is touched on in the policy memorandum, which says that the bill should "make the system more responsive to the needs of the general public and industry ... create more flexibility for designers to promote new and innovative design" and "support Scottish Executive aims of providing excellence in public services and encouraging sustainable development". I believe that the matter that is missing in relation to those aims is broadband roll-out. If we do not address that in the Building (Scotland) Bill, we will miss an opportunity. If the Executive says that we will address the matter in future years, it will be merely postponing work that should be done now. Members of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive recognise the importance of rolling out broadband. However, it can be argued that, in the 21 st century, broadband is as important a public utility as sanitation, electricity, lighting and so on were in previous centuries. I appreciate that the   Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning has recently made pronouncements on and provided cash for supporting broadband roll-out, and I recognise that the Deputy Minister for Social Justice—whom I congratulate on his promotion—has a family interest in the matter, but it seems to me that we have an opportunity not only to address the minutiae that are clearly important, but to take a new step forward and consider how we can take the initiative in rolling out broadband rather than dealing with it from behind. At present, there is public support for rolling out broadband and BT has embarked on a major advertising campaign, but all of us will be aware of difficulties that friends or constituents have had in getting broadband. Those difficulties happen not only in rural Scotland but in cities and major conurbations in central Scotland. Throughout the country, people either cannot obtain broadband or can obtain it only at an unaffordable price. The bill gives us an opportunity to say to building companies that, if they are building a housing or business estate, the provision of fibre optic cables—or an appropriate alternative—is as important a requirement as are provision of power cables, water and sanitation. We must acknowledge, however, that that cannot be done in all areas. It might be unreasonable to compel someone who is building two new houses in Achiltibuie to provide fibre optic cabling. There must be made available an opt-out on the basis of cost. That flexibility could be  provided for in regulations, which are dealt with early in the bill. However, there should be a standard for any construction project that involves, say, more than 25 houses or whatever we decide on. At present, the Executive is trying to aggregate resources for industrial estates that are already in commission. Why do not we ensure that any new industrial or housing estate is required to provide broadband access? We should not require builders to pipe broadband directly into every house, but we should require that there be a fibre optic cable or an ADSL connection within a reasonable distance. The difficulty that we face is that anyone who wants to get broadband in their new house can be quoted ridiculous prices—for example £3,000—to get it. If all that a telecommunications company had to do was connect the house to the pipe at the end of the road, the cost would be much less. It would perhaps be as little as £250 or less, which would be an insignificant amount, given the sorts of prices that people pay for houses today. We have a golden opportunity for the Executive and the Scottish Parliament to put Scotland at the forefront of the roll-out of broadband. It is important that we continue the efforts that are being made by Scottish Executive, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, but we have an opportunity to make the situation better at the outset. Of course, it is not within the sphere of responsibility of a building company to ensure that broadband is rolled out to the area in which it is building houses, but it can work in partnership with telecommunications companies to do so. The only caveat that should be added is that, if only one telecommunications company is involved in the provision of the fibre optic cables and so on, it must ensure that there is enough capacity to allow its competitors also to provide the service. That is not beyond the capabilities of modern technology and would allow, for example, people in an estate in which BT had provided broadband connections to choose instead to subscribe to Telewest Broadband. I do not know whether the Executive is already considering what I propose, but if we do not do what I propose, we will miss a golden opportunity to put Scotland at the forefront of broadband provision. I see many heads nodding in agreement and I assume that everyone is aware of the importance of the issue. I have discussed matters with the telecommunications companies and I know that they are prepared to support the Executive in relation to the proposal. If the Executive has not considered the matter, I urge it to do so. I know that the minister is interested in the matter. I repeat that we have an opportunity to ensure that a utility that is essential in the 21 st century is  given the same priority that was given in previous centuries to other important public utilities. We forsake this golden opportunity at our peril.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate and on an excellent speech. I heartily endorse much of what she said. Sarah Boyack is correct to identify the development of Waverley station as a vital infrastructure project. There is a great myth among the general public that the project is a retail development and a simple upgrade or tarting up of Edinburgh's primary station. The project goes beyond that. It is not simply about improving the station for passengers; it is about improving capacity for the network. It is not simply about improving transportation for the city of Edinburgh; it is fundamentally about improving transportation for the whole of Scotland, and certainly the whole of the east of Scotland. It is important that we realise that. It is also the case that the project is not simply about passengers, but about freight. Improving the infrastructure at Waverley station will allow the opportunity for freight to be throughput, as opposed to having to go on the south suburban line, which slows matters up. It would also allow a far better distribution system. Rather than having to unload at out-of-town depots, we could allow goods to be brought into the city centre and distributed. That would save road miles and consequent pollution. We must also hear from the minister on various matters. We have various pledges from the  Strategic Rail Authority. It has made some efforts, but we must see delivery. The first question that must be answered is on responsibility. I accept the points that Sarah Boyack made on partnership—I would be the first to criticise the Executive if it were not involved—but who is in charge of the project? It is certainly not ScotRail and it is certainly not Network Rail. Ultimately, the SRA must be in charge of the project. Consequently, it seems to me that it is the body that will have to fund the project. We must have a clear statement from the Executive that the project is an SRA project, that the Executive will seek to ensure that the SRA delivers it in a reasonable time scale—sooner rather than later—and that the SRA will fund it. Considering the project's nature, it is correct that the Executive should contribute seedcorn money, as it has done. However, it is about time that the Scottish taxpayer and rail user saw some delivery from the SRA as opposed to seeing their money going into investment south of the border. We will not neglect that investment, but we must ensure that investment is also delivered in Scotland. We need to know who is in charge. The SRA must be in charge. If that is not the case, we will go round and round chasing our tails. The Executive's role is important, but the SRA must realise that actions speak louder than words. It must deliver a key infrastructure project for Scotland. Moreover, notwithstanding whatever comments the UK Secretary of State for Transport makes, we must be convinced that the SRA will have more than a brass plate and one member of staff in Scotland. We must have confirmation that the SRA will deliver the project in a reasonable time scale and that it will pay for the project.

I would be grateful if the minister were a bit more supportive of the report than his London colleague, who was haughtily dismissive. His colleague in London indicated that Network Rail was a private company and that he could not tell it what to do, and that the Strategic Rail Authority was perfectly capable of looking after the whole of the country from one office. Presumably that office will be in Victoria station in London rather than in Victoria Quay in Edinburgh. Does the minister accept that those comments are entirely unacceptable? Will he support the report of an elected cross-party Scottish Parliament committee rather than kow-tow to the references and orders of his London Labour colleagues?

I first record my thanks to those who contributed to the attainment of the debate, in particular my colleagues Tavish Scott and Irene Oldfather, who cosponsored the motion. I thank also the consuls and Professor David Arter, who showed great forbearance in advising me on the Nordic Council. It is a pleasure to speak in the debate. There is to be a substantial event next month in the Parliament, but the precise anniversary was yesterday and it was celebrated formally in Helsinki. I will make three specific points. First, I commend the organisation on all that it has achieved for its member states and regions and for what it has achieved internationally. Secondly, I want to see the lessons that we in the nations and regions that constitute the islands of Britain and Ireland can learn. Thirdly, I want to discuss the steps that we can take to ensure that our Government and our Parliament interact with the organisation and its constituent members. Is it not an absurdity that centuries ago, Scotland's links with the nordic nations were greater than they are now, despite the fact that we live in a global and shrinking world? Many of the nordic states are the closest neighbours to great tracts of our land. In terms of demography, geography and topography, we have more in common with many of them than we have with other nations with which we have either a closer affinity or specific alliances. The interaction between Scotland and the nordic states was substantial. There is a linguistic similarity between some of their words and words that are used here in the east of Scotland, such as bairn, kirk and flittin, never mind phrases such as  gangin oot, all of which have their Scandinavian equivalent. Interaction between our states was significant. The Scottish diaspora was heavily represented, commercially and militarily, especially in Sweden and Norway, and names such as Hamilton and Carnegie were prevalent. Moreover, the Chalmers University of Technology in Gothenburg, which is dedicated to William Chalmers of this parish, is one of the principal universities in Sweden. As Scotland began to look increasingly to London and to trade more with America, our links across the North sea were neglected for points south and west. We have an opportunity to recreate those links, which are based on firm historical foundations. I will return to that issue. I want to put on record the Scottish Parliament's congratulations to the Nordic Council, which was formed 50 years ago. The Nordic Council brought together nations and regions that had suffered economically, had been ravaged by war and, in some instances, had been occupied. Its five constituent nation states are Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Iceland and it contains representatives from the three devolved Parliaments in Greenland, the Faeroes and Åland. The Nordic Council is an interparliamentary consultative organ that has advanced at a pace since its inception 50 years ago. In 1954, there was a passport union and, in 1956, reciprocal arrangements for social security were invoked. In 1971, a nordic council of ministers was formed, which was based on the principle of intergovernmentalism. The Nordic Council is not a parliament in that it cannot legislate and is not directly elected, but it has a strong parliamentary character—it has standing committees and cross-national party groupings—and its ability to pass resolutions means that it is a significant agenda setter. It can be argued that the Nordic Council is a precursor of much of what the European Union seeks. The Schengen agreement and the social union replicate what was done in the nordic states many years ago. The Nordic Council has brought peace, harmony and co-operation to nations that had historical antagonisms, such as Sweden and Denmark. It has allowed a geographical area with significant demographic similarities to develop a common front on social and economic issues of importance. A great deal has been achieved, for which the Nordic Council is to be applauded. In these islands, we have an opportunity to learn from the members of the Nordic Council. Although we might come at matters from a different perspective in the United Kingdom and Ireland, there are similarities—for example, the existence of distinct Parliaments and regional Assemblies that reflect geographic areas and demographic  groups. The circumstances might be different in that everyone in the islands of Britain and Ireland is a citizen of the EU. Nonetheless, I believe that the co-operation and interaction that has been shown across the North sea is something that we can and should learn from. As a Parliament and as a nation, we must create closer links with our nordic cousins. There are good reasons to do so. I indicated earlier that, geographically, the nordic states are among our most proximate neighbours. Socially and economically, we face considerable common challenges. A falling birth rate is as much of a problem in Sweden as it is in Scotland. Fishing and oil are of great significance, as they are in Norway and elsewhere. On that basis alone, there is merit in coming together to seek co-operation. For the reasons that I have outlined, I ask the minister and the Parliament to seek representation for our Government and our elected members on the Nordic Council. There are specific sub-regional authorities within the Nordic Council. The Nordic Atlantic Co-operation—formerly the West Nordic Council—which comprises Iceland, Greenland, the Faeroes and Norway, exists under the Nordic Council's umbrella. In view of Scotland's location and our common problems with and interests in oil and fishing—which were addressed earlier today—we should seek representation in that organisation. I am told by those in the know that the door is open. I hope that the Government and the Parliament will seek to step through that door. Membership of the sub-body and the principal organisation should be the method by which we begin to restore the historic links that we have allowed to lapse. I congratulate the Nordic Council on achieving its 50 th anniversary, but I hope that, in future, we will be able to do so not as bystanders, but as participants, uniting and co-operating with representatives of our near geographic neighbours and sharing common problems and a common purpose. We should acknowledge that our common interests are served by looking east and north, as well as south. We cannot change our geography, but we can change how we act and interact with our common partners in the North sea area.

Many of my points will be made more in sorrow than in anger, because I think that there have been brave attempts by all to try to eliminate poverty. Many views are sincerely held in the chamber, not least by the minister, but we need a holistic approach rather than a sticking plaster or piecemeal approach. Just as we need to integrate housing and social work at local authority level if we are to deal with many problems, we also need to integrate taxation and benefits at national level. We need to have the powers to deal with things, not to be left in isolation or impotence on major issues. That brings us back to powers and vision. It also brings us back to fundamentals. Great strides have been made, post 1945, on the back of a consensus of social democracy. The great credit for that goes to the Attlee Government, but there was consensus. The father of the welfare state was Beveridge, who was a historic old Liberal, and the Conservatives, in a coalition Government during the war, also signed up to the principles that Atlee delivered. There was a consensus round social democracy about the role of a state and what needed to be done to tackle poverty. Many mistakes have been made. The legacy of the housing schemes that proliferate round central Scotland is testimony to errors that were not made deliberately but which are seen as errors with hindsight—a great thing to have the benefit of. Great strides and improvements were made, but I believe that we have lost that route path and many of those powers. I disagree fundamentally with the Tory amendment. I am a child of the 1960s, and I recall that when I went to schools they were new schools, when I went to health centres they were new health centres, or new health centres were being built, and when I went to hospitals, new hospitals were being constructed. That was being  done on the back of my parents' and grandparents' generation, who did not clamour continually for lower taxes and more money in their pockets, but who recognised—post war and post two wars—that they had a duty to deliver to future generations. If that meant that they did not get as much money in their pocket there and then, it also meant a better society for their children and their children's children. It ill befits anybody in our society who grew up in that generation not to recognise that we have a similar obligation to future generations, and we must stop continually striving for a low-wage, low-taxation economy. Some things have to be paid for; those things are fundamentally the responsibility of the state, and the money must be gathered in by the public exchequer. The consensus was attacked by Thatcherism, and perhaps most of all by Keith Joseph, who was the axis behind it. Social democracy is under attack. According to Pilger on new democracy, the major aspect of globalisation is not the proliferation of Starbucks or McDonalds, but the abrogation by social democratic Governments of matters that were taken for granted as being the responsibility of the state. It was taken for granted that it was the responsibility of society and of the state to deliver housing, health and education, yet we now put those matters out to the private sector. We must get back to the basis of a social democratic consensus if we are to go forward. The fundamental antithesis of that is Toryism and its offshoot in Blairism. The fundamental responsibility lies not with the minister or on the Labour benches, but with her President down in London. We must have a vision of the society that we want. I do not want to go down the road of having a low-wage, low-taxation economy as manifested in the USA or Australia, with great disparities of wealth and all the consequent problems that they bring. I believe that we should emulate our north European neighbours, and particularly the Scandinavian nations, which have never given up the consensus of social democracy and have maintained the role and duty that are incumbent upon a Government to deliver. Those nations have less poverty, better health, fitter children and lower unemployment. At the end of the day, we require to deliver such objectives. I support the SNP amendment because, if we do not have adequate powers, we cannot create a consensus to deliver the social democracy that we need and from which we, as children of the 1960s, benefited.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is right to have a debate on the future of air transport in Scotland. As the minister said, air transport is essential for the economy and for tourism. Improvements are desperately needed in the Highlands and Islands and throughout our land. However, what solution does the Executive suggest? What strategy does it intend to pursue? After all, a strategy is essential if progress is to be made. We are debating a motion that asks Parliament to note "the consultation process currently being undertaken jointly by the Department for Transport and the Scottish Executive". Yahoo! Bingo! Salvation is upon us. A solution to poor air links, high air costs and few flights is about to unfold. That will be right—there will be more spin and consultations, but no substance or action. I do not think that the Executive is the worst Government in Europe, as the leader of the Tories suggested. The Parliament and our country do not need lectures from the leader of the self-confessed nasty party. That party inflicted misery on many people in its native land and deindustrialised huge swathes of our homeland. With friends like Iain Duncan Smith, Scotland has  no need for enemies. However, I say to the minister that that is as good as I will be about the Government. The Government might not be doing us harm, but it is certainly not doing us any good. The Government might not be the worst Government in Europe, but it has a responsibility to govern. There has been an abdication of responsibility and a dereliction of duty. There are serious problems with aviation in Scotland that the Government has not addressed or even acknowledged. Let us consider the situation. Internally, we have outrageously expensive flights in the Highlands and Islands. The cost of those flights is sucking the lifeblood out of communities and is an impediment to social and economic progress. No mention is made of that, never mind a solution provided. In the central belt and in urban airports elsewhere there is a critical shortage of direct air services to Europe and beyond. Direct links are essential, both for tourism—from an inbound point of view—and for the economy, from an outbound point of view. Comparable and even smaller nations have more direct flights and better air connections.

I visit Prestwick regularly, as Mr Gallie will know. I am a great supporter of that airport and I wish it well. It has served Scotland well and I agree with Mr Gallie and endorse his sentiments. Whether in comparison with Iceland or Ireland, Scotland falls short in relation to direct air services. After all, there is a direct flight from Reykjavik to Halifax in Nova Scotia, the homeland of the Scottish diaspora, but there is no direct flight there from Scotland. Our absurd position is that when the second First Minister—the one before the current one—went to tartan day last year, he flew by Aer Lingus via Dublin. Is not it absurd that at the start of the 21 st century our country's foremost statesman travels to the capital city of the economic powerhouse of the world through the capital city of another nation on an aeroplane that belongs to that other nation's national flag carrier? In the north of Scotland, where tourism is essential to the economy—yet where we find that it is in decline—affordable and accessible air links are also essential. What do we discover? Inverness airport, in the capital of the Highlands, has the highest landing charges in Europe. Ryanair says that the charge is £15 per passenger. "That's no true", says the chief  Executive of HIAL, "It's only £8." Whether the charge is £8 or £15, it is too high. The First Minister says that Ryanair must pay its share. It does; it pays its fair share at 58 airports in Europe where it lands, from Kerry in the west to Graz in the east and from Oslo in the north to Pescara in the south. What it does not pay are the First Minister's unfair charges at his airport.

It is a great pity that the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning has not read the study by Dr Romano Pagliari at Cranfield University, which was published many months ago. It may be that the previous minister was dealing with the issue then, but I would have thought that Iain Gray would have been up to date and up to speed on that important document. What is the situation? What does the Executive suggest? It asks us to take note of its consultation document. Take note? I know that the First Minister wants to do less better, but that is doing nothing whatever. The consultation document is really one for south-east England. It is predicated on whether to have Heathrow 5 or a new airport elsewhere in leafy England. The consultation document recognises only two airports in central Scotland when it is clear that there are three. Is not Prestwick in central Scotland? Cannot the Department for Transport acknowledge that airport's location and appreciate its importance? Scotland is factored in only to the extent of how we link to the hub airports down in greater London. That, I say to the minister, is the current problem. We need an aviation strategy for Scotland. Surely that is what a Scottish Government should provide.

I am coming to the ideas. I might be seven minutes into my speech, but Labour is  six years into Government in London and has not delivered any improvements in aviation north of the border. Michael O'Leary has been banging on the door offering to fly to Inverness and Stornoway, not in 2015, but now. Talk about looking a gift plane in the mouth.

Not at the moment. What are the solutions? The minister might wish to note that I am coming to the matters that he should deal with. We need a route development fund and we need routes to Spain, Italy and Scandinavia, among others. The Irish—never mind the Icelandic—take such routes for granted. We need to provide a marketing budget that will support airlines in providing such routes. Cornwall County Council did so for the Ryanair flight to Newquay airport and has reaped the benefit. The Welsh Development Agency supported Cardiff airport in attracting bmibaby. Cornwall County Council might not be the best council in Europe, and the WDA might not be the best agency in Europe, but those bodies have done more than the Executive has done to support and promote aviation. If they can, we should and come next May, if Labour will not, we will. I remind the minister that his boss owns Inverness airport; Jack McConnell is its sole shareholder. It is his airport. He is responsible and accountable, but he has grounded flights into Inverness. He must take action to get charges down and to get flights flying. It is time for him to say why he has put tourism in the Highlands into a nosedive when he is in the cockpit. Tourism will fly high if he gets landing charges down. If he does not, we will know whom to blame. Come next May, if he will not get landing charges down, we will. The Executive's position is not blue-sky thinking, but pie in the sky. It does not involve the development of new routes or the removal of existing impediments to flights. Flights into and out of Scotland are delayed or grounded, but not through bad weather or mechanical failure and not because of any airline or airport. The buck stops with the Executive, which will neither initiate new routes nor remove present impediments from airports. That is why I will move the amendment. I want to provide a flight path to the improvements that are badly needed the length and breadth of our land, throughout all sectors of our economy and in air services. The Executive is devoid of vision and it is vacuous when it comes to solutions. If the Executive rejects the amendment, the opportunity to take off remains for Scotland through a change in Administration next May. I move amendment S1M-3469.1, to leave out  from "consultation" to end and insert: "urgent need, in relation to tourism and the economy in Scotland, to increase the limited number of direct international connections and to expand the number of routes operated by low-cost carriers; further notes that Inverness Airport is operated by Highlands and Islands Airport Limited, which is wholly owned by Scottish Ministers; is concerned at studies indicating that Inverness Airport has the highest landing charges in Europe, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to set up a route development fund to promote direct international connections from Scotland and to take immediate action to reduce the landing charges imposed at Inverness Airport."

Does the minister accept that one of the reasons that Scotland underperforms in respect of passenger numbers is landing charges? The Office of Fair Trading report into charter flight supplements indicated that landing charges at Glasgow and Aberdeen were significantly higher than the landing charges at Manchester and Newcastle. Will the minister address that point? If so, what will he do about it? If not, why not?

I congratulate James Douglas-Hamilton on securing the debate and I subscribe to many of his and Margaret Smith's points. The debate is important for two reasons. First, there is the issue of how we treat asylum seekers and whether accommodation centres are the best method of assimilating them. Secondly, there is the issue of the economic expansion not only of the airport, but of Scotland. I do not believe that accommodation centres are the best way in which to integrate people. The debate is ironic, given that, this week, the census figures have revealed the potentially cataclysmic decline in the Scottish population. There has been talk of the return of the expatriate community and Professor Wright from Stirling mentioned a need for immigration. We must assimilate people into the country. There is a labour shortage in key sectors in Edinburgh, not only in the highly skilled sectors, but in hotels, which are at the lower end of the food chain, if I may put it that way. Without Kiwi and Australian students working away, many major hotels in the city would have great difficulties. We need the labour that those people provide to assist the growth of our community. Fiona Hyslop will deal further with asylum seekers. We must consider separately the issues of economic development and the expansion of the airport. The expansion of the airport is fundamental. I do not want to be pedantic about one of the points Margaret Smith made, but Edinburgh airport is not the fastest-growing airport in Scotland or the UK; it is the fastest-growing BAA airport. The growth at Prestwick surpasses that at Edinburgh, but BAA spin-doctors have put a spin on the matter. However, I do not denigrate the growth at Edinburgh airport, which has benefited the city and individual citizens such as me. Fiona Hyslop has visited the cargo facilities. No doubt Margaret Smith has done the same. There is a need for expansion. The current facilities are antediluvian and they must be improved. Given  what already exists at Ratho and Newbridge, the site provides an opportunity to create a greater intermodal interchange and hub that would add value not only to the airport's cargo operations, but to Edinburgh, given the M8 and M9 access and the road network. I am glad that BAA Lynton seems to be returning to being an airport rather than a retail developer. It has given up and sold out in the McArthurGlen outlet, although I think that it retains ownership of its Livingston outlet. BAA Lynton should concentrate on the important hub that I mentioned. Edinburgh is naturally constrained to the north by the River Forth and to the south by the Pentland hills. Only a set area is available for economic development. The site we are discussing is a key area and has always been cherished. We must consider carefully any extension that breaches the green belt, but we have an opportunity to allow Edinburgh to grow through rail links to the airport and cargo facilities, which will add value to the city. We also have to accept the fact that there is room for expansion not only of cargo facilities. Park-and-ride facilities are a proposed method of addressing traffic congestion. I know that the preferred park-and-ride facility is not exactly adjacent to RAF Turnhouse, but it is not that far away, down towards the Newbridge area, at the end of the footprint of the runway there. The area must be preserved for the growth of the airport and for the expansion of the city's economic development. Such opportunity does not exist to the north or the south, and the possibilities for moving eastwards are constrained by Musselburgh, Port Seton and all that other area. The only other natural land bank for the city of Edinburgh is the brownfield site that is controlled by the Forth Ports Authority. That is being addressed, correctly, by the waterfront development. We must keep it together for the benefit of all our citizens and the economic progress of our city in the 21 st century.

In view of the Pavlovian response, I assure the chamber that I am simply keeping the seat warm for John Swinney until next Thursday—a bit like the way in which the First Minister is keeping his seat warm for John Swinney until May. To ask the First Minister when he next plans to meet the Prime Minister and what issues he intends to raise. (S1F-2110)

Is the First Minister aware of the report on tourism by Professor Terry Stevens, which was commissioned by the Parliament, given the recent dramatic fall in visitor numbers? Professor Stevens said: "Scotland will not be able to control this dynamic unless its tourism chiefs engage with the low-cost airlines ... Tourism equals travel and if people cannot get to a place then they will not come." Does the First Minister agree?

I am surprised that the First Minister is so blasé. Since the Administration came to power, the number of overseas visitors has gone down by more than a quarter and their spend has gone down by a third. Professor  Stevens says that low-cost flights are critical. The First Minister will be aware that Ryanair has sought to fly into Inverness. An analysis of airport charges by Cranfield University found Inverness to be the most expensive airport not in Scotland, nor in the UK, but in the whole of Europe. The First Minister is the sole shareholder in that airport. Why will he not address the urgent need? Will he get the charges reduced and let the flights take off at his airport?

I have never criticised private profit or private companies. Professor Stevens says that low-cost carriers—[ Interruption. ]

Professor Stevens says that low-cost carriers are the key. Ryanair will not fly into the First Minister's airport. EasyJet will not expand at his airport. Even the chief executive of his airport wants those flights to come into Inverness but says that he cannot have them. Will the First Minister take action at his airport? Will he reduce the charges and let the Highland economy take off? The responsibility cannot be buck passed to anyone else. It is his airport, they are his charges and it is his responsibility.

Why should the people of the north-east believe the rhetoric of the minister on the matter, when they have already seen the selling out of the A8000 in the central belt? That is clearly a Euro-route and a national route of significant importance to east and central—never mind north-east—Scotland. The Executive has passed the buck to the Forth Estuary Transport Authority. Will the Executive do exactly the same in relation to the western peripheral route?

It is difficult not to disagree with the Tory motion. We require to press, probe and call the Executive to account. There is no outline manifesto by a new Administration, because this is an Administration that is in its death throes. It should be capable of resting on laurels won for what it has done in its tenure in office to date. Instead, it is proposing to do something away in the future. That is unacceptable—we have seen it all before. Nonetheless, I cannot agree entirely with the Tories, who had the opportunity to change things during 18 hard years of Tory rule, 10 or 11 of which were Thatcher rule. They cannot continue to dine out on the construction of the M74 and the dualling of other roads. In those 18 years, we witnessed the undermining of the rail industry. Whatever criticism I may make about where the rail industry is heading, the problems began under a Tory Administration that privatised and underfunded it.

Not at the moment. I am trying to move on.

The Tories have no reason to be self-congratulatory. Reading the Executive amendment is a bit like seeing "Groundhog Day"—the amendment is couched in exactly the same terms that we have heard in the comprehensive spending review debate and from Andy Kerr. The Executive offers  various outline proposals but not one commitment or pledge. I had assumed that, in an attempt to spike the Tories' debate, the Executive might give a clear commitment today. However, not even today, in an attempt to take away from the lustre and light of the Tories' debate, has the Executive offered any firm commitments. We are told that the promised land is on the horizon, but we are not told how far away it is, what direction it is in, or what we have to do to get there. The Executive amendment is simply an abomination and an apology for the actions that it has taken.

Yes.

We will speak later about the powers that are required, some of which are fiscal and some of which pertain to ways of dealing with the rail industry. We have heard what the Executive is now saying previously in the CSR debate. Back in 1998, the position was outlined not by Jack McConnell, the current First Minister, nor by Henry McLeish, the previous First Minister, nor even by Donald Dewar as the first First Minister. It was Donald Dewar who, as the Secretary of State for Scotland, said on page 7 of the white paper, "Travel Choices for Scotland": "We shall continue to ensure that the Scottish transport network is appropriate to support Scotland's economy". Does that sound familiar? Does that sound like the Executive's amendment? What has happened since July 1998? The Executive has put forward no radical proposals. On page 8 of the same document, the Government talks about pressing "for improvements in rail ... connections to airports". The fact is that, since July 1998, no real progress has been made. There are more potholes, there is more congestion and we face a bus strike in Edinburgh. Some improvement schemes would be cheap. For example, the proposal to re-regulate the buses is supported not only by Executive back benchers, but by Glasgow City Council and Strathclyde Passenger Transport. That is not a grand scheme; it would be relatively cheap. Will the Executive support it?

Lewis Macdonald need only listen to the bus industry to realise that quality contracts are not working. How many quality contracts are in place? None. Why do Glasgow City Council and SPT not believe in quality contracts? It is because they accept that regulation is required.

Not again. I have given way once. We are told that the flagship concessionary fare policy is a national scheme. Yes; it is a national scheme in Wales, where people can travel from Anglesey to Swansea and from Cardiff to Colwyn Bay. By contrast, in Scotland a national scheme seems to be one whereby people can travel from Alloa to Falkirk and the lucky people in the Strathclyde region can travel from Girvan to Gareloch. However, can people travel from Wick to Wigtown? No, they cannot. The flagship policy is nothing but a con that will unravel before next April, when Scottish pensioners will realise that they have been sold a pup. There is also the question about the state of our roads. We had a great debate in the Parliament, during which Andy Kerr—as the then convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee—attacked the then Minister for Transport and the Environment, Sarah Boyack, about the privatisation of trunk road maintenance. However, we are told, on page 27 of the 2002 trunk road operating companies' report, that "Media criticism, predominantly of BEAR's winter performance, was sometimes inaccurate." I remember John Farquhar Munro voicing criticism that I certainly do not think was inaccurate. The Executive has not even resolved the shambles surrounding the care and maintenance of the roads. That is why we need to have control of the rail network. If we are to create rail links to airports, we must first tackle the congestion at Waverley station. Who is in charge of that? Is it the Strategic Rail Authority? Is it the minister? Is it the Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions? We do not even know who is dealing with that problem. The only way in which to address matters is by taking control of the rail network and the rail industry, but we need full powers to do so. I move amendment S1M-3422.1, to insert at end: "and calls for the Parliament to be given all powers necessary to allow these and other required transport and infrastructure improvements to be properly implemented."

I do not have the same detailed knowledge of the issue as most of the previous speakers, who are members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and have discussed the detail of the report. However, even though I do not sit—and have never sat—on the committee and even though the issue is not part of my brief, I make no apologies for seeking to speak in the debate. I believe that the issue is important; indeed, before I was elected as an MSP, I was heavily involved in children's rights in areas such as adoption. As a result, I feel reasonably well qualified to speak this afternoon. The Parliament itself should make no apologies for debating the issue. Earlier this week, we were criticised individually and collectively about the nature of our debates. I cannot comment on whether the individual who made that criticism would find this debate irrelevant and claim that it brings the Parliament into disrepute. However, I have no doubt that it would form part of the general thrust of those comments. Like most members, I accept the primacy of our economy as an issue for debate and believe that economic growth is essential, or all ages and all sectors of society—including the weakest and the most powerful—will suffer. However, it is not simply a matter of having a society that produces robots or cogs in the economy. As Jackie Baillie said, our society goes beyond economic matters. We are not automatons and our society should not be run by some oligarchy in a few boardrooms. We need to examine the broader interests of society, not simply the dynamic of its economic growth. Jackie Baillie was right to point out that a society is not judged by the nature and state of its economy, but by how it treats individuals as human beings and, more important, by how treats its weakest and most dispossessed people instead of those who have the most clout. As a result, we should make no apologies for debating this fundamental subject. We should accept that, in this respect, we are trying to be prescriptive. Cultural attitudes in Scotland present us with a considerable problem. As our previous debates on health, legal matters or even the carrying of knives have made clear, we have a culture in Scotland that perhaps originated in the maxim that children should be seen and not heard. As a result, our society is not  child-friendly. I do not believe that, in my lifetime, we will be able to replicate a Latin-type society that is much more outgoing and extrovert in the way that it treats its children—perhaps we do not even want to have such a society. However, I have to say that Scotland's current problems have worsened. They have been exacerbated partly by how the media has reported various matters. I am a parent myself, but when we reach a situation in which parents believe that their children will be kidnapped and murdered and in which parents consider implanting a chip in their child so that they know where they are, we have to wonder about the kind of society that we have allowed to develop. Although we face a problem with various individuals who are at large in society or who might be released into society, we must address that problem without scaremongering. In any case, we have to look after our children's interests. As I have said, I believe that this is a cultural matter. It might be difficult for the Parliament or a commissioner to tackle, but we must seek to provide a framework that underpins the fabric of society. Although it might be difficult to stop children carrying knives in Glasgow or elsewhere on a Friday or Saturday night simply by introducing legislation, that does not mean that we should not do so in order to crack down on the problem. All legislation does not have to be prescriptive and enforce certain matters; it can encourage and support certain sectors or attitudes. The commissioner's job will grow and develop. A lot will depend on what the individual does or creates, whether or not he or she is a stuffed shirt. Perhaps matters will develop only after several commissioners have been in the post. We will not change the nature of our society simply through this bill or the appointment of one individual for whatever term. However, we are going in the right direction. The minister was correct to point out that many of the matters that come under scrutiny may be subjects that will be discussed, debated and passed by the Executive or by the Parliament. That is quite right and fair. We are a unicameral chamber only and we are not the fount of all wisdom. If a commissioner should say that we are not going in the right direction, we as representatives should be big enough to accept that criticism. We should take it on board and try to address and change matters. We are products of the background from which we have come. We, too, are products of the culture in which we grew up. It is important, therefore, that somebody should challenge everybody, including those of us who are elected as parliamentarians. I believe that we must approve and support the  establishment of a commissioner. I do not believe that taking the society angle is contradictory to trying to get a healthy economy and a vibrant society. Far too many children in our society are born to fail. Those in the boardrooms of our society who seek to espouse and represent their interests should recognise—indeed, they have been commenting on the fact—that we face a skills shortage and a labour shortage. If we create a section of our society, especially in the younger age group, that is marginalised and doomed to fail and will not be economically productive, those young people will be the losers and our economy will also be the loser. We must go out of our way to create a better society. In doing so, we will create a better economy. This Parliament should therefore make no apology for debating the establishment of a children's commissioner or for bringing the post to fruition.

rose—

What surprises me about the attitude of those who sit on the Executive benches is that, in their statements, they accept that this is not an ordinary debate. This is not one of the meaningless debates that are sometimes highlighted as having no consequence and that occasionally bring the Parliament into disrepute. The debate is about the spun spending of our people's money over the next five years. This is a fundamental debate, yet not only is the Minister for Finance and Public Services absent from the chamber, the ministers who are responsible for the key areas that will be included in the manifestos and about which commitments and pledges have been made—although not elaborated on in the minister's statement this morning—are not here either. The ministers who are responsible for education, justice, health, transport and enterprise and lifelong learning—all areas in which ministers have made commitments and forward projections—are absent. They are treating this debate with unacceptable contempt, given the importance that they claim it has.

No, not at the moment. Over recent weeks, we have heard weasel words. Last week, we heard from the performance audit group about winter snows—pure whitewash. This week, we have "Building a Better Scotland", which is the spending review document—pure hogwash. As the French say, plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose. Great pledges, wonderful commitments, tremendous initiatives—but we have seen and heard it all before. In September 2002, the minister said: "An effective transport system is central to a thriving economy". In "Travel Choices for Scotland", which was published in 1988, the late Donald Dewar said: "We shall continue to ensure that the Scottish transport network is appropriate to support Scotland's economy". Four years and more later, the minister's statement is a declaration of failure. Due to political and public pressure, the Executive is required to address the importance of transport and to raise it up the political agenda. The Executive repeats itself, but it does not do what it said it would do four years or more ago. Page 8 of "Travel Choices for Scotland"—not page 8 of the statement that the minister gave today—refers to "improvements in rail ... connections to airports".  We are no further forward. When Ms Boyack was Minister for Transport and the Environment, she published "Travel Choices for Scotland: Strategic Roads Review" in November 1999. That document said that "the road network will continue to provide the core of our transport system." It continued: "Investment in new road capacity can support the economy by reducing journey times and improving reliability". The same warm words, support and inspiration for the economy that we hear today. We have moved on nigh on three years but there has been no progress.

No—I am into my last minute. The 20 items that the strategic roads review document referred to included the A8000, but the buck for that road has been passed to the Forth bridge authority. Three years on, we have not managed to complete, or even start, one of the projects that was mentioned during Ms Boyack's term of office. All we hear today is that the Executive will begin preparations on the A8 and A80 motorway upgrades. As I have said before, it is 40 years since the motorway from London to Birmingham was completed. After 40 years, after nearly two generations of unionist control from Tory and Labour Administrations, we still lack a motorway that connects our major city, Glasgow, to our capital city, Edinburgh—never mind a motorway that connects the central belt population with our rural hinterland in the Highlands. Forty years on, the Government has failed. All we have heard today is a declaration of failure, a regurgitation of past promises and no sign that any initiatives or construction will commence forthwith.

The member talks about priorities and the Minister for Finance and Public Services mentioned that the top priority rail projects will be delivered. What are Labour's top priority rail projects? Are they a regurgitation of the Larkhall rail link or the Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline line, which we have heard about for nigh on a generation?

My purpose in supporting the amendment is not to seek to break the existing consensus but to drive things forward and improve the situation for the youngsters involved. Although we know where we are and where we need to go, we must ensure that we actually go down that road. In a nutshell, we must ensure that we can check against delivery. As Donald Gorrie pointed out, all the warm words, eloquence and rhetoric in the chamber or elsewhere will not provide the warm homes, comfort, loving and guidance that the children require. As a result, checks are required. Irene McGugan said that we need to take resourcing issues into account. I heartily endorse that point. We must ensure that people in front-line services, particularly in social work departments, are provided with the necessary means. I do not want to go into financial matters, because the subject has been discussed before. All parties must look to their position on the funding that they are prepared to provide. Instead, I will make two points, the first of which relates to a position that will require political courage to adopt. Again, that is an issue for all political parties in the chamber. My second point concerns an attitudinal change that all parties should be required to make. As I said, my first point relates to a question of political courage. Although it concerns funding, it is also a matter of the cultural attitude towards the youngsters, who statistics show are more likely to be involved in crime or to end up in custody, through no fault of their own. That is meant not as a condemnation, but as a sign of an understanding of the circumstances in which they—and we—find ourselves. At the moment, our society is greatly worried about youth crime. I have to say that I worry about nomenclature. As a parent of two teenage children, I think that we are in danger of stigmatising a generation when, in fact, my children are, in many respects, less predisposed to misbehaviour than many of my peer group were a generation ago. The fact is that the issue that we are discussing brings to the fore the question of youth crime, which involves resources. We are all facing the clamour for more bobbies on the beat. I do not think that any party in the chamber would repudiate such a desire. We are also facing the clamour for more secure places for youngsters, which I support. However, we must be aware that, because of the circumstances in which the children about whom we are talking find themselves, they do not evoke public sympathy. In fact, they often inspire public opprobrium. It will take courage by members of all political  parties to say that we require to find resources to deal with the matter at the same time as finding resources for police officers, secure units and so on. We must find those resources not in response to any namby-pamby liberal agenda; we must provide them because they are necessary to break the cycle of despair in which many youngsters find themselves. We cannot simply marginalise those young people and leave them to be excluded for ever and a day. Unless we address the issue and find the resources to put in at the beginning, we will for ever require more secure places and more police officers, because we will not have broken that cycle. It will take some political courage from everyone in the Parliament to be prepared to stand up and ask for resources, because the issue is not a great vote winner. It may be important in the chamber and to a section of society that is in touch with what is going on but, as far as the tabloid press is concerned, it is not at the forefront. As I said, an attitudinal change is also required. The resourcing of social work, voluntary and professional, has been neglected. The attitude has been to denigrate social work departments. We must move away from that. Many of us who were in the chamber yesterday afternoon heard Karen Gillon's debate about looking after public servants. We all, quite rightly, laud our police officers, firemen, nurses and emergency workers, but let us remember that social workers, community workers and youth workers are public servants too—we must stop denigrating them. The issue is not simply a matter of finding the resources. We must have political courage as a chamber and as a body politic and we must try to encompass an attitudinal and cultural change within our society, lauding the role that public services and social work undertake and recognising the need to break the cycle at the outset rather than picking up the pieces at the end.

Will the minister give a categorical assurance that the current projected reduction in travel times will be achieved? If so, by what date will that happen? If not, why not?

I fully support my colleague Christine Grahame's motion and endorse the sentiments that she, Ian Jenkins and Murray Tosh have expressed. As Ian Jenkins rightly pointed out, the fact that Peebles sheriff court is not the busiest court does not necessarily mean that it should be denigrated. As one who has appeared in many courts, I can say that the busiest court is probably Glasgow district court or Glasgow sheriff court. Glasgow district court is certainly not a court that I would want to be replicated elsewhere in the country. Murray Tosh made an important point about revenue and cost. The fact is that democracy does not come cheap. The potential closure of Peebles sheriff court is not simply about the judicial process or expediting the way in which petty or serious crime is dealt with. Fundamentally, the issue concerns how a democratic society works. Sheriff courts are part of the apparatus of state at the local level. A visible court presence gives citizens a clear sense of security. Such things are not simply about how we deal with those who transgress the law. People must have the opportunity to make representations on things such as housing matters within the court, where they can have their rights redressed. The issue concerns how we bring democracy home to people and down to the roots. The fundamental tenet of any democratic society is a judicial system that is not only affordable but accessible and visible. Such a system gives reassurance and satisfaction to residents. Clearly, nothing can be written in tablets of stone. As Murray Tosh pointed out, the Executive's position was that consideration would need to be given to any clear demographic shifts. As one who grew up in Linlithgow and practised in the sheriff court there, I am aware of the shift in population from the north of that county to the south of that county. Quite correctly, that has resulted in the opening of a sheriff court in Livingston, to which the resources will doubtless move in due course. We recognise that. However, the growth in the population of Peebles, to which Murray Tosh referred, shows that the situation in Peebles is quite distinct from that in West Lothian. Peebles and its environs will grow, although it is unlikely to become a high crime spot. The crime used to come mainly from those who were passing through the town, whom I used to denigrate when I appeared as a practitioner in the sheriff court. I remember one particular time, when the clientele that I was appearing for came down and suggested that a cordon might solve some of the problem. At the end of the day, the people in Peebles and Tweeddale are entitled to a court on their doorstep.  There is more than one way to deal with the court's method of operation. Although the current position is that the resident procurator fiscal has moved out, courts should not be run on the basis of what is best for the prosecution service. The position of the procurator fiscal is but one factor in an array of things that must be taken into account. Indeed, the procurators fiscal in Edinburgh are able to deal with such matters and the sheriffs are able to come down from Edinburgh to Peebles. Moreover, if further security is required for serious offenders, we have the ability to move people to various courts if security is not adequate in Peebles. We need to recognise the importance to the community of retaining the sheriff court in Peebles. Not only does the court's presence give the town a gravitas that would be denigrated if the court were removed, but the court provides the area with a symbol of justice in a democratic society. Obviously, we need to take cognisance of the growth in communities and demographic change elsewhere, but that does not affect Peebles. If the question comes down to pounds, shillings and pence, we must do what we can to recognise that no judicial system can have an infinite budget but, ultimately, affordable steps can be taken that would allow the court to remain open to continue serving the local population. Any questions of security costs for a particular case could be dealt with by removing such a case to another court. I endorse the cross-party points that have been made and ask the Executive to take cognisance of them. Perhaps the minister, who indicated that the Executive would take cognisance of clear demographic matters, will bear that in mind.

During the debate in Westminster, Henry McLeish made it clear that the Executive's powers would be significantly greater than those that have in fact been devolved. Scotland now has the ability to give directions and guidance, but only as long as they do not conflict with those that are given by the Secretary of State for Transport. Did not Mr McLeish pledge significantly greater powers, which could not have been superseded by those of the Department for Transport?

Our rail network clearly has significant and continuing problems. No amount of spin can mask the underlying substance. Post the Hatfield derailment—never mind post the Potters Bar crash—there are major problems. Even more recent incidents on the Scottish rail network are evidence of a rail network that lacks investment and suffers from poor management and, often, mismanagement. Railtrack is a failed organisation. It was belatedly put into administration by new Labour and its demise was long overdue. Action must now be taken to ensure that a safe and able driver is in the engine of the Scottish rail network. It is time for a Government to govern, we might think. It is time for the accountants to be replaced by transport officials. It is time for a Scottish Executive transport department that is more than Strathclyde Regional Council roads department writ large. When it comes to spin about the railways, the Executive has never been shy about coming forward. Four years ago, with the publication of "Travel Choices for Scotland", new Labour was talking up what it would do for Scotland's railways. In that document, prior even to the opening of the Parliament, new Labour indicated that it would "fulfil our manifesto commitment to free the potential in the restructured rail industry for passengers' benefit. In this way we shall deliver improvements in terms of fares, and quality and reliability of services, across Scotland". It pledged a bold new vision for our rail network to match the bright new dawn of the Liberal  Democrat-Labour Executive. The fine words and eloquence continue to this day. The latest Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning said just a week ago that "Scotland deserves a railway that is fit for the 21 st century and we should not settle for anything less"— although passengers on the west coast main line may settle for a train between Carlisle and Glasgow this week. He went on to say: "We also want a railway network that is safe and accessible and that supports a dynamic modern economy, meets social needs and enhances our environment." That is excellent. Who could possibly disagree? We need the substance to match the spin. Railtrack went into tailspin. That was the ignominious demise of an ignorant policy that an ideologically driven Tory regime imposed on the railways. We must go back to the drawing board. We have an opportunity to start with a clean sheet and to make a fresh start for railways in Scotland. The rail network in Scotland is relatively small, as rail networks go. Over 70 per cent of rail journeys are made on services that are run one rail operator. Over 95 per cent of rail journeys start and finish within the boundaries of our land. What could be simpler than to make an Executive department a transport department, not a regional council roads department writ large?

Mr Tosh is clearly missed on the Transport and the Environment Committee. Other members will be able to remind him that the likes of ScotRail said in evidence to that committee that the current funding method is byzantine, that it does not do us any favours and that we should ensure that funding goes directly into our railways through a publicly owned trust or ScotRail, rather than circumventively, by a back door, through Railtrack. Eureka! An idea has come to mind. We will run our railways ourselves in our own country. That idea is so simple that we wonder why nobody has thought of it before. After all, just about every other country on the planet runs its own railways. Better late than never, the idea has dawned on the Scottish psyche. That idea is no blatant nationalist propaganda. Who though of it and who articulated it? First, transport experts such as Strathclyde Passenger Transport. Malcolm Reed, a transport guru whom the Executive—rightly—holds in high esteem, has  indicated that, unless we have control of our rail network, the investment will go south. SPT, which is a spawn of Strathclyde Labour, realises the need to seize control. Secondly, the business community articulated the idea. Scottish Financial Enterprise—a pillar of the Scottish business establishment and hardly a nationalist fifth column—has produced a document that details the business community's need for a railway that is accountable to, and managed by, elected representatives in Scotland. It sees the business sense in operating to our own timetable. The final group to articulate the idea was the train operators, such as the much-maligned ScotRail, which—to be fair—was until recently doing a very good job in difficult circumstances. I hope that the spot of local difficulty will pass and ScotRail will get back to its previous high standards. What did ScotRail say when it gave evidence to the Scottish Parliament? It said that the Scottish Executive could take over responsibility for the railway infrastructure, thus ensuring that it does not continue to lose out. The ScotRail submission continued: "The Parliament or its Executive would act as an overarching Scottish Passenger Transport Authority coordinating the excellent work of existing bodies like SPT, WESTRANS, SESTRANS and other bodies such as the Highland Rail Partnership." ScotRail is no narrow-minded nationalist organisation that seeks to build a Scottish totem. It is the Scottish arm of National Express Group plc, which is a multinational company with a multitude of portfolios in many nations. However, it sees the need for accountability, responsibility and control.

Much of the regulation that deals with our railways comes from European Union directives. We acknowledge that safety matters will be dealt with at the EU level. There are safety and transnational matters that would obviously best be dealt with on a UK basis. They could be dealt with by a cross-border authority with two equal partners, not with Scotland as a subservient partner that has no say, never mind no budget apart from the pocket money that it is given. No wonder it is sung: "We boast—then we cower, We beg  For a piece of  What's already ours". We boast. Oh aye, we do that. To see that,  members just need to look back at all the spin and all the eloquent statements by new Labour minister upon new Labour minister. Then we cower. "Run our own railways. Oh—we cannae do that. We're too wee." Then we beg for a piece of what is already ours. Cap in hand, off the Executive will go to the Strategic Rail Authority, seeking crumbs from the table. Transport experts, transport operators and the business community see the need and know the benefit of running our railways. There are none so blind as those who will not see. Protestations about safety and cross-border traffic are inane. All over the European continent—never mind in different hemispheres—trains run transnationally and, in many instances, with greater safety than in Britain. However, we are told that crossing the border on the east coast or west coast main line is of such complexity that it is beyond the wit and competence of the Scottish Executive and its minions to operate and manage. Tiny Luxembourg can run its railways, but the Liberal Democrat-Labour Executive cannot. Perhaps the minister could tell us why he is so incompetent and so incapable of doing what is taken for granted in small nations the world over. Is he the one who is incompetent and incapable—or is it his party or his party's colleagues? Is the problem his incapacity or is the problem congenital? First we boast, then we cower, then we go cap in hand begging for a piece of what is already ours. Our rail network is suffering because it has been starved of investment. It is as clear as night follows day that all the major investment will go into the London and south-east network. The malaise will continue. The tragedy is that, for all that the Executive condemns the Tories, it would rather the Tories ran the railways than that the Executive itself took responsibility. It is quite apt that Mr Tosh should mention safety. Just recently, we found out about the huge profits made by Jarvis, which is the firm that was responsible for track maintenance at Potters Bar and which was appointed as safety adviser to Network Rail. Sitting on the board of Jarvis and dining out as a corporate fat cat is Steven Norris. As a former Tory transport minister, Mr Norris is someone who is responsible for the privatisation of a public asset and the creation of the mess that became Railtrack. However, Lewis Macdonald and his colleagues in the Scottish Executive obviously think that Mr Norris is more capable than they are. That might be the case, but not everyone in Scotland is as incompetent as Scottish ministers. If they cannot, others can. If they will not, we will. It is time to take control of the rail network in Scotland. It is time to take charge of our own affairs.  I move, That the Parliament notes the ongoing problems for freight and commuters on the rail network in Scotland; welcomes the support within the transport and business community for responsibility for the rail network in Scotland to be devolved, and calls on the Scottish Executive to take full charge of the running and operation of the network in Scotland.

Given the importance of air links to our island communities, the fact that almost all, if not all, the PSOs in the UK are within Scotland and the fact that we have a Scottish Parliament, a Scottish transport minister and a Scottish transport department, why are PSOs dealt with by a London department rather than by the Scottish Executive? Is that evidence of the superior talents of the UK department or the incompetence of the Scottish Executive?

Is Phil Gallie aware that a Tory Government built the rail link to Stansted? Before that link was built, Stansted had fewer passenger throughputs than Edinburgh or Glasgow; now it has 10 million passenger throughputs, which is almost as many as Glasgow and Edinburgh put  together. Was it right of the Tories to build a rail link to Stansted? Is it not right to build a rail link to Edinburgh now?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that the private finance initiative for the new terminal at Inverness airport has been an abject disaster, and that the trigger mechanism for payment to the financiers is a disincentive to increasing the passenger throughput? That is one of the reasons why HIAL squeals that it is unable to offer Ryanair the deal that it seeks. Does the member accept that that PFI was a mistake, and that whoever carried it out needs their head examined as far as airport operation is concerned?

What about Reykjavik?

Can the minister justify that time of seven and quarter hours?

I departed on the 8.25 from Edinburgh and arrived in Dublin at 9.25. I had a courteous meeting with Ryanair's communications officer. I got the 11.50 and arrived at Aberdeen airport at 12.50. If the minister calculates that to be in excess of seven hours, he requires to work on his mental arithmetic.

It goes without saying that aviation is vital to Scotland. Affordable and accessible air links are vital for a nation that is geographically distant from its markets and which contains numerous communities that are distant and isolated from the country's social and economic centres. Aviation is no longer a luxury for the rich; rather, it is vital internally and externally. Externally, aviation is the method by which we can make our country easily and cheaply accessible to visiting tourists. Conversely, it the method by which we can provide for our businessmen and businesswomen convenient and affordable access to foreign trade markets. Internally, aviation is the method by which our more distant communities and islands can be integrated into the social and economic main stream. Aviation is one area in which central Government can ensure that there is no rural surcharge and that, irrespective of people's geographic location, they have the opportunity to partake in the fruits of our society. What is the present situation? Internally, our links are poor and expensive. Externally, the situation is much the same, notwithstanding some recent turnaround as a result of the growth of low-cost carriers, particularly at Glasgow Prestwick International Airport, but also elsewhere. In comparison to other countries such as Ireland, France or the Scandinavian nations, we underperform badly on internal and external air links. As I said last week, it appears that the Irish Government cares more about the people of Derry—which is not even within the boundaries of the Republic of Ireland—than the Lib-Lab Executive cares about the people of the Highlands and Islands, which are within our national boundaries. That is how the matter appears if one considers the funding of public service obligations for connections to those communities.

The cost should be well known to Mr Macdonald because, besides operating the Derry to Dublin route, Loganair Ltd also operates three routes in Scotland, which are funded by the minister's colleagues' department south of the border. We must move from subsidising airports to subsidising air services. Why are we in the situation that I described? The first reason is the structure of the system. Who owns and operates our airports? Who is in charge of aviation policy? Who controls the purse strings? In each of those respects, there is a problem that must be rectified. I do not want to concentrate on the central belt; there will be other opportunities for that. Parliament does not often meet in the north so it is appropriate that we concentrate on Aberdeen airport and on Inverness and the other airports that are owned by Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd. It would be remiss of me not to mention at least the situation elsewhere in Scotland. Prestwick airport has been a success story, albeit on the back of a particular carrier. Elsewhere, Scottish Airports Ltd owns Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen airports. That company is a wholly owned subsidiary of the British Airports Authority, which owns London Heathrow, London Gatwick and London Stansted airports. Scottish Airports denies that it acts as a funnel to channel people to the airports that are owned by its parent company. That denial might be true, but Glasgow airport is in decline, Aberdeen airport is stagnating and the growth at Edinburgh airport is not so much in new routes, but in more flights to London. Some of that is because of the growth in low-cost carriers, but much of it is because of the debacle on our rail networks. There is a private monopoly that is not working in the best interests of Scotland. More than 87.5 per cent of air journeys in Scotland are operated through BAA airports. That is a private monopoly that must be addressed. Edinburgh and Glasgow airports must and can do better. Comparable airports in Dublin, Copenhagen and Stockholm all do better. Does anybody seriously believe that Dublin airport would have more direct services if it were owned by BAA? We need action, not spin, from BAA. Let us consider Aberdeen airport, where a new service to Dublin is being operated by Ryanair. I welcome that. Indeed, I flew here on that service. However, that is one of the few routes that has been opened and developed. If Aberdeen airport  is to grow, expand and interact in the global economy, there must be connections to Brussels, Frankfurt and elsewhere. BAA has opened more new shopping lets than new routes this year. Over recent years, it has developed more BAA McArthurGlen shopping malls on the European continent than direct services from Aberdeen to the continent. Aberdeen and Scotland deserve an airport operator, not a retail developer. So much for Aberdeen, but what about Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd? That is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Scottish Executive. It has been described by the finance director of Ryanair—a company that has higher share capitalisation than British Airways—as inept and incompetent. It currently levies some of the highest landing charges in Europe.

That is part of the problem. However, there is a fundamental structural issue. How did we get into the calamitous situation that we are in over the private finance initiative? Why is there not more get up and go? Why can Teesside International Airport Ltd deliver far more than Inverness airport? Airport operators—including those at Teesside airport—say that they would rather operate an airport such as Inverness airport than operate Teesside airport, because Inverness has far more going for it. Inverness airport is underperforming. I would have thought that the distance that people have to travel to get to an airport would have resulted in a reduction in charges as an incentive, but apparently that is not the case. Inverness has some of the highest landing charges in Europe. The problem is not simply the additional tax that has been imposed by Westminster, but the landing charges that are imposed by the Scottish Executive. HIAL and the Lib-Lab Executive use the same excuse in the development of aviation as they use in the development of our nation: "We're too small. We cannae dae it." Surprisingly, Ryanair has offered to fly into Inverness and Stornoway and to guarantee the route and the fares for 10 years. A company in Ireland has more get up and go and more faith in the economy of the Highlands and Islands than the Scottish Executive has. The Executive must sort out the debacle of landing charges and get Ryanair and other low-cost operators in. Although easyJet operates in Scotland at the moment, it will not expand its services because of exorbitant landing charges. The time for excuses  is past and the time for action has arrived. The Executive should bring the landing charges down and get the low-cost carriers in. The tourism industry needs them and the people of the Highlands and Islands want them. It is obvious that there are routes within HIAL's operation that are used too little to be profitable. They require Government support and assistance. The Irish Government provides such support for Derry, although it is not within its national boundaries. They also provide support for Kerry, Sligo and other communities. The French provide similar support for Corsica and for other places in mainland France. The Scandinavians provide it as a matter of course. The Executive is embarking on a renegotiation of the ScotRail franchise. It will consider routes, timetables and fares. In the north, where rail is not an option in many instances, we must do the same. We must create the routes, decide on the type of aircraft and the standard and frequency of the services, and—most important—set the level of fare to be charged. We do that for rail in the central belt; we must do it for aviation in the north and the islands. It is a similar issue; it is a matter of having the will to deliver. We must recognise the importance of aviation to social and economic development in the north of Scotland. The Government is pivotal in that and must take charge and act. The Government controls and decides on the motorways and highways in Scotland. The SNP argues that we should take similar charge of rail; the same argument applies to taking charge of aviation. If that does not happen, we will remain simply a channel down to London Gatwick, Heathrow and Stansted. There should be no more flying cap in hand to London asking for a PSO. We should decide our air routes and their frequency and cost. Comparable European nations manage to do that and to deliver internal and external air services that are suitable for their people, their tourism industries and their business sectors. We fail to do so because our Lib-Lab Executive and the British Government let us down. Action must also be taken in Inverness and Aberdeen airports. They are underperforming and must do better for their communities and for Scotland. As I said at the outset, air links are not a luxury but a necessity. The time for excuses has passed; the time for action has arrived. The minister must deliver for Inverness and act on Aberdeen. Our people are entitled to no less and deserve far more. The Lib-Lab Executive's double whammy of high landing charges and low subsidies must end. Change or be changed at the next election.  I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of air links to, from and within Scotland for social and economic development; notes with concern the current situation within Scotland and, in particular, in the north of Scotland of poor international connections and high internal air fares; further notes with concern the high landing charges imposed both at British Airports Authority and Highlands and Islands Airports Limited airports and calls for action to be taken for these charges to be reduced and the competitiveness of the airports increased, and calls for all aviation matters to be devolved to the Parliament, for the Scottish Executive to establish a route development fund to assist the development of direct routes to and from Scottish airports, and for action to be taken regarding the terms of the Highlands and Islands Strategic Transport Partnership report into the creation of more public service obligations allowing affordable and accessible air links within Scotland.

I have three points to make. First, the status quo is not an option. Although we have heard numerous partisan speeches from members of all parties, we accept the fact that the status quo cannot continue and that the situation has to change and be addressed. My second point—which I will address in greater detail in due course—is that alternatives to custody are not soft options. I think that all members have taken it as read that some people must be imprisoned because they are a danger to the public; it is also taken as read that some youngsters must be placed in secure units. One irony about those whom we require to place in secure units is that they are a danger not only to the public but often to themselves. They require to be remanded in a secure unit not only because they may endanger someone else's life, but because they are often a danger to their own lives through suicide or something else. My third point is that we need to resource non-custodial alternatives. They may be expensive but there are social and economic benefits to be accrued as well as cost savings. Those three matters must be addressed because there is a problem. The status quo is not tenable; it is a blight on our society. We should be ashamed that the number of prisoners per thousand of the Scottish population is significantly high compared with the situation in not only western Europe, but the whole of Europe. That is something that we all—

There is a saying that when one is in a hole, one should stop digging. Perhaps the analogy in criminal justice would be to say that if banging up people in prisons is not working then perhaps we should stop building prisons. We must consider a better way. Another shameful matter that has not been addressed is the fact that, demographically, given the decline in the number of youngsters, there should have been a decline in the percentage of youngsters in the prison population. I remember being a practising defence agent in the 1980s and 1990s; the number of youngsters going through the system then was going down, not because Edinburgh was becoming better behaved but because the percentage of youngsters was declining in our society. That is where, pro rata, much of the problem exists. The SNP has said—and there is a political acceptance in Scotland of the matter—that as we have a declining population, with all the problems that go with that, we should have some dividend in terms of the size of the prison population. That that has not happened is a problem. We must also recognise that non-custodial alternatives are not a soft option. I am not the only former defence agent in the Parliament who will have heard people say that doing time is the easier option. Those who say that are often recidivists or the hardest offenders. They would rather do a short period in prison than do a non-custodial alternative. Therefore, we must stop believing that banging up people in prison is a way of dealing with them. Those who are serious offenders and who are dangerous to others must be dealt with in that way, but banging up those who are not a danger to others is expensive and is not working. We must consider alternatives.

There are cost options. Putting people in prison is damaging to them and their  families and gives a licence to learn in academies of crime. In my days as a practising defence agent, I represented people from Greenwich in south London who carried out armed robberies in Bonnybridge and Livingston. They did so because they had been on remand with prisoners from Scotland who told them that there were easily accessible places that they could go and rob. They did so because they had learned how and where to do the robberies when they were in prison. We must recognise that if we are to prevent the fragmenting of our families we must keep people out of prison, especially fine defaulters and women prisoners. The social and economic costs of banging up those who are not necessarily a danger to others are greater than the cost of providing the necessary resources. We must provide the resources. No matter how partisan some speeches have been, there seems to be a consensus on the three matters to which I have referred. We need to work around the consensus that the status quo is not an option, that alternatives to custody are not necessarily a soft option and that we must provide the necessary resources. Providing the resources will free up other methods that will provide cost savings.

The minister will be aware that train operators are affected by the track upon which the trains run. Given that organisations as diverse as Strathclyde Passenger Transport and Scottish Financial Enterprise support the concept of a Scottish Railtrack, will the minister tell us why, as a minister responsible for transport, he is capable of running the roads but not capable of running rail?

The minister will be aware of the discord within the golf sector over the eTourism joint venture partnership. Will the minister confirm that VisitScotland was not given any opportunity to consider any scheme other than a public-private partnership? Why was it forced to go down the route of a PPP scheme when that does not necessarily represent best value?

Sustainable development seems to be a topic on which there is general agreement about where we want to go but disagreement about the pace or direction to be taken. It is a broad topic and transport is fundamental to it. I appreciate that we have recently appointed a new Minister for Everything, as Mr Gray's post is euphemistically known. I have no doubt that he has a considerable amount to read up on, but it is disappointing that neither he nor his deputy could be here for the debate, because transport will be fundamental to what happens to achieve a sustainable future for our country. As others have said, the combustion engine has been a great social liberator and, I would argue, an economic driver, but we cannot ignore the fact that it has come at an environmental cost. We must address that. We cannot leave it to laissez-faire, and nor do I accept the view that some people take, albeit genuinely, that we must seek to roll back history or travel back in time. The combustion engine is here to stay and we must try to harness it rather than allow it to take us over. That must be done for the best interests of the economy and taking cognisance of the best interests of the environment. That is why I do not criticise the Executive for the building of the M74 northern extension. I criticise the method by which it is being paid for and the manner in which it is being done, but I believe that its construction is necessary. In Scotland, we have a problem not with car ownership but with car usage. We must seek to emulate the position in Germany, where there is higher car ownership per capita than there is in Scotland, but there is lower car usage per capita. That is because people have affordable, accessible alternatives. In this country, we have allowed ourselves to get into a situation where the car is not the method of transport of choice or a matter of luxury, but a matter of necessity. That is the case whether one lives in the rural countryside or whether one is a nurse who lives in West Lothian but has to travel for work to Midlothian. That happens all too often, and it is a matter not of apportioning blame but of trying to provide an affordable and accessible alternative. Not all transport schemes have to be grandiose. I support the concept of trams in the city of  Edinburgh, but it would be quicker and easier to re-regulate the buses, not only within the boundaries and environs of the city of Edinburgh but elsewhere. It has become quite clear that the platitudes that the former minister with responsibility for transport and I were given by those in the industry have proved to be false. We must realise that we should re-regulate the buses, which would provide a cheap method of cross-subsidy to get a better bus system that would encourage people to get out of their cars and into public transport. We must also address the question of structures. One of the fundamental problems that we have is the lacuna post-devolution and following changes in local government. The fact of the matter is that our local government boundaries are too limited for many major planning and transport matters. A lacuna has developed and is creating a great problem. That is shown on the east coast by what has happened with Ikea, as well as on the west coast and elsewhere. Many matters need to be dealt with on a trans-authority basis as opposed to being dealt with on an inter-authority basis. Those of us in the east of Scotland have looked with envy at Strathclyde Passenger Transport. Until such time as we have a transport authority that has powers in the broader travel-to-work area and involvement in scale in respect of planning, we will not be able to address matters. I recently saw an article about the opening of a new factory unit, or technopole, out in Midlothian. I fully admire that and welcome the jobs going there, but a drive past makes it quite clear that the people who will be employed there will have to go there by car, because public transport routes are insignificant. Until we ensure that significant retail, industrial or employment developments tie in with transportation, we will not address the problems and will be left with the symptom of escalating car usage as opposed to the cure of well-structured public transport. I support the amendment.

There comes a time in politics when politicians have to stop looking back to the previous election and start looking forward to the one that is in front of them. They cross that rubicon and there is no demarcation line—it just occurs. It is clear that the 1999 election is behind us and that 2003 beckons. As in political life, so must it be in national life. We must move on. As a nation we have moved on culturally. Our literature is no longer restricted to the culture of the kailyard, where time was frozen either in 1707 at best or perhaps later in 1745. Our writers have managed to recognise that we are a modern nation in the 21 st century, that the kailyard is history. They have moved on to address the needs and wants of our country, warts and all. Numerous authors testify to that: not just Kellman and Welsh but others such as Alan Warner and Laura Hird. They recognise that Scotland has moved on. They have changed and adapted. We must move on. Politically, we must recognise that Thatcherism is in the past and in the past it must remain. We had 18 hard years of vindictive rule. Nobody can take away from the fact that those years were dreadful, no matter what those on the Conservative benches might say. Margaret Thatcher is now muted and we must also be muted. The question is not "How did we get into this situation?" but "How are we going to get ourselves out of the mess we are in?" The tragedy is that the harking back to the past is not from the SNP but from the Labour party, which, five years and two elections on, puts the blame on one woman and her Government in London. We now  recognise that, as we have moved on culturally, so we must move on politically. We have to address that. We also have to recognise, as our writers have, that many of our nation's problems were not created by legislation brought in by Margaret Thatcher or any other Westminster government. They are matters that we have to address. Our problems might have underlying social and economic causes, but the reason that we have a Buckfast culture or a diet of deep-fried Mars bars is not down to any legislation that has been imposed upon us by a Westminster government. It is down to the failure of every one of us in the nation to address and change matters. The Finns have done so. They have not just turned around their economy, they have turned around their health service, not by seeking assistance from Russia or Sweden—the governments that ruled them historically—but by recognising that they would only make Finland a better place by addressing their problems themselves. We must do that. As we move towards the election, we must also recognise that our powers are not able to deal with the problems that we face. Much has been commented on our powers. I noticed what Phil Gallie was saying. Let us analyse matters. At present, we have a Parliament that is in charge of recycling but cannot address packaging. We go from the sublime to the ridiculous. We are in charge of road transport but not rail or aviation, no matter what Phil Gallie might have said. A recent example is the city of Edinburgh. We are in charge of criminal justice. Imitation firearms are a cause of concern not only for those who live in the city but for the constabulary. When I made inquiries about what action is being taken, I was told that firearms are a reserved matter. How can we be in charge of criminal justice when 20 years as a criminal defence lawyer tell me that drugs and firearms are fundamental to the cause of serious crime? If we cannot address issues such as drugs and firearms, how can we claim to be in charge of criminal justice in Scotland? We also worry—and we debated it in Parliament yesterday—about the problem of turning people on to the body politic. We have worries about voting turnout. All parties in the chamber regretted what happened in 2001. We worry about what has happened in France as they run into an election in terms of the effect on nations and what can happen if people do not vote. As we go into the 2003 election, every one of us will be out canvassing for votes individually and collectively for our parties. What message will we give to people when we go to their doors and they ask "What about tax?" and we say "Sorry, that's a  reserved matter." "What about social security? I'm bothered about that." "Oh, that's no for us either." "What about foreign affairs and immigration?" "No that either." They are going to say "What's the point of voting for you if you can't address the needs and wants of our nation?"

Those are issues that people will be interested in voting on in the next election. It gives me no pleasure because the turnout will affect all of us and it fundamentally affects the democratic will of our society. We all lose if people fail to vote. That is why we have to stop the whingeing jock culture that Patricia Ferguson was right to comment on. It is up to us to address our problems, not to hark back and put the blame on the Tories, who have been out of power for five years.

I am winding up and do not have time to take an intervention. David McLetchie—who is no longer in the chamber—went on about the benefits of what has been contributed to Scotland by Britain. I have no doubt that there has been a substantial contribution and we have played our part. However, we must consider what is so great about being British when one third of the people live in poverty, when one third of the children born in this land are facing a life of poverty and despair and when we have endemic crime, drunkenness and drug abuse in a section of the population. We must be ashamed of that. Other nations discover oil. We are the only country in the world to discover oil and find ourselves getting poorer. When other countries discover oil, they can make the desert bloom. We discovered oil and, under the control of the unionist coalitions, we created an industrial desert in too many parts of our land. It is time to stop whingeing, time to give the Parliament powers, and time to take control and change things for the better.

This is a worthy subject to debate. I shall address more general matters than the specific issue of the youth parliament. As members have said, there is a declining turnout of both young and old at elections. We need to reflect on that. It is not a matter of simplistic solutions. Longer polling hours and easier voting might help, but they will not address the underlying problem of disengagement from civic society, whether of youngsters or people of a considerably older generation. We must also address the way in which people are being informed about key issues. A well-informed electorate is more likely to vote. Members have commented on the fact that the turnout for the referendum on the Scottish Parliament was higher than the turnout that elected us. I predict that any referendum on the euro will have a considerably higher turnout than the turnout for past Westminster elections, as considerably more effort is made to educate people about the clear issues. If people are interested in and informed about the issues, they are more likely to vote. We must take that on board. We do not operate in a vacuum—plenty of studies show what motivates people to vote. If the minister has not read or heard of Professor Henry Milner, I recommend that she read his work on civic literacy. In Finland and Sweden, there is a far higher turnout for elections at all levels than there is in the United Kingdom or the USA. It is not rocket science. The issue has been investigated and we must address it. It concerns not only the young, but all age groups. There is also a paradox. The fact of the matter is that, the older people get, the more likely they are to vote even if they have not voted before. People become politically engaged through being in a trade union, joining a political party or taking part in voluntary groups. It is engagement in civic society that interlinks people and gets them involved in the  election process in a democratic society. I agree that we have to address key matters at school, but we must be wary of simplistic solutions such as civic studies. They are important but we must also put a great deal of effort into encouraging youngsters—especially females—to participate in sport. The tragedy is that, when they reach the age of 16, society has difficulty in maintaining their interest in sport, notwithstanding the fact that there has been a proliferation of gyms. We must recognise the fact that simply bringing in civic studies will not result in people voting at the age of 26, 36, or whatever. The issue is getting them to participate in the democratic process, and a large part of that depends on literacy. We need an educated electorate—that is the lesson of the Scandinavian countries. There is too much abuse of youngsters at present, with pejorative descriptions such as "generation X" and the "MTV generation". Who creates, manufactures and garners wealth from MTV? It is not people who are aged 18 or under—they have no real influence over what goes on. The people who benefit from the creation of the MTV generation are a few people of a considerably older generation. Civic literacy is not just a matter of requiring that people have the basic abilities to read and write; it is about involving people, so that we can address the digital divide, and ensuring that people read quality broadsheets, so that they are informed. Without that, we will end up with an MTV generation of people who sees one minute of news time for every 59 minutes of music or whatever else and who will not be capable of making an informed decision and will simply not vote. My colleague Duncan Hamilton is not here, but I have a comment to add to what he said. If we had put all the money that was spent on the American presidential campaign into literacy schemes, not only would we have dealt with illiteracy in the United States, we would have dealt with illiteracy almost around the globe. That would have been far better for all of us in humanity, as the outcome would have been more people voting and we probably would not have ended up with the current president. That is a lesson for those of us on the left and a warning to those on the Republican right. If we educate our people, they are more likely to vote for parties that want to create a more egalitarian society. That is the virtuous circle that is being created in the Scandinavian countries, as opposed to the vicious cycle that has been perpetrated in the United States and which is beginning to enter this country and, in some respects, Australia. As I said, we need to upscale the literacy of our people. There are other simple matters that need  to be addressed, such as proportional representation, support for public broadcasting, which is vital for us to get our messages across, and the encouragement of the broadsheet press. If we allow ourselves to live in a dumbed-down society with a dumbed-down electorate, we will get the Government that we deserve. If we wish to replicate what has been achieved in the Scandinavian countries, as many Scottish Executive ministers do, we should start by addressing basic matters such as encouraging literacy and encouraging people to participate in all aspects of democracy.

The minister considers railways a key priority. Like many other members, I have received a communication from Network Rail regarding its make-up; it has no shareholders and it is accountable to its members, who fall into three categories. Those are the SRA, industry members, who will be represented—

I have a question. The third component will be public interest members, who will be chosen from a wide range of stakeholder groups. Where is the Parliament's representation? What power will the Executive and the Parliament have over Railtrack's successor?

Does Margaret Smith believe that the tramway outlined in the transport delivery plan is best paid for by congestion charging? If we read between the lines, it is quite clear from the answer that the minister gave after making her statement that the tramway in Edinburgh would be paid for by congestion charging. Does Margaret Smith support congestion charging?

Mr Mundell talked about a "plague of potholes". The phrase "A plague o' both your houses!" springs to SNP members' minds. I have some sympathy for Mr Mundell's critique, which echoed many sentiments that he and I, and members from around the chamber, have expressed in previous debates. He was right to say that the transport delivery plan provides more questions than answers. We must consider where we are at present and how we got here. We have not simply arrived from cyberspace. We are here because of a period of logical progression. As the minister said, during that time we had 19 years of Tory rule. Because of those 19 hard Tory years, the people of Scotland turfed the Tories out at the 1997 election.

Not at the moment. The fact is that the Tories constructed the M74, for which we give them credit. However, they cannot dine out on the construction of one major bit of infrastructure in a generation. That is inadequate.  Many of the points that have been made about potholes arose because the Tories underfunded local authorities. The Tories started starving local authorities of cash and I am sad that the Lib-Lab Executive has continued to do that. When the Tories initiated that underfunding, the cracks began to appear. They might resemble crevasses in many areas now, and they began with the Tories.

The member probably did that because he did not wish to use the railway. A former Tory Prime Minister used to say that she did not believe in railways, and she went out of her way to humiliate them. Mr Gallie did not take the train because to travel through Glasgow—our major city—he would have had to change trains and stations. The Tories had power for a generation, yet they could not connect Ayr to Edinburgh with a direct train. The Tories failed to do that, so we need no empty lectures from them. The motion refers to fault, error and malaise, but all that started with the Tories. Did not the terms "chaos" and "muddle" apply in the 1980s and 1990s? Did not we have strikes? Yes, we did. I have some sympathy for ScotRail, because when the public monopoly was handed over to a private monopoly, the difficulties that the public monopoly had were simply transferred. The blame for that cannot be laid solely at the Executive's door. I blame the Executive for failing to take action and for washing its hands of the matter, but the solutions that the likes of Mr Canavan suggest would probably not be required if we still had British Rail, because collective bargaining would take place nationally. The Tories caused the problems by fragmenting and privatising the rail network. As I said, the Tories started underfunding of local road maintenance. It is gross hypocrisy for the Tories, who privatised the railways and deregulated the buses, to say that public transport is unreliable. Not only did the Tories deregulate the buses back in the 1980s, but Mr McLetchie now wants to privatise Lothian Buses—the jewel in the crown of Edinburgh in the 21 st century. The Tories initiated the problem and want to worsen the situation. The people of the Lothians will reject them again next year, because their suggestion to privatise Lothian Buses is anathema. The Tories did not restrict themselves to privatising the railways and deregulating the buses—they even sold off the British Airports  Authority. Glasgow airport now withers on the vine not simply because of the Executive's failure to construct a rail link, but because of its management's failure to deliver and make that airport prosper. We have no control over that, because the Tories sold BAA. The Tories say that they want to resolve the situation by taking money from Scottish Enterprise's budget. I sympathise with that position. Scottish Enterprise has suggested that it would pay for the M74 north extension if nobody else would, so it is clear that there is slack in its budget. However, that alone will not address matters.

That is a matter for Scottish Enterprise. The minister would have to speak to Robert Crawford about that. Scottish Enterprise has said on record that if the M74 extension could not be funded any other way, it would scrape to the bottom of the barrel and use all its money at local enterprise company and national level to build the extension, because it considers the extension important. If Scottish Enterprise has said that it can manage that, it is about time the Executive found out where it can get that money.

Not at the moment. In the Executive's amendment, Mr Macdonald talks about public transport. The ScotRail franchise is to pay for everything that has been pledged for rail, but the franchise does not exist in isolation. We will eventually pay for it. We can approach SNCF, Virgin Trains or National Express, but they will all want to know how much they will be given before they will say what they can do. We cannot say that we will construct the Borders rail link and the airport links, improve the service and make the trains run on time unless we say in time for the tendering process in 2004 what budget will be available. It is incumbent on the Executive to say what funding will be available for the ScotRail franchise. Until it does that, we will have only a wish list, because SNCF, Virgin Trains and National Express will say only, "We can provide what you want, but that depends on how much you pay us." The proposals for Waverley station are fine. Everyone welcomes the developments, but Waverley station is a property bank. The Executive and the previous Tory Administration failed and let down Scotland. We  are paying the price for a generation of underfunding and the failure to have a strategy. The key problem with the transport delivery plan is that it contains no long-term planning and establishes no structure. We need immediate action to fix the potholes in key congestion areas, allied with a long-term strategic plan for building up our national infrastructure. So far, the problems have been caused by the Tories and continued by the Executive, which has no solution. As I said, we should say not "plague of potholes", but "A plague o' both your houses!" I move amendment S1M-2945.1, to leave out from "unreliable" to end and insert: "trunk roads and unreliable public transport; recognises that this is a result of decades of under-investment and misguided privatisation; regrets that the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive has failed to reverse these damaging Tory policies, and further regrets that the Scottish Executive's latest transport strategy publication, Scotland's Transport: Delivering Improvements, provides no programme, no costings and no timescale, and therefore offers little hope for, or commitment to, improvements in Scotland's transport infrastructure."

Will the minister give way?

Yet again, Parliament is faced with self-congratulatory twaddle from the Executive. The motion as it stands defies the reality on the ground. The tourism sector has had to face calamitous events and is still in difficulties. No one could have predicted foot-and-mouth or the events of 11 September, but to ignore them or to imply that they are or were factored in is absurd. The motion talks about a strategy having existed since 2000. Given seismic global events, to suggest that all was and is covered is ludicrous. Although the Executive cannot be blamed for those events' having occurred, it must take responsibility for the handling of the crises that followed. The words "belated" and "inadequate" spring to mind—too little was done, too late, for too many. Today, reference has been made to a major events strategy. The Ryder cup and Euro 2008 have been mentioned. We have lost one of those and we are in danger of losing the other if the Executive continues in its current manner. The motion goes on to commend the framework for action as the way ahead, but the impotence of that document is shown by the parliamentary answer that I received from the minister earlier this week. When we asked what additional funding would be made available for the marketing of  Scotland overseas following the publication of the framework, we were told: "The Framework for Action is not a new strategy. It contains new actions, mainly for the industry, that will meet our aims for this important sector of the economy. The public agencies who provide support to the industry, will be able to do so within existing and planned funding levels."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 25 March 2002.]  The events that the industry, our nation and the world have faced have been calamitous. To suggest that existing budgets are adequate is pathetic. This is not a solution; it is yet more spin from an Executive that ignores and undervalues our biggest industry. There will be no hardship fund for those most deeply affected.

Not at the moment. What is the reality? Foot-and-mouth disease and the events of 11 September have caused massive bleeding in the industry. The additional funding that has been provided is welcome but inadequate. The action that has been taken by agencies is welcome but piecemeal. We require an overarching strategy for making our land accessible to visitors and for marketing ourselves abroad. Sadly, the motion and the Executive's actions are deficient on both counts. What is the situation and what needs done? First, there must be recognition of the underlying problems that the industry faces, in addition to the two calamitous events that have occurred. Action, albeit belated and inadequate, is being taken with regard to the latter, but nothing has been done to deal with the former. Scotland remains a high-price, high-cost destination because of the high pound and the high price of fuel. Those issues may be outwith the remit of this Parliament, but the Executive can neither wish them away nor avoid addressing them. If the Executive is to be responsible for the health and welfare of both the industry and our people, it is obliged to take cognisance of those factors and to take what action it can to mitigate them. At the minimum, should we not indicate the significant damage that is being done to the industry by both the high pound and the high price of fuel, instead of taking the ostrich-like, head-in-the-sand attitude displayed by the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport and his predecessors? Unless those two underlying factors are addressed, our industry will continue to require to fight a rearguard action in the face of overwhelming odds. The industry does not need lectures; it needs action. If this Government would sort out what it is in charge of, the industry would be able to sort out  what it is responsible for. The industry will sort out the quality aspects that are needed, but the Executive must sort out the fundamental matters that are crushing it. The Executive must stop lecturing and start delivering. The industry will cater for its clientele; the Executive's obligation is to help persuade possible clients to come to our land in the first place.

Not at the moment; I will let Winnie Ewing in in a minute. Changes for the better have been made recently. Sadly for the Executive, that has been more by accident than by design. The new regime at VisitScotland has been impressive. Let us not forget, however, that the minister who previously had responsibility for tourism brought in another chief executive with great fanfare and promotion, only to ditch him within days at great public expense. Greater clarity and a clearer strategy are coming from VisitScotland, but the difficulties that have been forced upon the organisation remain.

I fully agree and I will go on to mention the fact that we should give VisitScotland our full support and encourage it—rather than the BTA, whose actions are inadequate—to act in Scotland's interests.

The tourists who come from the other parts of the UK are encouraged to come here by the marketing strategy that VisitScotland has introduced. We have to promote VisitScotland, not undermine it by having it work with the ball and chain of the BTA around its feet. There are matters of importance surrounding VisitScotland. There are political and ideological matters that it has to accept. E-tourism is vital, but why is there such hurry and, most important, why is a public-private partnership necessary? Yes, we have to outsource what is best dealt with by experts, but why do we have to sell out lock, stock and barrel? Were other forms of funding or venture capital considered? If not, why not? If they were ruled out, why was that done? What action  will be taken to try to assuage the fears that have been intimated by Eddie Friel at Greater Glasgow and Clyde Valley Tourist Board and by other area tourist boards? There are two key priority areas: accessibility and marketing. I will move the amendment for those reasons, because they are critical. Our geography means that we need mechanisms and a strategy to make our land accessible at an affordable rate. We need to prioritise air routes, for both low-cost and other scheduled carriers, but the Executive has no strategy for that. I asked the Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning what strategy and funding were available. He replied that there was no specific budget and left it to a variety of other public sector and private organisations to deliver. Tourism is a key priority; it is a national responsibility. We need a route development fund. The Executive must deliver on that. The other priority is marketing. Despite a modest increase in funds, it is quite clear that Ireland still spends more on marketing than we spend on our entire budget for VisitScotland. Moreover, as any marketer would say, we need to maximise our USP—our unique selling point. The Executive sends out mixed messages. VisitScotland works overtime to sell Scotland; meanwhile the Executive and the member for Midlothian expect us to flog "UK OK". Until we realise that our product is distinct and must be sold as such, we undersell our industry and sell out our country. The mantra from the Executive's back benchers is, "Where's the money coming from"? Without going into the tales about readdressing priorities or the Scottish Enterprise budget, why do we not simply take our share of the BTA budget and give it to VisitScotland for marketing and a route development fund? The resources are there. We would be better served by VisitScotland and an organisation in charge of a route development fund than we are by the BTA, the British Airport Authority and British Airways. The leadership is not there. This is about marketing and accessibility. It is about selling Scotland as a unique product and creating a route development fund for aviation or maritime routes. So far, the Executive has issued many glossy brochures and given itself many pats on the back, but that is not what is needed. That is why the motion is deficient and why I move my amendment. I move amendment S1M-2941.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the damage caused to the tourism industry by the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease and the events of 11 September 2001; further notes that the underlying problems of the high pound and high fuel costs remain; notes with concern that the Scottish Executive's Tourism   Framework for Action 2002:05 contains no additional funding; calls on the Executive to promote marketing and accessibility for the sector, and further calls for action to open new air routes to Scotland and to make VisitScotland, not the British Tourist Authority, responsible for marketing Scotland abroad."

A new day has dawned, but it is not a new age for public transport in Scotland. Several questions arise from the report. It appears that we are long on rhetoric, but short on detail. The plan gives us yet more studies and reports—studies and reports on on-going studies and reports. By my calculations, more than half the 10 projects referred to by Wendy Alexander are dependent on the outcomes of current studies and new studies or on interaction with partners from whom we have heard nothing and have no guarantee that they will deliver what the minister wants. I want to raise some specific points in regard to four critical areas: airport rail links; providing 21 st century public transport in Edinburgh; Borders rail, which is so important in the south of Scotland; and the missing motorway links, which are so significant for vehicle traffic in Scotland. The report is considerably devoid of detail in those four areas and we have no "route map", as the minister called it. Can she answer three points relating to those four matters? First, when will building commence? Secondly, who will provide the funding? Thirdly, what funding mechanism will be used? If those three questions cannot be answered, I regret to say that the report will be not a route map but another example of the Executive being long on rhetoric and short on substance.

What mechanism of financing will be used?

As is customary, I congratulate Lord James Douglas-Hamilton on securing the debate. The issue is fundamental, not just for the city of Edinburgh and the east of Scotland, but for all Scotland. Passenger statistics show that 12.5 per cent of passengers at Edinburgh airport come from Fife and 25 per cent of passengers come from north of the Forth. Everybody is aware that Glasgow airport is—unfortunately—situated on the wrong side of the city for many who seek to use it. Perhaps by accident rather than by design, Edinburgh is becoming Scotland's national airport. Cognisance must be taken of that. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton is right to say that we need less sympathy and more action and that, although we have had an indication of movement from the minister, we need to know when, how and by whom. Investment in a rail link to the airport would not just add to the airport's position as an international gateway, but would help to take business from the north of England. Only 10 years ago, Stansted had a rail link built at public expense—it was paid for in the old British Rail days. When the link was built, Stansted had  fewer passengers than Edinburgh or Glasgow. Now, Stansted airport almost has more passengers than Edinburgh and Glasgow airports put together. That shows what can be achieved by building a rail link. A rail link is fundamental to boosting the airport, but it is also about infrastructure investment for the whole of Scotland. As I mentioned, it is not just about Edinburgh or the east of Scotland; it is about what else can be done. If we take the visionary view that has been proposed by some within ScotRail and others to loop the current Edinburgh to Glasgow line through Dalmeny and into the Fife line, not only would there be the opportunity—albeit with the requirement to build a tunnel—to link the airport terminal to the line, there would be other knock-on effects. It would prevent the perennial difficulties that ScotRail and Railtrack have at the Winchburgh tunnel and the Newbridge viaduct, where there is either perpetual flooding or a speed restriction. By looping the line we would open up access to the airport not simply from the east, but from the north, west and south. There would be an add-on benefit for the existing Edinburgh to Bathgate line, because if the line was looped in that way, more trains and more capacity would be available for the Bathgate to Edinburgh line, and the service could go from two trains an hour to four trains an hour. We must consider that visionary loop. It should also be made clear that building a rail link to Edinburgh airport would not necessarily be at the cost of building a rail link to Glasgow airport. Both must go together. If, as a society, we seek to be considerably visionary, we should build both links. Building both links should not mean that we cannot have a direct connection from Edinburgh airport to Glasgow airport. If a rail link was built, and if the relevant steps were taken to make cross-Glasgow traffic possible, it should be possible to go from Glasgow airport to Edinburgh airport without requiring to change train. That would benefit not just Edinburgh airport, but Glasgow airport. Indeed, it could be argued that coming into Glasgow airport on an intercontinental flight then going on an outbound flight, whether to Scandinavia or elsewhere, from Edinburgh airport, would be no more difficult—and may be quicker and less hassle—than going from Heathrow terminal 1 to Heathrow terminal 4. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton is quite correct to raise this issue, but at the end of the day we need less spin and sympathy from the Executive. We need a commitment to build the rail link, which would be a fundamental factor not just in growing Edinburgh airport and the economy of the city of Edinburgh, but in boosting the economy of the whole of Scotland in the 21 st century.

Is the minister aware that, following deregulation in Sweden, the cost of a stamp rose by 72 per cent, the number of post offices fell by half, the Saturday service was scrapped and door-to-door delivery in rural areas ceased? Will he ensure that the DTI and Postcomm are told in no uncertain terms that privatisation is unacceptable and that we want to improve our post office, not to privatise it?

What about John Farquhar Munro's speech?

Did the member listen to John Farquhar Munro, who is the member for Ross, Skye and Inverness West and the former convener of roads for the Highland Council? Mr Munro made it clear that although the weather has not been the worst that there has been, we have experienced one of the worst winters—possibly the worst—for getting the roads cleared. Does the member agree with Mr Munro that there is a crisis in the Highlands and Islands, in particular?

Go back to school.

Nora Radcliffe's colleague Jamie Stone said in a previous debate on the matter: "this process is tragic for rural areas ... It means rural job losses" and "Worse than that, the process will be irreversible, because it will be impossible for councils to return to roads maintenance once it goes to the private sector." He went on to say that the "two amendments that are before us this morning are an obituary for council-run maintenance".—[ Official Report , 25 January 2001; Vol 10, c 569.] Does Nora Radcliffe agree with Mr Stone?

I start by quoting briefly from Shakespeare: "Now is the winter of our discontent"— not, I should add, "Made glorious summer by this sun of York" but made a shambles by Ms Boyack. From the Borders to the Highlands and from the A1 to the A9 we have a winter of discontent for the traveller and for our economy. There has been a catalogue of complaints and anecdotal evidence, from individuals, elected representatives—including many on the Executive's benches—motoring organisations and even entire councils. We were put on standby when, as a result of a manhole cover collapsing on the M8, the economy of the whole of the west of Scotland ground to a halt. Such an absurdity has not been heard of since a kingdom was lost for the want of a horseshoe nail. That was even before the winter snows and ice, which are a difficult period for all in Scotland, when individuals require to take care, for their own safety and so as not to jeopardise the safety of others by their actions. During that period, those charged with the care and maintenance of roads must ensure that all adequate and appropriate steps are taken to keep roads clear and traffic moving. That has not happened. We have had complaints about ice on the A1 and lack of gritting and we have had the first closure of the snow gates on the A9 at Blair Atholl for many a year, despite the fact that this has not been the most inclement of winters. There have been complaints that the M90 at Kinross is more reminiscent of an ice rink than the main highway from Lothian to Tayside and the north. The Kessock bridge—the artery from Inverness to the Black Isle and beyond—was shut down. I could go on and on. The tragedy for the economy and the traveller is  that they cannot get on, never mind go on. As I indicated, many of the complaints emanate from elected representatives in the chamber. Righteous indignation, they will claim; sanctimonious twaddle, say I. We do not need their pious press releases, for they were well warned about the effect of the privatisation of trunk road maintenance.

Not at the moment. Elected representatives have had the opportunity in previous debates to register their vote against the folly of splitting up and hiving off trunk road maintenance, selling off the work force and selling out the public. Action not rhetoric was needed then and action not rhetoric is needed now. When the privatisation of trunk road maintenance was debated just over a year ago, members were strident in their rhetoric, but reticent when registering their vote.

If Mr Lyon would listen to my speech, he will hear my suggestions. We should never have got into this situation in the first place. The Executive sold out the work force and the local economy by signing a contract and signing away good care and maintenance of our roads. Let us take the former convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee, the illustrious Mr Andy Kerr, who said: "We are on the edge of making one of the Parliament's worst decisions in its short life. It is a personal and political embarrassment that we find ourselves arguing over such issues in the Parliament. Allowing the management and maintenance contracts to go ahead as planned would be one of the worst decisions we could possibly make ... the private sector will make our roads worse".— [ Official Report , 25 January 2001; Vol 10, c 579-580.]  He was absolutely right. The pity is that while he was given licence to moan he did not have the guts to vote. Instead, for his cowardice, he was promoted onwards and upwards to become Minister for Finance and Public Services. Now that he is in a position of power, what will Mr Kerr do about the situation? Mr Lyon should perhaps take note. Mr Kerr has an opportunity, as the problem is not simply trunk roads but all roads. As was forewarned, privatisation has not only created a worse service on the trunk roads but has undermined the ability of local authorities to deal with non-trunk roads. A previously integrated service has been rent asunder. That manifests itself in two ways, the first of which is the loss in economies of scale. Councils' grant-aided expenditure allocations were  insufficient and had, in any case, been cut year on year. Now, without compensation or allowance, councils are expected to cover the same distance at lower cost. It just cannot be done. Our largest council, Highland Council, has had cuts of 13 per cent in its roads maintenance allocation and 5 per cent in its winter maintenance allocation. The City of Edinburgh Council has less now than it did four years ago to maintain the same, if not a greater, number of roads and pavements. There has been a cut in real terms. That is not offset by the removal of trunk roads from the council's domain, as trunk roads were previously funded from another budget. The budget has been slashed and economies of scale have been cut without compensation. Councils are short of cash and have now been short-changed. Secondly, there is the lack of an integrated network. Previously, local authorities collaborated for the public good. Now, in many instances, there is not only disunity but disharmony between councils and the private contractors. Moreover, there are total absurdities. One example is the area where the A1 meets the Edinburgh bypass. Until last year, East Lothian Council dealt not only with the A1 trunk road but with the non-trunk sections in both its own and the City of Edinburgh Council's jurisdiction. All was well and the roads were clear. Even in inclement weather, Mr Home Robertson saw no need to complain. Now what do we have? Well, Amey Highways Ltd has the contract for the trunk road, so it grits up the A1 to the junction at Old Craighall and stops. East Lothian Council then grits the next 1.5km, up to the City of Edinburgh Council boundary, and stops. The City of Edinburgh Council then grits the last 1km, to the Asda roundabout, and stops. Where, oh where, are the cost savings in that? It is organisational lunacy. No wonder Mr Home Robertson was complaining bitterly about Amey and the A1. Three organisations separately maintain three stretches that were once maintained by one. That is but one example of the absurdities created by the fragmentation of the network. There are many more. Pavements, adjacent footpaths and trunk roads were once maintained collectively, but now a second machine from a separate organisation is required, as the contractor maintains only the road, leaving the council to return to maintain the footpath. Does the Executive not realise that roads do not exist in isolation? The people of Scotland do not want excuses from the minister, never mind BEAR Scotland Ltd or Amey Highways Ltd; they want action. They want their roads gritted and their pavements cleared, just like they used to be before privatisation and cuts. That is not too much to ask;  the public sector delivered it before. As my party predicted, and back benchers—including the Executive's current Minister for Finance and Public Services—echoed, the Executive's privatisation has spelt disaster. The Executive got us into this snow-hole; it should now get us out of it. At the very minimum, the Executive should ensure forthwith that BEAR Scotland Ltd and Amey Highways Ltd shape up or ship out. Taxpayers' money is paying for their profits, while the companies provide a poorer service than the public sector did before. There are contracts that they must adhere to—the Executive must ensure that they adhere to them. There may be the performance audit group report, but surely the Executive department with responsibility for transport can ensure that action is taken. Just when will the PAG report be available? Will it address service and an integrated network or will it be yet another whitewash—of the accountants, for the accountants, by the accountants? Is it really worth the millions that will be spent on it, when we have an army of civil servants? Would not the money be better spent on roads? We want the matter assessed from the point of view of road engineers and road users, not faceless financiers who count the pennies and look at the bottom line, not the road ahead. Will the Executive ensure that BEAR Scotland Ltd and Amey Highways Ltd subcontract to the councils to ensure best service, best practice and an integrated network? Let the road engineers run the road network, not the private financiers. There have been bad days this winter but the weather has been by no means the worst or the most inclement that we have ever faced, yet, as a result of the privatisation forced through by Labour and its Lib Dem colleagues in the one-party coalition, we have a winter of discontent—and it is still not finished. The Executive would do well to recall that a winter of discontent was the prelude to the ultimate demise of a former Labour Administration that was propped up by the Liberals. The Executive may have sold out the public sector, but it still has a responsibility to the general public. New Labour and agricultural Labour—for the Liberal Democrats are but country cousins—must ensure that action is taken against BEAR, in particular for the benefit of our travellers and economy. There are no excuses. When it comes to rail, the Executive blames the situation on the Tory privatisation. There is merit in that, although the Executive's handling leaves a lot to be desired. When it comes to road maintenance, the privatisation is Labour's and the Liberals'. They know the price of everything and the value of nothing. Labour members have no one to blame  but themselves and their lapdog partners. They claim that they make the difference and claim all the success of the coalition—although that is not much to boast about—but they cannot run from this. The Lib-Lab privatisation is causing havoc and will cost lives. The buck stops with the Executive. The Scottish public will not grin and bear it. The Executive must get it sorted out or get out and hand over to an Administration that recognises the benefits of public service, not private profit, and which realises that public service is precisely that—it is worthy and meritorious in its own right and it is about doing things collectively for the common good, not privately for individual profit. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern recent dangers and problems affecting travellers and the economy and caused by a deteriorating winter roads maintenance service; believes that the privatisation of trunk road maintenance is a false economy, resulting in loss of efficiencies of scale, knock-on increased costs to local authorities for clearing non-trunk roads and an overall cost in the form of reduced standards of service; further notes that BEAR Scotland Ltd and Amey Highways Ltd have failed to deliver a quality of service necessary for the safety of road users and the movement of goods, and condemns the Scottish Executive for its actions in ignoring warnings regarding privatisation and in failing to address the current problems.

Will the minister give way?

What is the Liberal Democrats' position on the SRA's policies in relation to the Orton loop and the improvement of the Aberdeen to Inverness line? Does not Nora Radcliffe believe that, from a Scottish perspective, those are of fundamental importance? If we leave matters with the SRA and the current Scottish Executive, when will people in Nora Radcliffe's constituency see an improvement in the Aberdeen to Inverness line?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister agree that the basis of yesterday's GNER announcement was that the expansion of the service would be brought about by making the three Eurostar trains that it was promised would go from Edinburgh and Glasgow to London and Europe go instead from London to Leeds? Where is the benefit to Scotland from a GNER announcement that sees an improved service to Leeds but absolutely nothing better for us north of the border? Were not the Eurostar trains that have been allocated to the London to Leeds service originally promised to Scotland? Are they or are they not our trains?

Well, well. Monday saw a fanfare for the Executive and Strategic Rail Authority announcements, pledges and promises. What is the substance behind the spin? The minister for enterprise, rehash and spin—who in her previous portfolio had convictions for recycling the same Government money with multiple announcements of the same proposal—is at it again. She is a serial political offender. Where are we at the moment? It took the Minister of State for Europe to indicate that our railways were the worst in Europe—probably because the UK Secretary of State for Transport, Local Government and the Regions was sitting on a beach sunning himself. "Crisis? What crisis?" brought down Jim Callaghan, and a similar ignorance and insensitivity will do likewise for new Labour. We have seen a 25 per cent cut in ScotRail services—services that were already drawing increasingly frequent complaints from disgruntled commuters—leaving an economy stagnating and travellers marooned. The situation is epitomised by the service from our third city to our fifth and newest city, where a 90mph train travelling 108 miles takes two and a quarter hours to arrive. So much for an intercity service in the 21 st century. The spin must be substantiated. How much is the Executive spending? When is it spending it? When will we see the construction and improvement? Passengers do not want platitudes; they want firm commitments about what is being spent and when they will see the dividend. Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose. We are on our third First Minister and our second transport minister, but what has changed? Let us consider the evidence. Let me quote, and let the Scottish traveller listen and weep: "A Scottish parliament and executive with substantially wider powers and democratic authority than the Scottish Office ... will be better placed than ever before in developing and implementing Scottish solutions to Scottish problems." I quite agree. A new dawn for Scotland and rail. What a pity that the Minister for Enterprise,  Transport and Lifelong Learning and her colleagues have failed so lamentably. Given the unique circumstances, the minister has abdicated responsibility and wasted a golden opportunity. What else was said? "The prevarication that characterised our predecessors' approach to transport is at an end; this Government intends to deliver, I can assure you of that." Those are fine words, worthy even of the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, even though they were not hers. The tragedy is that the prevarication continues, and the delivery is non-existent. And yet still there is more: "We have promised a balanced package of measures to deliver a sustainable effective transport system appropriate to the needs of Scotland's people, environment and economy." Who made those pledges? It was the late Donald Dewar, addressing the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Authority on 4 December 1998. More than three years on, and into not just a new century but a new millennium, the situation is simply this: things are worse now than then. Last week, our third First Minister, not our first First Minister, was rightly criticised by the leader of the Opposition for failing to act in the current ScotRail dispute. It was pointed out that he had powers to give direction and guidance to the SRA, but that he had chosen not to do so. Moreover, it was pointed out that this is not a run-of-the-mill labour dispute between management and unions. Not only is the service vital to our society and economy, but ScotRail is a private monopoly run by public subsidy. There is no alternative train for the commuter and it is our taxes that are paying the franchise holder. What response of gravitas and depth was given by the third First Minister? He flippantly chastised my colleague John Swinney for suggesting that he could get trains to run when there were no drivers. There was much hilarity on the Lib-Lab back benches, but no solution for those waiting on the station platform. What was pledged by the first First Minister? He extolled an "eight point action plan including the recruitment of 800 extra train drivers", but where are those drivers? What trains are they driving? If the first First Minister thought it important to extol the virtues of recruitment, why does the third First Minister deny responsibility for the absence of those drivers? Does the civil service in the First Minister's office rely on civil servants working in the evenings or at weekends? Does the office rely on rest-day working? If the First Minister does not operate in that way, how does he expect our railways to run in that way? He or his transport minister either knew or ought to have known. Either they are culpable or they are  negligent. Either way, they have failed. Crown prince? Court jester more like. I should add that the first First Minister went on: "I am satisfied that ScotRail has less to worry about than the other train operating companies—but we will ensure that they are kept on their toes." On their toes? Most people think that the Executive is falling flat on its face. "Who is responsible for all this?" ask a disgruntled public. That is a perfectly legitimate question and one that the first First Minister appeared prepared to acknowledge and accept responsibility for, but that has not happened. The public ask who is responsible. "Not I," says the First Minister. "Nor I," says the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. "Nothing to do with me, gov," says the Scottish Executive. That is the sort of behaviour that drives passengers to distraction and a rail operating company into disrepute. What about some of the Executive's announcements? On Monday, the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning promised us the Milngavie to Larkhall line within four years. However, three years ago, the first First Minister indicated that the Larkhall project was high on his list of priorities and that he hoped that an announcement would soon be made. The minister indicated that we would have the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line by 2005. That was notwithstanding the fact that the project was first mooted in 1991 and that the previous Minister for Transport had a photocall on the track in November 2000 to give a visual image of the impending opening of the line. The announcements are not about a new beginning. They are a regurgitation of existing commitments that have yet to be honoured—it is cauld kail het up. What do we need? We need responsibility, accountability and vision. I shall deal with each of those concepts in turn. On responsibility, the Executive needs to get a grip and end the excuses and abrogation of responsibility. The Executive is elected to lead, not to hide. It must cease denying responsibility and being fearful of entering into dialogue, never mind giving direction. If the Executive will not confront the combined forces of ScotRail, the RMT—the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers—and ASLEF—the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen—who will? The Executive funds ScotRail and the RMT funds some Labour members. On either or both of those grounds, the Executive not only can, but must intervene.  The issue is about taking charge of our rail network. The minister cannot expect plaudits for going cap in hand to London and returning with a commitment that it might be possible for a rail link to the airport to be built by 2005. That is notwithstanding the fact that the document that the minister is supporting and extolling in her amendment makes no commitment to build that link by 2005, only to build it within 10 years. The minister is pleading for crumbs from the UK cake for the Scottish rail network. As long as the minister denies responsibility, Scotland will remain on a railway siding and go nowhere. On accountability, we must be in charge of our rail network. The current system is not delivering. Why can the minister be responsible for highways, but not railways? That is neither logical nor beneficial. The SRA is a UK body and it will look after UK interests. It is self-evident that, with 70 per cent of UK rail journeys starting or ending in London, the expenditure will be focused on London.

I found that rather a convoluted question. The purpose of this debate is to focus on—and to give the chamber the first opportunity to debate—the SRA announcement and the Executive press release. I will come on to what we will do, but this is the first democratic airing of what the Executive put in the press. That contrasts with its inability to give—despite being offered the opportunity—a democratic airing to health care for the elderly, for which it has decided to abrogate responsibility. Why can the minister be responsible for highways, but not for railways? The SRA is a UK body; its announcement confirms that fact. The SNP is clear that the minister and the Parliament must be the responsible, accountable body for rail. The SNP believes that a separate Scottish public trust for Railtrack is the best way forward. That would allow us to spend our money on our priorities and direct our funds to where they are first required. What is the argument against that proposal? People say, "Trains don't stop at the border." Blow me—that is a hard one. Do not trains pass from the Netherlands to Germany, or from the Republic of Ireland to Northern Ireland, or from Portugal to  Spain? Does the minister suggest that those independent nations have somehow missed a trick and that the rail services that they have and aspire to would be better served by re-entering or entering the British empire—on rail or otherwise? The minister should not be absurd. The SNP's suggestion is not narrow-minded nationalism; it is plain common sense. Do not the M74 and the A1 cross the border? Do we require to change our tyres at a border interchange? That would be ridiculous. Even if the minister, with her limited aspirations, thinks the suggestion is a step too far, surely the current circumstances are unacceptable. The SRA is based in London and has a representative for Scotland who is located not at Victoria Quay, but at Victoria station. At the minimum, we require a dedicated Scottish director of the SRA in an autonomous Scottish department, as 96 per cent of rail journeys in Scotland start and finish here. We can work together on an inter-island basis on cross-border matters, but internal Scottish services must be decided on here. If we can build our own Parliament building, we can build our own rail network. If we can decide on the furniture and fabric of that building, we can be responsible for the signalling and stations on our railways. Although we call for the rails to be publicly owned, we accept that the train operators will remain in the private sector. That brings us to the ScotRail franchise. We cannot continue to limp along until 2004. There must be some light at the end of the dark tunnel. ScotRail claims that it is haemorrhaging money. If the present situation continues, it will haemorrhage rail users. We must seek to have ScotRail deliver to the terms of the franchise, but we must also acknowledge the extent of the difficulties that it faces. A carrot must accompany the stick. If, like other franchise holders, ScotRail is making a loss, we could say, "Tough. You got it wrong, you pay the price." ScotRail might pay a price, but so would we all. For those reasons, there must be discussion and review. The status quo is unacceptable. Moreover, the minister must urgently set in place the time scales and conditions for franchise renewal. Like the travelling public, we do not care whether ScotRail, Stagecoach or SNCF runs the network. We care that the company delivers a working network that is safe and reliable, enhanced and expanded, and based on a clear strategy that focuses on passengers and service. Where is the vision? A rail link to an airport sometime in the next decade, or if we are lucky, by 2005 is suggested—and the minister was quoted as saying that it might happen by 2005. Having failed to impress the morning papers, she tried to  think of something new for evening television. The Railtrack network management statement that was issued in 1998 talked about a rail link to Glasgow airport within 10 years. Why the slippage? When will that be constructed? Who will pay for it? No mention has been made of electrification and the sparks effect. We have had tea and sympathy for those in the Borders. We need to take responsibility, enforce accountability, develop a strategy and deliver a vision.

We argue for European levels of investment. That has been proposed at a UK level by the British Government and by David Begg, who used to sit with members of the Labour party. We must recognise the need for investment. We must decide how much is available to spend and what rail network we can obtain for that. At present, we have neither timetables nor vision.

Not at the moment. Plenty must be done, not only to improve the service, but to enhance and expand it. The service to which we should aspire is not a utopian vision, but the service that is taken for granted in other small European nations, such as Sweden. At the outset of the debate, I gave details of the travel time between Inverness and Aberdeen. I repeat that it takes two and a half hours in a 90mph train to travel 108 miles. Comparable journeys in Sweden are completed in half the time and at half the cost. We need to get control of our share of the rail money and spend it on our vision and projects. There has been much criticism in the industry that the rail network is being run by accountants and financiers. I can only echo those comments. It is the same here. I recently met a senior person in the rail sector who indicated that, at best, only three lines could make a profit. What an absurd premise. What road makes a profit? When I get in my car for a road journey, it costs me money. When the minister gets in her limo, it costs us all money. Apart from those plying for hire or carrying for trade, no road journey makes a profit. We build roads, we care for them and we patrol them. Do we talk about social highways? No. That is because a proper road network brings social and economic benefits. When there are environmental as well as social and economic arguments for rail, why do we predicate our position on the false premise of profit? That was the logic of Thatcherism. Margaret Thatcher was a woman who prided  herself on never travelling by train and who, when she was Prime Minister, revelled in rubbishing British Rail. Let us never forget that it was the Tories who created the mess. We must end the concept of knowing the price of everything and the value of nothing. A modern 21 st century Scotland needs a vibrant, expanding network. It needs such a network not just socially and economically, but environmentally. Let us dwell on the Executive amendment—although not long will be required.

I am happy to agree with those sentiments. The minister will have an opportunity shortly to answer for herself.

We are not the Executive. We are not the Strategic Rail Authority. On Monday, the SRA, the authority to which Labour has abrogated responsibility, made its position clear. That position is that it will govern rail in the whole of the UK for the next 15 years. The minister went cap in hand to see Byers because she did not like the fact that the SRA specified rail networks for 10 years or more. Last night on television, and today in the papers, a promise for 2005 was aired. Labour has said that the SRA document will dictate railways. We say that that must be addressed. We say that there is a different way to run our railways. We say that the minister must take responsibility. We do not want a minister who scuttles down to London cap in hand, who does not accept responsibility for the immediate crisis, who does not seek accountability for herself and the Scottish Parliament and who does not create a strategy for delivering a future vision. Labour has been in office in Scotland for five years. We have had one election, three First Ministers and two transport ministers. In the UK,  we have had one Prime Minister, two elections and three transport ministers. What has Labour been doing? I have heard about finding one's feet, but that is the gestation period of a political elephant, conceived in the 20 th century and inadequate for the 21 st . The structure is absent. The Executive has neither accepted responsibility nor created accountability. It has neither vision nor strategy. The Executive does not even require a Jo Moore to bury press releases. That is because the industry, press and public view the Executive as stillborn. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Executive's neglect and lamentable lack of vision and strategy for Scotland's railways has contributed to a deterioration of rail services in Scotland to the point at which they have become amongst the worst in Europe; further notes that the Strategic Rail Authority's new strategic plan offers nothing new for Scotland; believes that Scottish railways must be fully controlled by, and accountable to, the Scottish Parliament, and therefore calls upon the Executive to take responsibility for delivering a strategy for the running and operation of Scotland's rail network.

What powers in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 would the minister advise City of Edinburgh Council to use to resolve the bus wars, given that the conflagration started in August, one or two months after the act came into force, and to preserve Lothian Buses?

I concede many of Sarah  Boyack's points. If we are now magnanimous enough to say that we perhaps should have proposed an alternative and that we did not recognise that quality contracts were not going to work, will Sarah Boyack now accept that quality contracts are not going to work and will she accept that we should now introduce regulation? Mr Home Robertson has issued a press release indicating that quality contracts do not work and that regulation will have to be considered.

Why has the City of Edinburgh Council not gone for quality contracts? Because it knows that they will not work.

Will David McLetchie give way?

I am grateful for this opportunity to debate an issue of significant concern to Edinburgh: the on-going and escalating bus war in the streets of our capital. As the motion says, the situation is "detrimental to routes, services and passengers and ... results in congestion and pollution in some areas, at the same time as routes and services are lost in others". The situation is conducive to neither the health nor the welfare of the capital's citizens. I should perhaps digress somewhat at this point to provide a history and background to bus services in this city. It might also be appropriate for me formally to declare that I am the holder of a Lothian Buses RidaCard, as are some other members. However, like others in the city, while I am a supporter of our publicly owned bus service, I reserve my right to criticise it and I often do so. Having said that, I think that the city has benefited from having had a publicly owned bus—or, historically, omnibus—service since the late 19 th century. Lothian Buses is the line successor to the Edinburgh Corporation Tramways and the Leith Corporation Tramways, which commenced operations in the 1890s. The service became Edinburgh Corporation Transport—I am old enough to still talk about corporation buses—before becoming Lothian Region Transport and, ultimately, Lothian Buses. Thousands may have criticised the service on occasion, but it is our service and our buses. We  have earned that right.

That is a matter for Lothian Buses to discuss with the local authority, but I certainly agree that an improvement in services that ensures the development of the travel-to-work area around the city of Edinburgh should be considered. I am aware of the differences in perspective. Perhaps in West Lothian, and indeed in Midlothian and East Lothian, there are different views of Lothian Buses and the other companies that provide a service. From a city of Edinburgh perspective, which I am addressing today, what we want is an end to the bus wars. From the point of view of the whole of Lothian, we want an improvement in services full stop. I will turn later to how I think that should be achieved. As I said, we have earned the right to criticise—it is a Scottish characteristic to be harder on one's own than on others. Lothian Buses is still a publicly owned company: 91 per cent of it is owned by the City of Edinburgh Council, and 9 per cent is split between East Lothian Council, West Lothian Council and Midlothian Council. It is the only remaining publicly owned bus company in all Scotland, and is one of the few that is left in the United Kingdom. It resisted privatisation under the Tories and it will, I believe, resist commercial attack under the current Administration. Lothian Buses may be our service, but it is not a big player in national terms. It is only about 2 per cent of the size of FirstGroup, the other combatant in the current situation. But what is the current situation? For a decade, FirstGroup has eyed Lothian Region Transport, and then Lothian Buses, the jewel in the crown of the city of Edinburgh. Overtures were rebuffed. A back-door attack, through the failed, but not lamented, city of Edinburgh rapid transport—CERT—project, was repelled. FirstGroup is still a huge conglomerate. It is the biggest operator in Scotland, and has not a national, but a multinational, stature. When that wooing failed, it was time for FirstGroup to adopt bully-boy tactics. Since the summer, FirstGroup has stepped up a commercial attack on the services historically run by the public bus company for the public benefit in our capital city. FirstGroup entered, offering bounties to drivers, cut-price fares to passengers, shiny new buses and an unprecedented service for the city. Across Edinburgh, passengers on key routes were met by a flotilla of buses competing for a limited number of passengers. However, as I pointed out at the time, that was—and still is—unsustainable. Bus wars cost routes and services. The bounties  to drivers were unsustainable and prices have risen. The new buses in the city are there only because old buses are running in the country, particularly in the Borders. Transferable tickets between operators are no longer available. Most important, although we have more buses than we need at key times on key routes, we are losing essential services at off-peak times on the less profitable or unprofitable routes. Some of the cutbacks have come from Lothian Buses, which has been pilloried by the public. However, we have to remember that Lothian Buses, although it is publicly owned, is not publicly subsidised. It uses the money it makes on profitable routes to support the unprofitable services. There is no such quid pro quo for FirstGroup, which chooses profitable routes to boost shareholders' profits. As a result, services have declined. The new year has brought no respite. As at Monday, further key, profitable routes operated by Lothian Buses has come under commercial attack. It will not be a bounty of buses; it will be the death knell for less profitable routes. If we have in excess of a bus a minute going up Leith Walk, we have reached an absurd and ridiculous situation. If it continues any further, it will be easier and quicker to walk on the roofs of the buses gridlocked on the Walk than it will to travel inside them. That is not just absurd in transportation terms but unhealthy in environmental terms. Complaints come not just from Leith Walk. Members can go and speak to residents on Torphichen Place, where a public highway has become a public bus park. What is the solution? Doing nothing has not worked. FirstGroup is in for the kill and condemnation from a united front will not suffice. FirstGroup will not be persuaded; it must be dealt with. Some cling to the hope of the cavalry coming over the hill in the form of the Office of Fair Trading. That organisation's ability to protect Scots was clearly exposed in its failure to protect them from charter flight supplements for flights from Scottish airports. That aside, the situation in Edinburgh would take months to consider. That delay is unacceptable for our citizens, and it will be too late for Lothian Buses. In any event, a fine and a slap on the wrists will not stop a multinational with deep pockets; only regulation will. I do not wish to pre-empt the minister's response to the debate, but I wish to address the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 and the quality contracts. They provide no salvation, which is probably why the City of Edinburgh Council has not even bothered to take preparatory steps. If a quality contract were to be invoked, it would be easy to write the script for what would occur. The organisation with the deepest pockets—the multinational—would put in an artificially low  tender and would win, and Lothian Buses would lose. Lothian Buses would pay off its drivers and sell off its buses, as there would be no alternative. When the tender came round again, as we have discovered with cut-price fares during the current price wars, the cost would rise, but there would be no competition, as there would be no Lothian Buses. The same thing happened with privatisation of environmental services in many English local authorities. The best and only solution is bus regulation, which is supported by Glasgow City Council Labour group. That is what happens in London, England's capital city. The increased passenger numbers there put any pride that we have in our bus service well into perspective. With bus regulation, FirstGroup or any other company would have an opportunity to operate services. However, it would have to provide a package of routes, not cherry-picked routes—a balanced service for all our citizens, rather than just for those travelling on profitable routes at peak times. A bus service is by nature a public service. That must be reflected in the area that it serves and the times at which it operates. My purpose is to highlight the importance to the city of Edinburgh of our publicly owned bus company, Lothian Buses; the congestion, damage to the environment and loss of routes and services that have been caused by FirstGroup's predatory attack; and the need for action to be taken before prices rise again and routes are lost once more. A capital city deserves a capital bus service. Action must be taken. If the minister cannot offer a solution to the problem, I ask that the Executive support my member's bill to regulate buses in this city. The error of the Tories in the 1980s must not continue under the Lib-Lab Administration a generation later.

The Executive says that it had high hopes, but so did we and so did the public. However, the Executive's claim was a lie. The Executive has talked big and delivered little. What is the genesis of the situation in which we find ourselves? This is the third First Minister's vision that we have heard in the Scottish Parliament. The Executive will say that it is third time lucky, but we say that bad luck comes in threes. Today we have the McConnell menu, before that we had the McLeish muddle and before that we had the Donald Dewar "Partnership for Scotland" that was mentioned by George Lyon. That is the genesis of the situation that we are in. That document was a sell-out of Liberal Democrat principles that has been surpassed only by the selling-out of the pledges that it contains. Let us consider some of the document's pledges, particularly those relating to transport. On page 18, we read that the Executive will "promote rail transport and encourage an improvement in journey times" and that it will "continue to encourage freight off the roads and onto trains and ships". It is rather bizarre to go about achieving that aim  by ensuring that the loss of a manhole cover on the M8 would bring gridlock not only to road freight but to all road transport in the west of Scotland. That situation cannot be considered to be an incentive to put road freight onto rail because, at Christmas, we discovered that English Welsh and Scottish Railway had suspended movement by train of Scottish exports to the continent because its trains could not get through the channel tunnel. Far from promoting a switch from road to rail, the Executive has managed to ensure that we cannot even deliver our goods to the continent. As my colleague, Fergus Ewing, mentioned, there is also a question over BEAR Scotland. Let us be frank; the matter concerned not only BEAR, but Amey Highways. Mr John Home Robertson was quoted in the Edinburgh Evening News at Christmas time complaining about Amey's lack of attention to the A1. What was the situation there? The current Minister for Finance and Public Services—who is not in the chamber—was, in his alter ego, vehemently opposed to privatisation of road maintenance contracts. Everything that he said would happen when he was, as a back bencher, opposed to privatisation has come true. There was recently a disaster because of a manhole cover, which caused gridlock in the west of Scotland like that in a third-world nation. The Executive also failed to address the problem of winter snows, whether in East Lothian—Mr Home Robertson's constituency—or in Inverness-shire, in Mr Ewing's constituency. The Executive has failed. What else does the Executive say? That same partnership document stated: "We will set up regional transport partnerships to develop transport strategies throughout Scotland." What Ms Boyack failed to mention, however, was that outside the chamber in the city of Edinburgh there is a shambles because of the bus wars, which are causing congestion and pollution and are costing routes and services. Far from promoting a transport strategy, the Executive is following a free market free-for-all, which was brought in by the Tories in the 1980s and which is now, in the 21 st century, supported by the Liberal Democrats and Labour. It is costing a public service in Edinburgh and it is jeopardising an institution in the form of Lothian Buses, which has served the city well for more than 100 years. The Executive has failed to deliver in that regard. That brings us to the best: "We will promote rail transport and encourage an improvement in journey times." In a week when 25 per cent of rail services in Scotland have been cancelled without consultation, the Executive has done nothing. Its Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong  Learning is not even in the chamber to comment and, more important, has not even sought to bring together the rail unions and the management. The Executive is allowing the Scottish economy and the Scottish commuter to pay the price for its inadequacy and its inefficiencies. ScotRail has been given by the Executive a private monopoly, which is provided by public money—our money; taxpayers' money—and the Executive has washed its hands of it. It has failed to address the problem. Today, we have not been shown a vision, but a vacuum, which will be filled only following the removal from office of the Liberal Democrats and Labour in 2003.

I am sure that you will manage, Presiding Officer. There is a considerable degree of consensus in the chamber about this issue. Perhaps that is less the case among Conservative members, but many of us will agree with many of the points that Bill Aitken made. I regret the points that were made by Mr Gorrie. It should be taken on board that there can be such a thing as constructive criticism. An amendment can be lodged to add value to a debate, rather than simply to make a political point. The purpose of the SNP amendment is to try to create a coherent strategy, to focus matters and to bring them together. It may be that we will disagree on that and vote in a different manner, but the amendment was lodged for proper reasons. This subject is difficult and it has no simplistic solutions. There are multiple causes and the corollary of that is that there are multiple cures. Every generation begins to fear or criticise the generation that follows. We have all experienced that—it may be that, at my age and with two teenage children, I begin to see that it is the case. We have to take on board that matters are slightly worse than they were before. We have a breakdown in family relationships and a much more mobile society, in which there is much more fear about approaching kids. It is rather a tragedy that in our society people, including me, sometimes wonder whether they can wind down their window and ask kids for directions without causing fear or alarm. That exacerbates matters and, as a result, the alienation between children and older generations is much worse now than in previous years. The minister is correct that we have to put matters into perspective. The minister was also correct to say that young people are most likely to be the victims. It is the small element that is involved in serious youth crime that is the problem, not youth per se. The person who is most likely to be assaulted by a tearaway youth is a member of that youth's peer group. We have a duty not simply to protect the majority of our citizens from a small minority of the young but to protect the majority of the young from the small minority of their peer group that is making life difficult for them. What do we do? I believe that we should build on the model of the children's panels. The problem is not the institution but the limited resources and powers available to it. I recollect from my dim and distant past that children's panels are not unique— we took them from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Since then, many people have looked at what we have done and refined it. I accept that children's panels have to move on now that we are in the 21 st century, but the whole concept is something that we should build on. At the moment, if a minor commits a serious crime, they can be prosecuted by indictment in the serious courts, exactly as happened down south with the Bulger tragedy. Had that happened in Scotland, I have no doubt that those children would not have gone before the children's panel but would have been prosecuted in the High Court. The problem is resources. What can a children's panel do? It is easy to say that children's panels are doing nothing. If we returned to juvenile courts, what would a sheriff do with a 14-year-old child? He would have exactly the same difficulties that the children's panels have. The sheriff would not say, "I'll lock you up," because the question is where they would lock the child up. Like others, I have experienced practice in courts and I am well aware of the difficulties in finding secure accommodation—albeit for a short period—when a child is detained. The problem is not the institution of children's panels; the problem is resources. It is correct that we should seek to reduce the number of looked-after children. However, the target of 20 per cent is rather arbitrary. In Edinburgh, the number of looked-after children has increased by 15 per cent in five years and residential capacity has increased by 17.5 per cent. The children's panels do not have the necessary resources at their disposal. It is those resources that we have to address. The purpose of the SNP amendment is to focus matters.

I put on record at the outset that, in moving amendment S1M-2488.4, I bear no animus against Mike Watson as an individual; my objection is to the manner in which he has been appointed and the portfolio with which he has been provided. Many of the points that I wish to make have been made by others. The creation of the portfolio of the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport has demeaned the Executive and the Parliament. It reflects the worst of the municipal fiefdoms that Labour possesses in the west of Scotland. In coming in as First Minister and making this appointment, Jack McConnell reflects what has gone on in local government and  what has brought it into disrepute. What he has done justifies the need for proportional representation in local government. What we have seen is simply on-going cronyism. The appointment of a Cabinet is a matter of balance. The Cabinet has to reflect not simply one's friends—clearly a First Minister has a right to ensure that those who are closest to him are brought on board—but the wishes and aims of the political party. Most important, given that we are talking about the Government of our nation, the Cabinet has to reflect the talents that are available. If we take a broad view, we see that the appointments are not based on picking the right people to deal with the needs and wants of the Scottish economy, Scottish tourism, culture, art or sports; they are a matter of Jack McConnell rewarding his friends for supporting him this time, as they supported him last time. That is simply not good enough. The First Minister talked about a minister for what he pronounced as "Gaylick". I hope that Mike Watson—if my amendment is unsuccessful and he is appointed—has more knowledge of Gaelic than the First Minister has. We had a minister who dealt with Gaelic. I had my criticisms of and run-ins with Mr Alasdair Morrison, but at least he had some knowledge of Gaelic and was conscious that it was a living language that we hope to preserve. Jack McConnell has appointed someone who, if he follows his First Minister—this may relate to their friendship—will consider his brief to be the language that is spoken on the other side of the Irish sea. We will be classifying Gaelic with classical Greek, as opposed to trying to support a language that may be spoken only by a small and diminishing number of our people, but that we are trying to retain and support. That is part of the Parliament's ethos. The part of the previous portfolio that covered the Highlands and Islands has simply disappeared. Where is the representation of that area if we bring the Lanarkshire Labour group into the First Minister's private camp? Another issue is tourism. The minister who previously had responsibility for tourism, Wendy Alexander, failed. The tourism industry clearly thought so, given the disgruntled representations and anecdotal evidence. Neither I nor anyone in my party went as far as to describe her as "an extremely stupid woman". That was said by someone who is close to the First Minister—perhaps even by someone who is now in the Cabinet. There are considerable difficulties. We support the concept of a dedicated tourism minister. The problem before was that the ministers had far too much on their plates. How do we tie in tourism with transport? Where are the conduit and links if we are to bring in the  necessary flights, whether from the United States or elsewhere? What is the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport supposed to do when the VisitScotland board already contains many friends of the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning? How does the role of the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport tie in with the appointment of a new chief executive and chairman of VisitScotland? What will happen when the new minister finds that he has no influence over two aspects that are fundamental to tourism in Scotland—transport and training? We do not need a minister who will simply go round having cups of coffee, visiting bed-and-breakfast establishments and patting people on the back. We need a minister who has the power and clout to deliver what is necessary—bringing in foreign visitors. Given that Americans are deeply fond of titles, never mind our castles, it might be thought that, if the minister goes around as Lord Watson rather than as Mike Watson, that will boost the number of tourists in Scotland from North America. I think not. We need to improve the ways in which visitors from the United States can fly to Scotland and to make that cheaper, through sterling exchange rates. It is for those reasons that I move amendment S1M-2488.4, to leave out "and Mike Watson".

As is customary, I congratulate my colleague Alex Neil on the motion. I am conscious that other members wish to speak and I am grateful to the Presiding Officer for allowing a motion to extend the debate. The level of attendance at the debate is testimony to the interest in it. This has been one of the best-attended members' business debates for a while. I go along with the points that were made eloquently by my colleague Alex Neil and by others. A crisis is pending in higher education. As he said, talent is haemorrhaging and there is a brain drain. Unless that is addressed, we will all pay the price in our communities and in the economy. There is a danger of a collapse in morale in the AUT and among those who work in the sector. As others such as Des McNulty and Tavish Scott—members from different parties—have said, discussion of the matter has been postponed and those in the lecturer circuit say that that cannot continue. McCrone dealt with the situation in primary and secondary education. That is causing an imbalance. We must recognise that salaries must be dealt with. We cannot continue to allow people to work on the basis that doing so is virtuous, that the institution in which they work is virtuous and that they are contributing to a greater cause. Those people must be rewarded. We must recognise why such work is important. Alex Neil talked about the importance of research, which is fundamental. Contract research staff do policy work that is important not only to the Executive, but to members of the Parliament, whether on the Government benches or not. Contract research staff provide the knowledge and the basis on which we conduct much of our work. Contract research staff also deal with a growing teaching load. The idea that research staff and teaching staff are differentiated is not often borne out. It must be factored into consideration that research staff do some teaching. Tavish Scott mentioned that security of employment can be just as important as the rate of pay. People in any employment will say that their  terms and conditions are often as important as the pay that they receive. An extremely highly paid individual who works in a stressful situation in an institution that does not meet health and safety regulations may not wish to remain with that institution. We must address that. As Alex Neil and Tavish Scott said, we must deal with pay. The minister must take it on board that clearer directions must be given to SHEFC. Blunkett was clearer in his directions about pay than the Executive has been. That must be addressed. We cannot simply place all the blame on the institutions. I agree with what David Davidson said about the underfunding of research. Research is significantly underfunded by the state and its funding is in deficit. I understand that the figures vary by institution between 39 per cent and 90 per cent. Until we increase funding for research, we will not have enough money for those at the coalface. I therefore support the motion.

Nobody disputes that what happened on 11 September was an abomination, that the world has changed irrevocably—as numerous people have said—and that some legislative changes will be required. However, two matters must be addressed. First, how do we bring those changes into Scotland? Secondly, how do we ensure that the legislation that is brought in reflects our distinctive culture, nature, geography, demography—and whatever else? Things are distinct and different here. The one-cap-fits-all solution for the United Kingdom does not go well here. One just has to look at the use of statistics for the Terrorism Act 2000 to see that what is necessary for the greater London area does not reflect, and is not required for, the situation here. We must make two points. The first is about the use of the Sewel motion, the second is on the question of detention. On the Sewel motion, there should be a presumption that wherever the Parliament is competent or capable we should address matters and legislate here. That should be taken as read, not simply because the matter of the Sewel motion is within our competency and capability, but because it impinges on and affects other bodies and institutions. We are competent in this matter and capable of acting on it. Failure to do so will impinge on our distinctive legal system and police forces, which will be fundamentally affected by what is happening in Parliament on this matter. It is not just a matter of saying that we have competent and capable people within the chamber—there are many, whatever the tabloid press might think. We also have competent and  capable people within our legislative and police networks. Just yesterday we appointed a new Lord President and a new Lord Justice Clerk. Lord Cullen, the Lord President, is highly thought of, not only within Scotland, but throughout the UK. After all, not only did he do the Piper Alpha report, he was also taken down to do the report on the Ladbroke Grove rail disaster and he has done an array of other matters. For a panoply of matters the cry was, "Get in Lord Cullen. He is the best man that there is." Yet what are we saying here? We apparently do not have the knowledge to consider the terrorism matter distinctly and individually. We will just take on a plate what comes from down south. Not only does that impinge upon Parliament's ability and capability, it also fundamentally impinges on the ability and capability of others in other institutions that are equally important and valid in our society. It also fundamentally affects our legal system, because our ancient and modern law has taken the view that detention without trial must be considered extremely seriously and avoided at all costs. I am always amazed—as are others in the chamber—by the limited knowledge that Scots have of their legislative system. Those such as Gordon Jackson and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton will have had jury trials where people did not know that we have 15 jurors and that we do not have opening speeches. That is understandable, because the mass media is geared towards a system that reflects what happens south of the border or in the United States. People know more about those legislative systems, irrespective of "Taggart" or "Rebus". However, when we as a Parliament take this stuff just willy-nilly, it is no wonder that individuals in Scotland do not know about their distinctive legal system. All that we get fed by those in power is, in fact, a system from elsewhere. If we want to make sure that people know—

Yes.

We cannot ignore the matter of detention—that is fundamental. The whole ethos of detention refers to such matters as Magna Carta. The fact is that, in terms of our legal system, the 110-day rule is sacrosanct—as Gordon Jackson knows. That rule has been applied for centuries and generations because the view has been that people should not be detained eternally without trial. That is why the 110-day rule  is a cardinal aspect of our legal system. This motion is ripping that up and throwing it away. We cannot accept that. We have now, in our modern age and after great debate—whatever Phil Gallie and others might have thought—invoked the ECHR because we viewed that as a fundamental tenet of where we Scots see Scotland in the new millennium and in the 21 st century. We brought in those individual rights to add to and bolster our legal system. By introducing detention without trial through today's motion, we are ignoring that. Detention without trial is anathema. We are a western, northern-European democracy, so let us consider which other ECHR countries are bringing in such measures. Is detention without trial being invoked in Sweden or Finland? Is the Republic of Ireland introducing it? That country has problems with terrorism equal to ours, but it is not rushing to introduce these measures, because it is considering matters. Who in Scotland would we be dealing with through the imposition of detention without trial if they cannot be deported or extradited and dealt with by an international criminal court, and if they cannot be found guilty of a criminal offence in this country? Imposing it means passing a Sewel motion, which undermines the jurisdiction not just of the Parliament, but of our legal system. Detention is fundamentally wrong, not just in Scotland and in the context of Scotland's legal history, but in any modern democracy.

I congratulate my colleague Bruce Crawford on securing the debate and I echo Helen Eadie's comments, particularly those regarding Scottish Enterprise, Mary McLaughlin and Alf Baird at Napier University. Scottish Enterprise is an organisation that is frequently maligned—often by me—but to be fair, the idea has been well thought through by Mary McLaughlin and her transport and area development department at Scottish Enterprise. They have persevered and they have been dogged in their determination, which has finally—I hope—borne fruit. It is absurd that it has taken us until now to deliver an east-coast ferry service. I can understand why the principal port of a land-locked European nation should be located in a foreign land. I can understand why, for example, the principal port of Switzerland might very well be Rotterdam or Antwerp. However, it is quite absurd that the principal port for an island nation such as Scotland should be Hull. That port is not even proximate to our borders, but is located a considerable geographical distance away and, indeed, at the other end of a bad road. It is absurd that, in the 21 st century, more than 50 per cent of the traffic going to and from Hull emanates from or is bound for Scotland. However, I am grateful that Mary McLaughlin and others have persevered to remedy that situation. Although I do not like to look a gift horse in the mouth, the delay in implementation has been a bit like drawing teeth. The economic benefit of the link has always been clear and we should be grateful that we have finally got round to establishing it. However, we must ensure that the delays and impediments that existed previously do not re-emerge. Where do we go from here? The question about the link has never been, "Will it come?" Rather, it has been "Will it stay?" Previously, a principal port was started at Dundee. It came, stayed for a short period and then went. As Bruce Crawford and others have correctly pointed out, we need to improve our infrastructure. We need to ensure that the Stirling-Alloa-Dunfermline line is opened and that there is a decent terminal, not merely a replication of Cairnryan, which is not the sort of place at which we want people coming from the continent to arrive. It is fundamental that the port achieves critical mass. The doubt that the Freight Transport Association and the Road Haulage Association have about the port is that it will not run the number of ferries that would make it important for them. If somebody is in a time-critical situation and they miss a ferry, they do not want to wait 24 hours for the next one. The advantage of Hull is  not that it is geographically proximate, but that if people miss a ferry, they can catch another in two or three hours and still manage to make up the time that they have lost. If we want Rosyth to survive as a ferry port, we must ensure not only that we increase the level of service there, but that we build on it so that Rosyth becomes the principal port for the east coast of Scotland, tying in with the land bridge that has always been mooted from the west to the east. As Bruce Crawford said, we will then at long last again have a direct link to the continent, similar to the link that we had centuries ago with Gothenburg and the rest of Scandinavia. That will enable us to tie in with the Baltic, where the infrastructure for fast ferries already exists. This is just the start. We must ensure that there are no further delays and that we build on what has been done so far for the benefit of Rosyth and of Scotland.

I agree with everything that Alex Neil and Marilyn Livingstone said and I adopt their position. The report was produced by a cross-party committee. By definition, all parties were represented by committee members, who included me and my colleague Duncan Hamilton. We accept the motion and the report that is its basis. Accordingly, my  comments will not follow a party line, because the SNP supports the motion and the report. Therefore, I may not take up all my allocated time, but allow SNP members and others who have a constituency interest or who wish to raise other matters to speak. The situation is a bit of a guddle. The report is to be commended, but some aspects of it have been dated by actions that SHEFC has taken. Nevertheless, we must take cognisance of aspects that emanate from the report and follow its recommendations. A difficulty could be that too many reports exist. There is no clarity or strategy. The sector needs stability and strategic direction. As well as taking on board the report and its recommendations, we could argue for the Cubie committee to be reconvened and have its remit extended into higher education funding, then tell Andrew Cubie to get on with it. However, matters may have passed that point. Like others, I will give SHEFC some brickbats, but it would be remiss of me not to say that I have some sympathy for SHEFC for two reasons. First, if an organisation's remit is unclear and its instructors do not set parameters, that organisation may go off at a tangent, in a direction that is unacceptable to those who chose the remit and everyone else. SHEFC needed clear directions and a clear remit but did not have them. The second and fundamental point is that if the cake is too small, there will be hunger no matter how it is divided. The higher education funding cake is too small. No matter how we divide it, someone will squeal that their piece is inadequate, not because they overeat, but because the available amount is insufficient. It is fair to say that SHEFC handled the matter in a cack-handed way. Given the nature of the beast, there should have been more transparency and SHEFC should have consulted Universities Scotland and individual universities more. It should have realised that to say that its proposal was part of a discussion document was insufficient. The fact is that SHEFC sent hares running. I think that every member in the chamber received e-mails, mail or other communications from academics who were worried that their departments would go belly up. That caused instability in faculties and I do not doubt that it worried those who were considering applying to study in some faculties or universities. That situation should have been expected. As lawyers would say, SHEFC knew or ought to have known that the way in which it presented the report would send hares running and that worry would follow. As I said, aspects of the report have been superseded. We must consider whether we want to go back to the drawing board on those aspects. The report recommends the establishment of a  review body into SHEFC. Those comments have been affected by SHEFC's subsequent actions. A UK-wide transparency review is being conducted. The committee's report suggests that a review body should be established, but the Parliament should not reinvent the wheel. If the best knowledge and the great and the good are in SHEFC, reviewing how that body operates internally in Scotland and how it interacts with other bodies in the UK, rather than establishing another tier of bureaucracy and setting us off at a tangent, might be the best way of reaching the best solution. Comments have been made about research funding, RAE and level 3 particularly. I subscribe fully to Marilyn Livingstone's and Alex Neil's comments. We must accept that SHEFC intends to pursue excellence. That is a laudable aim that is fundamental not only for the benefit of academic institutions per se, but for our nation's economy. There is great danger in allowing SHEFC to end funding for level 3 departments when that is not happening south of the border. That would cause considerable difficulties for new universities. As Alex Neil said, the great danger for new universities is that ending level 3 would ossify the situation and that we would be caught in a time warp. Those who sought to get up to speed but were late off the starting blocks because of the period in which they started would have difficulty reaching levels 4 and 5. Many universities would be caught by that situation, be unable to progress and have to remain as teaching universities. Scotland should not work against those who seek to improve themselves, whether they are individuals, universities or their faculties. As Alex Neil correctly said, that situation would have affected not only new universities, but ancient universities with departments that wished to move up a gear and reach a higher level. We must take that on board. The critical point in the report relates to research funding. The report makes points about the requirement to consider how we provide funding and the level at which we provide it. I agree with the committee convener's remarks about how to progress. I am extremely grateful that the minister has been converted into a Finnophile. I have been mocked in the chamber—by Mr Mundell particularly—for my support for Finland as a country that Scotland should aspire to follow. I make no apologies for saying that. There are aspects of Finland that are laudable. Finland has resolved its economy and its health service and, as I have also pointed out, has managed to turn around the fortunes of its national football team. Over the past few years, in each of those three aspects, Finland has outdone Scotland  considerably. I am grateful that the minister now subscribes to that theory. The minister should also take on board the levels of teaching and research funding that nations, in particular Finland, provide. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development funding figures show that, in 1993, Finland contributed 2.17 per cent of its gross domestic product to research and development. The United Kingdom lagged behind at 2.12 per cent. In 1998, by which time the white-hot hope had landed at No 10, Finland had increased its level of expenditure of GDP on research and development to 2.9 per cent. The UK's, by contrast, had declined and decreased to a miserly 1.83 per cent of GDP. I put the blame just as much on Westminster as on the minister and her colleagues. That brings me back to the point that I made earlier: if the cake is too small, no matter how it is divided we will not be able to progress. If we wish to emulate Finland, and that would be an admirable idea for Scotland, we have to recognise, as other speakers did, the hard choices that have to be made. A small nation does not have the economies of scale that come with the critical mass of larger ones, whether they be our southern cousins or elsewhere. Small nations have to make a conscious effort to recognise that, to a greater extent, because they do not have the same ability to generate funding as do the larger countries, they have to front-load research and development. As we look at where we are going in the 21 st century, we need to recognise the importance of research and development. One important aspect of commercialisation is the benefit that it brings to ensuring that ideas that are springing forth and spewing out of our universities are generated economically. Part of the issue has to be addressed culturally, but we have to ensure that entrepreneurs who have business acumen and an idea but who do not have the scientific or technical knowledge are able to access the universities. One of the spin-offs of growing commercialisation would be for Scottish universities to move towards that goal. We need to create a conduit between commercialisation and the ideas that emanate out of the universities with a scientific and technical base. At the same time, we have to allow our entrepreneurs and business community access to the universities. It is a two-way process. It is not about allowing universities to become more commercial—although they should—it is about allowing entrepreneurs who do not have the benefits that university faculties have, or the equipment that goes with that, access to the universities. The process is one of mutual co-operation.  The SNP commends the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee report. As I said earlier, some aspects of it have been superseded, but I hope that it acts as a base for the Executive to progress matters. I hope that the minister will take from the debate some of the same matters that she has taken from her trip to Finland. That would see us push our research and development funding towards the level that is taken as a norm in Helsinki.

Unlike John Home Robertson, I believe that it is vital for Scotland's voice to be heard in the current global circumstances. We should make our views known and take what action we can, most especially on humanitarian aid. However, the flip-side of the coin is equally important. As current global circumstances are having a significant and increasing effect in Scotland, it is important that we take cognisance of them and make appropriate adjustments in light of them. As other members have concentrated on the former point, I will concentrate on the latter. What is the current situation? Job losses have risen and manufacturing exports have declined, and it is important to bear it in mind that both statistics predate 11 September. The problem is worse now than then. In manufacturing, further closures have been announced and diverse voices, from the director of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce to the Scottish leader of the engineering union, have warned of a crisis and called for action. The manufacturing sector was already suffering from the high level of the pound and high fuel costs. What action have we seen so far from the Government? We have received only lectures to the effect that those who acknowledge the extent of the crisis are apparently talking us into a crisis. The Government should wake up. No matter how deep it buries its head in the sand, the problem will not go away. The First Minister's suggestion of convening a meeting is no solution. The first priority must be to acknowledge the severity of the situation and to plan and prepare accordingly. With a pre-budget statement around the corner, surely now—if not before—is the time to make it clear that the high pound and high fuel costs are crippling our economy. The problem is not confined to manufacturing. The tourism and aviation industries are facing meltdown. Since 11 September, the Air Canada service has been withdrawn, the American Airlines service has been reduced and Continental Airways' proposed service into Edinburgh has  been abandoned. All that has happened despite the knowledge that the value to the Scottish economy of tourism from America dwarfs the losses that we have already sustained through foot-and-mouth disease. Our tourism industry was in difficulty before both the foot-and-mouth crisis and 11 September. The high pound and high fuel costs made Scotland a high-cost destination; now we face devastation through the loss of the north American market. It is not so long ago that the Executive was selling that market as the saviour of our tourism industry. Clearly it could not have anticipated the 11 September tragedy. However, why were all our tourism eggs put in one basket? I will tell the chamber why. Because of the exchange rate, it was easier to sell Scotland as a destination to the north American market instead of to the UK and European markets. Now we have been told that there will be an upweighting of the marketing budget to promote Scotland in the UK and Europe. That is simply a reallocation of resources that were already too meagre and to a great extent had already been spent or committed. What about the proposal to promote Scotland in the UK and European markets? Our major competitor is Ireland, which outspends Scotland by more than 100 per cent in television marketing. London, which is the most populous place in the whole of the UK, spends £1 million, while the Executive, through its quango, spends not one penny. As for the Highlands and Islands, when Ryanair discussed opening up the Highlands—beyond simply the long haul up the A9—and offering destinations to UK and Europe, what did we find? We found an airport authority, wholly owned by the Executive, which was wholly indifferent to the plight of the Highlands. That is just not good enough. What happened on 11 September will live with us as not only a human tragedy, but an economic one. That is why the SNP has raised this debate; and it is for that and the other reasons that I have outlined that the Executive must take action now.

The Graduate Endowment (Scotland) Regulations 2001 flesh out the skeletal terms of the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Act 2001. However, they are neither benign nor benevolent; they represent the imposition of a tuition fee at the end rather than at the beginning of a course of study. The SNP's position has been quite clear and consistent. A tuition fee is a tuition fee whether it is paid at the beginning or at the end of a course, and whether or not it has been renamed a graduate endowment. It is a retrograde step. The price will be paid by individual students in years to come and by the nation collectively as we provide a disincentive for people, especially from disenfranchised backgrounds, to proceed to higher education. Finally, it is shameful that members, especially on the Labour benches, who benefited so much individually, and members—especially on the Liberal Democrat benches—who have preached so much about education should impose this iniquitous tax on each and every student who will go forward to study. I oppose the regulations.

I want to ask the minister how two points in his statement will impact on a substantial quango that was not mentioned in his statement: visitscotland. I assume that it is not one of the 52 quangos that are to be abolished, unless those of us who attended the visitscotland event last night, including the minister with responsibility for tourism, were attending some sort of last supper. The first point is overlap. The duplication of effort is as crucial a question as the number of quangos. Can anyone clarify why tourism is dealt with not only by visitscotland but by tourism departments in Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Executive? The second point is guidance. Can we ensure that the direction and guidance that the minister talked about will address the question whether visitscotland is a marketing body or a regulatory body? That would ensure that we would not hear the excuse that the £4,000 that was spent on marketing Scotland in Canada, for example, was an operational matter for visitscotland. Such matters should become the responsibility of the Government.

I was very disappointed by the tenor of Mr McConnell's reply. The one point on which I agree with him is that many factors affect academic achievement. We do not dispute that. A reduction in class sizes is one factor. However, I am unsure whether the Executive is repudiating the STAR project. Our position is that we believe that a reduction in class sizes is beneficial and we believe that studies indicate that. I have no doubt that some studies in the United States indicate to the contrary, but there are, no doubt, educationists in the United States of America who will argue that we face the end of civilisation as we know it if Harry Potter is not proscribed. It is incumbent on Mr McConnell, or his colleague Nicol Stephen, to indicate whether the Executive is suggesting that reduction of class sizes is not, per se, beneficial, or whether the  Executive accepts that the benefits exist. It is a matter of whether the Executive believes that that is one of the major aspects that should be supported. We believe not only that reduction of class sizes is an individual's right, but that it is in the national interest. We believe in education for education's sake. We believe that it is everybody's right to progress as far, and to achieve as much, as they possibly can. We also believe that that creates better individuals and better citizens. The corollary of that is that a better-educated person is able to contribute more effectively to the society in which he or she lives. Therefore, we as a society and as a community collectively benefit from investing in education. We believe that one of the best ways of ensuring that everyone has that opportunity is to ensure that children benefit at an early stage. We underestimate the importance of that at our peril—it is as much in our interest as it is in theirs. In other debates in the Parliament, we have discussed the fact that there are significant skills shortages in Scotland. The tragedy in Scotland is that we have many idle hands. Children leave school without basic literacy and numeracy, never mind other aspects that I will comment on. We, as a nation, cannot afford that. A demographic time bomb is ticking away. We have severe skills shortages in an array of areas. We need the hands that are currently idle to contribute to the economy in future years. We believe that it is much better to do so by intervening early than by having to return later to address earlier problems. That is why we believe that there is a national interest. I will make two points about educating about learning. We all accept the concept of lifelong learning. First, on a reduction in class sizes, many trainers tell us that they face with youngsters problems not only of a lack of basic literacy or numeracy skills, but of a lack of basic self-confidence. We have a significant cultural problem—I understand the difficulties in legislating for culture—in that we in Scotland are shy and self-effacing and we must address that. That is much better addressed in a classroom in which there is much more one-to-one intervention by a teacher, than when there is rote learning and the pupil is one among many. We would benefit from giving children more self-confidence. Secondly, we must recognise that we live in a knowledge age. I, like some other members, was at the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's away day. I see that David Mundell is nodding. He will recall that when we spoke to those who are involved in lifelong learning, they quoted from Treasury statistics that show that individuals can expect to have to change their careers or the field that they work in 10 times in  their lives. It was suggested that it would be different if a person was a lawyer or a doctor. I have to say, looking back on 20 years as a lawyer, that my whole life changed; the type of law that I practised changed manifestly. That is why even the professions talk about continuous professional development, although such development is much more marked in other jobs. We must have a society in which people recognise that they have to learn, upskill and change. They must have the capacity to learn on the go. That means early intervention, so that we educate people not only in literacy and numeracy, but in the ability to learn as they go through life.

To ask the Scottish Executive what direction and guidance it has given to the interim chief executive of visitscotland. (S1O-3370)

The minister will be aware that the marketing budget for visitscotland in Canada has gone from the princely sum of £8,000 in 1995 under the Tories to the veritable king's ransom of £4,000 under new Labour in 2000. That is a spend of approximately 3p per visitor. Who is responsible for that absurd situation in the homeland of the diaspora? Does the blame lie with visitscotland? If so, does it lie with the current chairman, the past chairman, the current interim chief executive, the past chief executive or the chief executive who was appointed but was subsequently not appointed? Alternatively, does it lie with the Executive, which has underfunded and neglected Scottish tourism?

The Tories are right to have lodged the motion: there is a crisis and action is needed. Much of the motion is perfectly reasonable, but the SNP cannot support it for two reasons. First, it fails to acknowledge the Tories' culpability for the sorry circumstances in which tourism finds itself. Secondly, the solutions that it proposes are inadequate both as immediate action and as long-term strategy. In 1997, tourism went out of the frying pan and into the fire. Whatever fond memories the Tories have of being in government, the reality was not so benign for the industry. I do not seek to underestimate the catastrophe of the foot-and-mouth outbreak. However, it is no famine following feast; it is a disaster following five or more fallow years and it has occurred at the worst possible time in the industry's financial cycle. There should have been an opportunity for replenishment after the winter; instead, the lights are on but no one is about. Many businesses are living on borrowed time and borrowed money, with a shutdown that, to all intents and purposes, will run from winter 2000 to spring 2002.  Had there been previous years of feast, the damage might have been sustainable, but there were not. The culpability for that lies on both sides of the British political divide. A high pound, high VAT and high fuel prices were imposed not under the heel of an iron chancellor, but under the handbag of an iron lady and her successors. No matter how sincere their sympathy is now, the Tories will not be forgiven by the tourism industry for their previous complicity. What of the current incumbents? Before I address their belated and inadequate response to the crisis, I shall critique their period in office at Westminster and in Scotland. Did they roll back the Tory legacy? Did they invest where there had been shortage? Did they promote where there had been silence? Did they change where change was overdue? No. Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose. What did they inherit? A high pound, high VAT and high fuel prices. What is their legacy? A high pound, high VAT and high fuel prices. Both Labour and the Tories have conspired to make Scotland a high-cost destination, for which the tourism industry has paid a high price.

We have called for a reduction in fuel prices of 10p a gallon. We have called for interim measures to be taken to reduce VAT on accommodation and visitor attractions from 17.5 per cent to 5 per cent. We believe that membership of the euro is in Scotland's best interests, once the appropriate criteria have been met. Let us consider some examples of the British neglect of tourism. Hardly a family in Scotland does not have a relative in Canada. Much has been made—even by the Executive—of a call to the diaspora, but what action has been taken to promote our country and to encourage members of the diaspora to visit Scotland? I asked the Executive how much the Scottish Tourist Board and visitscotland had spent on marketing Scotland in Canada every year since 1995. In 1995, the Tories—known for their support of the British diaspora on the Costa del Sol—spent the princely sum of £8,000 on marketing Scotland in Canada. In five years, new Labour has reduced that princely sum by 50 per cent; in 2000, its advertising budget in Canada, the place of our diaspora, was a king's ransom of £4,000. One hundred and thirty-six thousand Canadians visited Scotland. To secure those high-spending visitors, the Executive invested the sum of 3p a visitor. Is that speculating to accumulate? Those are only the figures for Canada; we have the figures for  other places and we will release them in due course. So much for the Executive's past failures. What of its current inadequacies? The tourism industry does not want advice on receivership or debt counselling; it wants interest-free loans and hardship grants, assistance in its marketing budget and a credible rates relief package. The Scottish Tourism Forum has put forward its proposals, some of which have been met, but all of which must be implemented. Finally, what about a future strategy? The tourism industry needs a marketing budget that will allow Scotland to compete not just in Canada, but worldwide. We must ensure that, once interest in Scotland has been ignited, access to our country is reasonable in both time and cost. That must mean the expansion of direct air links to destinations not only in Europe, but in the USA. Fewer than 3 per cent of visitors from the US to the UK arrive at a Scottish airport. We need to be an international gateway not just to Scotland, but to the UK. If we cannot secure the same access to Scotland that there is to Ireland, we will never be able to compete. The tragedy in Scotland remains that, although the natural product is unsurpassed anywhere else in the world, current and past Labour and Tory Administrations have let down the tourism industry. Only the SNP stands for tourism and for Scotland. I move amendment S1M-1914.1, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "believes that policies being pursued by successive Westminster Governments, in particular a high pound, high fuel costs and high VAT, have been damaging to the tourist industry; further believes that the aims of visitscotland/the Scottish Tourist Board should be sharply refocused so that it is a marketing rather than a regulatory body; notes the relief package as proposed by the Scottish Tourism Forum and calls for its full implementation, and believes that direct transport links between Scotland and Europe and Scotland and America are essential."

On behalf of Scottish Youth Hostels Association, I thank all the members who have put their names to the motion. The SYHA was formed 70 years ago this month, a year after its sister organisation in England and Wales. It followed in the footpath of schemes initially trailed in Germany and other north European nations. It started modestly, with a hostel in Broadmeadows, near Selkirk, but has gone from strength to strength. Today, there are about 70 youth hostels the length and breadth of Scotland. Those hostels vary in their focus and facilities. They go from the most modest bothy to the grandest castle and from the city centres of Edinburgh and Glasgow to the remotest parts of mainland and island Scotland. They not only serve hillwalkers and backpackers, but can accommodate families and even weddings. The age span of people who visit and utilise the facilities and services is not restricted by the nomenclature of the organisation, but extends from babes in arms to the elderly. The association benefits not only individuals, but organisations, especially those geared towards the young and the disadvantaged. That is entirely within the ethos of the founders. After all, the initial intention was to facilitate youngsters getting out and about within their native land. Even today, 24 per cent of overnight stays are by school and youth groups. In the past year, more than 70 schools have used the service.  The SYHA was founded as, and remains, an egalitarian organisation, in which ties were dispensed with, lounge suits removed and the merchant banker and the street sweeper donned a common uniform. Diversity has flourished as the SYHA has mirrored Scotland in becoming more cosmopolitan. The spectrum of guests utilising the facilities has expanded. The pot pourri remains of young and old, rich and poor, active and more sedentary. A growing influence has been visitors from elsewhere within Britain and beyond. The proportion of visitors who came from Scotland used to be 70 per cent; now, 70 per cent come from outwith Scotland and half are international visitors. We should remember that the association provides a service to local communities; it gives employment and brings in badly needed revenue, often in remote areas. The professional staff of more than 450 employees is added to through part-time and seasonal employment, which provides much-needed jobs in areas where opportunities are few and far between. The hostels are fundamental to the rural economy in many areas. In places such as Tobermory, the association provides 7,000 bed occupancies a year. According to statistics, those who use hostel accommodation spend an average of £35 to £37 a day. That is a significant input into a fragile and often marginal economy. In some areas, the railway station exists simply because of the hostel; the absence of a hostel would certainly lead to the station's closure. It is not overstating the case to say that communities in some parts of rural Scotland survive simply because of the hostel and that, if the hostel were gone, the community's raison d'être would go, too. What is the situation on the association's 70th anniversary? The past weekend would have seen the anniversary commemorated by a walk from Innerleithen to Broadmeadows, where the first hostel was founded. However, the foot-and-mouth epidemic has led to the cancellation of what should have been a moment of celebration. The epidemic has placed the organisation—like many others—in severe financial difficulties. Although the Easter weekend was good for the organisation and others, it masked a barren month: the figures for April were 30 per cent down on last year. Some hostels opened late and others are still restricted. I do not like to make special pleading for any particular organisation in this time of crisis, as the crisis affects so many, but there are good reasons for targeting the SYHA and specific measures can be taken. Before I outline those measures and ask the  minister to comment on them, I will quote from a former Secretary of State for Scotland—arguably the greatest secretary of state we have had—Tom Johnston, who said: "Without this organised provision of hotels for hikers, great stretches of our country would remain inaccessible to multitudes of the rising generation in our large industrial towns ... The Scottish Youth Hostels Association makes a great contribution to good citizenship. It trains for and encourages good wayfaring upon the highway and good conduct upon the hillside. It provides facilities for good health and exercise, and, in some of the most important and formative years in life, it encourages reverence for the beauties and the glories of the Scottish scene." First, local authorities could take some steps. The City of Edinburgh Council, Aberdeen Council and Highland Council do not provide full rates relief for their hostels. The association is a not-for-profit organisation. The urban areas cross-subsidise the rural areas and, as I said, in rural areas there is a cross-subsidy from the hostel to the community. I call on those councils to extend rates relief. Secondly, although the organisation is cash-strapped, the first cuts will be in maintenance and development. That might make sound financial sense in the short term, but it will restrict growth in the long term. Specific matters need to be addressed that would not only ensure the existence and enhancement of current establishments, but add to the range and variety of the existing portfolio of properties. Cash grants, not loans, are needed, because loans are simply expenditure deferred. Although resources are restricted, I ask the minister to consider meeting financial requests from the available funds to add value not only to the SYHA, but to communities in Scotland in general. Thirdly, as many local authorities require to cut provision for outdoor education, perhaps now is the time for the Executive to assist in marrying the SYHA's existing fine facilities with the needs of the children in the communities of Scotland. That approach was noted by Tom Johnston back in 1944; it is as apt now as it was then. If we fail to take such an approach, we jeopardise those facilities and we neglect our children. Finally, although I appreciate that the matter is outwith the control of the minister and the Parliament, it would be remiss of me not to mention VAT. Other nations give a reduced rate either to tourism in general or to youth hostels in particular, and a reduction in VAT would stimulate demand. Moreover, there can be no suggestion that any reduction would simply be creamed off, as every penny is recycled. Let me once again congratulate the SYHA on its anniversary. As Tom Johnston and others have commented, it has added to the tapestry of Scotland and enriched and enlivened the lives of  millions. It deserves all our thanks for its contribution to the communities and the citizenship of our country. Although the association is in difficulties, I do not wish to end on a sad or sour note. My message is not simply for the Executive or for any other Administration; it is for us all in Scotland. Few individuals in Scotland have not utilised or benefited from the organisation's facilities. It is up to us to remember how much we gained, to consider how much current and future generations could also benefit and to ensure that we do not just applaud, but take practical steps to give support. If we do that, it will not simply be a matter of paying tribute today. In years to come, future generations will pay tribute, in another building and at another time, at the organisation's centenary and bicentenary.

The Executive motion as it stands is anodyne. While it is worthy, it lacks vision and aspiration. To be fair, arguably the minister has gone further than some in his own party had either anticipated or are perhaps comfortable with. However, the pace of change is accelerating. Scotland remains stalled on the starting blocks while, all around, the race is under way. Let us be clear: Europe is changing. No amount of Euroscepticism or Europhobia will  wish it away. The choice is whether to be an active participant or an idle bystander. As the negotiations commence, Scotland stands mute and emasculated. The European Union is where Scotland's social, economic and political future lies—not simply in the union that exists but in the one that it will become. I have no doubt that, in due course, not only the 13 applicants but other parts of Europe that are currently peripheral will be brought on board, and I welcome that. There are problems in enlargement, but the benefits outweigh the deficits. If we are to address the growing problems such as economic migrants, the environment and organised crime that were touched on by members from other political parties, enlargement is not simply a recognition of a global economy but a prerequisite. Can Scotland play an active part as things stand? Quite simply, no. The enhancement and expansion of Scotland House in Brussels is to be welcomed. However, Scotland House is not a resident envoy with accredited powers to attend and participate in the affairs of the states in the European Union. Arguably, it has as much legitimacy as the representative of a nation as the heirs to the Jacobite throne. I seek not the restoration of the Stuart dynasty but the powers that will allow Scotland to have a say in its destiny. The inadequacies and failures of British representation have been pointed out before and I do not need to recite them. However, the damage to Scotland was not done by the European Union per se but resulted from the inept and inadequate representation of Scottish interests by the British state. Fishing and steel communities testify to that. Even those who argue for membership of the EU, but within the British state, fail to aspire. That is a legitimate point of view, but it is not as good as independent nation status in the European Union. Let us see what is on offer within that. If we contrast it with what is done by the state of Flanders, we see that the difference is marked. The First Minister and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning congratulate themselves on announcing—perhaps unannounced to others in their own party—a Scottish attaché to Washington. While that is an advance on a tartan gift shop, it is not an envoy with status or power. In contrast, in every Belgian embassy, no matter where it is situated in the world, there is an economic attaché representing the state of Flanders. Moreover, Export Vlaanderen, the Flemish export agency, has about 43 representative offices worldwide, which are able to sell and promote Flanders in every shape or form, and powers to negotiate and sign trading agreements with nation states. Within the framework of the British state we cannot disguise our neutered status with a  flagpole and a brass plaque. Scotland House will not suffice. The only way in which we can participate effectively for our citizens and economy is as an independent nation with full member status. If we do that, we can play a full part in building not only our own nation but the European vision that others have touched upon. Whither Europe? The parameters are not simply a choice of Schroeder or Hague. Others who represent the interests of small nations are espousing a different line. Scotland should support the concept of fields of responsibility that is promoted by the Finns and recognise the confederal, not federal status of the European Union. We can cheer on the likes of Finland and Ireland from the sidelines, or we can work with them from within. As part of Britain, we are spectators. As an independent nation, we are participants. We can take part in decisions, or we can have decisions taken for us. Now is the time for Scotland to enter on to the international stage.

Has the minister seen the Automobile Association's fuel price report, which details that the price of diesel in Norway is equivalent to 55.76p, as opposed to 78.4p in the United Kingdom—

And in Norway, unleaded petrol is 66.48p per litre, as opposed to 84.7p in Scotland's remote areas—

Could he indeed tell us why he does not want us to harmonise at least towards those levels?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

This matter is reserved, so it will be dealt with at Westminster until such time as it is  returned here.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I actually took two interventions. If George Lyon had been listening and watching he would know that.

How are the oil companies going to benefit? Is George Lyon suggesting that the Executive is bringing in some form of windfall tax? If the tax cut is on the Government's income, how does that affect the oil companies unless the Government is imposing taxation on them?

Fuel duty has been debated several times in the chamber. Only last autumn, we had two debates on the matter in a relatively short period. Considerable heat and discourse was generated during those debates. The Minister for Justice referred to mob rule when describing peaceful protests, a statement for which he has yet to apologise. That door is still open to him and I hope that he will take it, as those protests have continued—albeit at a lower tempo—and they have remained lawful and well-behaved. Fuel was the issue of the autumn, as the price rocketed and the pain was felt by businesses and individuals alike. If the Government does not want fuel to become the issue of the summer, it must act, for the problems that were evident last autumn are back with us today. The Chancellor of the Exchequer's amelioration of the issue in November has proved to be insufficient and short term. Although that amelioration was welcome, it was belated and inadequate and it has not prevented the problem from surfacing again. The price of petrol has again reached the levels that provoked the crisis last autumn. Moreover, there are parts of rural Scotland where the point at which a litre of petrol will cost £1 is not far in the distance, but around the corner. That is an unacceptable price to pay for an essential commodity. Let us consider once again the reasons why we have the problem and the difficulties that it creates. Last year, I mentioned the significant problems suffered by the fishing, farming and road haulage industries. That was when foot-and-mouth disease was in the past, not the present. Farming and road haulage are now being crucified by the foot-and-mouth crisis. The farmers have secured a compensation package, but the haulage industry cannot and must not be overlooked. Only a foolish Government would forget an industry that was in the vanguard of previous protests and finds itself now in even more straitened circumstances. That industry, which carried out its protests with dignity and decorum, deserves not abuse from ministers, but assistance from the Scottish Executive. The situation is worse now than it was then. That assistance must relate not only to the foot-and- mouth crisis but, more importantly, to the underlying problem of high fuel costs. The fishing industry was in difficulties last autumn as well, even before the tie-up crisis and its crucifixion, not by an epidemic, but by the inaction of the Executive. Notwithstanding rebated fuel, fuel costs are a factor for that industry in terms both of uncompetitiveness with foreign fleets and distribution costs on shore. Tourism was mentioned in the previous debates. The high value of the pound and the high cost of fuel made Scotland a high-cost destination for a vacation. That also pre-dated the foot-and-mouth crisis and the scores of cancellations that have afflicted guest houses and hotels across the country. Some of Scotland is closed for business by necessary restrictions to combat foot-and-mouth disease, but much of the country is closed by lack of business. The First Minister, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and their colleagues may have travelled to Washington to proclaim that Scotland is open for business, but the problem remains that it is open for business at a price. As I said, the cost of fuel in the rural parts of the country is heading towards £1 a litre. One can almost fly the Atlantic for less money than it costs to drive up and down the A9. What an absurd situation to find ourselves in at the start of the 21 st century. Rural Scotland finds itself crushed by the hammer of foot-and-mouth disease upon the anvil of high fuel costs. While we support the action that the Executive is taking to combat foot-and-mouth disease, action must also be taken on fuel costs. Why? Because before foot and mouth there was a crisis; during foot and mouth there is a crisis; and after foot and mouth there will still be a crisis. The foot-and-mouth disease crisis may have subsumed that of fuel for the moment, but, when it has passed, the fuel crisis will remain. It may now be obscured, but it has not gone away. What has been done and what should be done? The London Government claimed that it was listening. Tony Blair said, "Of course we will listen ... we will carry on listening, we meet regularly with representatives of hauliers and farmers and will continue to do so." Not only had the Chancellor of the Exchequer listened, he said that he understood the genuine concerns that motorists and hauliers have and that he would do more to meet people's concerns. Given that we have a listening Prime Minister and an understanding Chancellor of the Exchequer, why are fuel costs once again rising to the crisis levels of last September? That is the situation that we are in. What goes around comes around.

As I was about to say, those developments are de minimis. The listening Prime Minister and the understanding Chancellor of the Exchequer may have thought that their de minimis actions would suffice, but they have been shown to be only a short-term fix for a long-term problem. The threat of a windfall tax to deliver the roll-out of ultra-low sulphur petrol and diesel might have put a different type of petrol in the tanks, but it has not put a different price on the pumps. The price at the pump is the problem, and is primarily driven by tax. Fuel prices are going up, and further rises are anticipated. Urgent action is therefore necessary. On 6 April, Richard Freeman of the Automobile Association stated: "The petrol price is inexorably heading to the point where it will wipe out the benefits of the budget. ... We want the Government to introduce a de-escalator to get prices to come down to an acceptable level compared with the rest of Europe." High costs are coming back, and with a vengeance. Action must be taken, or we fear that there will be a return to the demonstrations and the furore experienced but six months ago. Moreover, and more important, the economic and social effects will be catastrophic for Scotland. Why does the largest oil producer in the European Union have the highest fuel costs in the developed world? The reason is the level of taxation imposed by the present Government—and indeed by previous Governments of a different political complexion. It cannot and will not be forgotten that the Tories invented the fuel duty escalator. Fuel was an easy hit; the petrol pump a cash cow. People complained, but the money rolled in. The Government tried to cover its stealth taxation in an environmental wrapping. However, as was made quite clear by the Government last year, the purpose of the high tax was not to meet Kyoto commitments, but to raise cash. According to the AA, about 79 per cent of the cost of a gallon of petrol is tax. No other essential commodity is hit by such punitive taxation. And what of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's loudly hailed reduction in fuel duty? It is welcome, but it cannot be considered without bearing it in mind that the self-same chancellor, in four previous budgets, announced an increase. Tax on petrol is now 10p per litre higher than when he first took office. Even after last month's proudly trumpeted reduction, that is a tax increase of 27 per cent and a price increase of more than twice  the rate of inflation. That is a tax too far, and the tax must come down. That is why we are calling for an immediate cut of 10p per gallon. That cut has been costed, and we have outlined how it will be paid for. It appears to us better to apply the maxim: "From each according to their abilities, to each according to their needs." The motor car, for many, is not a luxury, but an essential. The cost of fuel is disproportionately high in rural Scotland, where there is no affordable or accessible public transport alternative.

The proof of the pudding is in the eating. The proof in politics is how members vote. The SNP representatives at Westminster moved an amendment to reduce the cost of fuel and Mr Rumbles's people did not support it. That is what will come back to haunt the Liberal Democrats in future elections. As I was about to say, is not it right that a small minority who can pay, should pay, so that the vast majority who can ill afford to pay can be afforded some relief? Others in the SNP will doubtless speak further on the matter, but I will say that we in the SNP appreciate that, while the cost of fuel must come down, public services still require to be paid for. It is for that reason that we have specified how that cost reduction can be achieved. We realise that the cost of further cuts will also require to be met and paid for. That is why we are calling for a review on taxation. It cannot be right or sensible that almost £1 in £7 raised by the Government comes from the motorist. Our call for a review is not only because fuel is essential, but because it is finite. At some stage, fuel cell vehicles or something similar will be mass-produced, first in the United States of America, and then elsewhere.

Not at the moment. Fuel use by vehicles will decrease. What do we do then? Do we massively increase income tax or VAT? Do we  cut services and public expenditure? If such a situation is to be avoided, steps must be taken now to review and reconsider how the tax burden is imposed and collected. This is not just a short-term fix, but a long-term change of direction. Aside from the philosophy of it, what about the mechanism? The Parliament is currently prohibited from prescribing the remedy. However, we can recognise the gravity of the situation and address the chancellor with one voice. The price of fuel affects our economic competitiveness. Given that we are a nation that is geographically distant from its markets and heavily reliant on its exports, distribution costs are a significant factor. Rising costs mean diminishing profits and uncompetitiveness, and, all too often, closure and redundancies. As a nation, we cannot price ourselves out of the market and the Government cannot price the nation out of economic existence by stealth taxation. As has been said, particular industries are seriously affected by the high price of fuel. We have previously called for specific measures for fishing, farming and road haulage. We stand by those calls. The need is greater now than ever, and even before this crisis there was a cri de coeur from industries. Tourism has been much in the news lately. The problems have meant not much good news for the Executive, and often not much good news for the industry. The number of visitors is down, and the foot-and-mouth disease epidemic has resulted in a situation in which, notwithstanding the belated advertising, what is open and what is shut remains a mystery. Even without the epidemic, Scottish tourism was facing yet another fallow year. There is a famine of visitors for all too many people working in the industry, but while foot and mouth could not have been foreseen, another bad year was clearly foreseeable. I do not wish to underestimate the crisis that has been caused by foot and mouth, but the outbreak should not be used as an excuse to ignore the underlying problems that are caused by the high value of the pound, and, in the north of Scotland, by high fuel costs. The British Government is pricing Scottish tourism out of existence. We live in an age when international transportation is easier than ever before. The opportunity to visit new and exotic destinations is not only available, but affordable. Scotland cannot wish that opportunity away and Scottish tourism has to compete in a global environment. However, if it is to compete, it must do so without the ball and chain of the world's highest fuel costs around its feet. I welcome the steps that the Executive has taken to allay the fears of potential American  visitors. Let us be clear, however: the principal market for Scotland is here and south of the border. If it is cheaper for somebody from the south of Scotland or from the metropolitan boroughs of England to holiday on the Algarve, no wonder hotels here are shutting, not just for the season, but forever. Last week, the SNP called for a fuel duty rebate to be extended to coach tours. We understand that that is being considered. We hope that that will be dealt with as a matter of urgency. After all, according to a written answer, visitscotland estimates that 700,000 people took a coach holiday in 1999. The revenue generated by those individuals amounted to £170 million. However, the Confederation of Passenger Transport UK informs us that the number of people travelling is falling fast, and that cancellations are being made by the score. We must reduce the price of the product. As that applies to coach tours, it also applies to visitors, many of whom come to or tour Scotland by car. The issue of fuel prices has not gone away. No master stroke was pulled off by the chancellor last year. That modest reduction did not mask the massive tax take. All the chancellor did was buy himself some time. As the world markets cause prices to rise—and it is accepted that market forces have an effect—the effect of last year's price cut is minimised, given that, after all, 79 per cent of the price of fuel goes in tax. Abusing demonstrators and pillorying oil companies will not mask the root cause of the problem. We do not go cap in hand to London, pleading for handouts. We are no whingeing Jocks. We are the nation that discovered oil, but found itself getting poorer. We are the eighth largest oil producer in the world, yet we find ourselves with the most expensive fuel on the planet. That is economically crippling, and is manifestly wrong. This should be a message from the Scottish Parliament, on behalf of the Scottish people, recognising the interests of all Scotland. Cut the cost of fuel. Take 10p off the price of a gallon as a prelude to getting towards European price levels. If that is not done, the message to the people of Scotland must be clear: what is the cost of new Labour? £4 a gallon. Who stands for a fair deal on fuel? Those who stand for Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes the serious problem caused to industries and individuals in Scotland through high fuel costs; further notes the additional burden that the foot-and-mouth disease crisis has placed on industries and areas vulnerable to high fuel prices; recognises that notwithstanding the changes in the Budget announced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, fuel costs in Scotland remain the highest in the developed world and are set to  rise further towards £4.00 a gallon; therefore calls on the Chancellor of the Exchequer to reduce immediately fuel taxation by 10 pence per gallon and thereafter to move to a fairer system of taxation and ensure a harmonisation of fuel prices with our European competitors, and calls upon the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to take action to end the disparity of fuel prices in rural Scotland.

Of course we are not suggesting that if Motorola wishes to retain operations at Bathgate we should take that away from it. We are saying that if Motorola is withdrawing lock, stock and barrel, it is entitled to take the fixtures and fittings, but given what was put in by local and national public money, there is a moral obligation on Motorola to allow the premises to remain and be used by others.

The motion is inadequate for two reasons. First, it is simply self-congratulatory, when there is no reason to be so. Secondly, the motion is entirely lacking in specification and detail. I seek not to detract from the concept that skills are essential to Scotland's economic progress. Indeed, the minister's phrase about a blind date is quite appropriate, although quaint. However, what is needed is not a mantra chant but a coherent strategy. It is ironic that this debate follows the statement on Motorola. The closure of the Motorola factory is a tragedy for individuals, for a community and for the whole country. Although there is a global problem in that sector, other nations and companies are weathering the storm better than Scotland and Motorola. In particular, I refer to Finland and Nokia. While Bathgate mourns, Tampere thrives, because Finland recognised its position, analysed its strengths and weaknesses and invested in infrastructure and education. We will debate infrastructure on another day, but today's debate encompasses education. In Finland, education is not simply about schools; it is lifelong. Education is not simply about skills, but  about research and development. Finland has weathered the storm because it remained ahead of the game. In previous debates, the SNP has held up Finland as an example to follow, but we have met scepticism, if not open derision—though not on a par with the minister's comments on Ireland. Such an attitude is insular and ignorant. Only a generation ago, Finlandisation was a derogatory term that was bandied about by the Henry Kissingers of this world, but not now. How times have changed. Finnish lessons must be learned in Scotland—and I do not mean linguistically, but strategically. Finland has learned that, when a country is geographically peripheral, investment in skills is essential. I quote from the Finnish minister for education: "The national strategy chosen by Finland is to develop our country as a knowledge intensive society, in which a highly trained population and heavy investment in research create conditions for production based on knowledge and know-how. Education and training cannot only be seen as a force reacting to change in society and working life, but as a force influencing and moulding them." Finland has learned and so gained. The tragedy in Scotland is that, while we have significant skills shortages, we have far too many hands willing and wanting to work but lying idle. Numerous industries in Scotland either have a skills shortage or an impending shortage. Those industries are neither peripheral nor expendable: they are key and core sectors of the Scottish economy. They include the oil and gas industry, the electronics industry and the financial services sector. Even road haulage is now facing a shortage and an aging work force. In a global economy, what encourages growth, both indigenous and extraneous, is education with a skilled work force and adequate infrastructure. Education, as I said, is not simply a mantra chant but a prerequisite in a knowledge economy. For too long, Scotland has competed in an economic league for assembly line jobs that are subject to undercutting from competitors, be they from eastern Europe or the southern hemisphere. To compete in the premier league for the high-value jobs, and to keep ahead of technological changes, requires investment in skills. A precursor to that must be that the available work force leaves school not just literate and numerate, but educated for learning. In a knowledge age, the pace of history is accelerating, and learning is most certainly a lifelong concept. The tragedy in Scotland is that, while we have skills shortages in so many sectors, we have so many hands lying idle. Much of the difficulty relates to a failure of Governments—current and past—to invest adequately in education. The basis  of a skilled work force is built upon a sound and solid education. Some of my colleagues will comment in greater detail, but let me say that it is not the responsibility of an employer to train an employee in literacy or numeracy. That is the responsibility of Government. The employer fine-tunes the individual for the skill or task, but he or she can only do so if the individual is job-ready. Within schools, we have fewer youngsters undertaking and obtaining qualifications in technology. That is matched by a reduction in the number of places at university for teachers of that subject and, indeed, by the absence of rooms to teach it in some private finance initiative schools. What, though, about current Government schemes to upskill Scotland? Perhaps the first problem for any employer or individual is this: just who is in charge? Who is responsible? Is it the Executive, or is it the Department for Education and Employment south of the border? Why is it that the minister can make a statement on Motorola, but cannot organise a jobs fair outwith the country? What is the divide of responsibility between Edinburgh and Sheffield? That needs to be clarified. Moreover, why should there be a divide at all? If the Finns can do it, why cannot the Scots? What about current schemes? Leaving aside the difficulty caused by a multiplicity of forms and bureaucracy, are we making best use of limited resources? Let us consider, for example, skillseekers training allowances. Why are there no foundation modern apprenticeships north of the border? It has been pointed out to me that foundation modern apprenticeships, aimed at level II qualifications, are of benefit to employers and would-be employees south of the border. Surely a similar concept should be available here. What about the use of limited resources? The skilling up of Scotland is not to be restricted to one area only. However, with finite resources, some focusing is surely essential. Is not the future of our country in science and technology? Is that not where it is at in the 21 st century? Why then has this Executive so neglected such an important subject? Why is it that, when we consider Highlands and Islands Enterprise or Scottish Enterprise's skillseekers expenditure, hairdressers and beauticians are invested in to a greater extent than those in science and technology? Is it not absurd that we spend almost £11 million training hairdressers and beauticians, in comparison with only £3 million for scientists and engineers? Finally, skills must be demand-led, not supply-driven. We are not living under a latter-day soviet where quotas of relevant trades were produced to  order. It did not work in the 20 th century and it certainly will not work in the 21 st . The best producers of skilled workers will be the industries themselves. They, after all, know what it is that they are looking to achieve through training. As an aside, would it not be better to encourage employers by offering tax breaks on expenditure on training, rather than by apparently trying to encourage by a modest grant and a maze of application forms? Moreover, it is quite clear in skills training, as in higher education, that certain sectors are far more cost-intensive than others. One grant does not fit or cover all. A flat rate does not differentiate between the hairdresser and the engineer. In summary, the Executive's commitment to improving skills in Scotland is welcome. However, if that phrase is not to be vacuous and void, the skeletal statement must be fleshed out. There must be recognition that a basic all-round education is a prerequisite, that employers are best suited to carry out and supervise training and that, whilst all areas of skills are welcomed, as a nation we must focus and specialise. In the knowledge age and in a global economy, the underfunding of science and technology must be rolled back. If we do that, I have no doubt that, in years to come, others will seek to learn from us in Scotland. Finland is to be credited for achieving so much with so little. The tragedy in Scotland is that with so much we have achieved so little. It does not need to be this way. Work is undone, crying out for hands to complete it. As a Parliament, we must ensure that we add value to labour in the 21 st century. Initiative, not simply endeavour, ideas, not simply actions, and skills, not simply sweat, are now not only necessary, but a prerequisite. As a nation that produced not simply engineers and craftsmen by the thousands, but more Nobel prize winners per capita than any other nation on earth, surely it must be within our wit and competence to allow the skills and talents that exist in our people to flourish. They are entitled to no less; we must do far more. I move amendment S1M-1857.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "notes that, under changing global economic circumstances, a sustainable future for Scotland is dependent on a high skills, high value knowledge economy; recognises that significant skills shortages have been allowed to develop in key sectors in the Scottish economy; regrets that, to date, government has neither quantified nor predicted these shortages, far less been able to take action to fill the skills shortfall, and therefore calls upon the Executive to take immediate action to identify and quantify Scotland's current skills shortages and likely future shortages, tailor investment in skills to meet current and future demands and shortfalls and work closely with industry to assure a demand-led integrated approach to  training, further and higher education."

I put on record the SNP's dismay at the closure and the damage done to a loyal and productive work force  and to the communities. The minister is correct to seek the return of £16.75 million of public money from Motorola, but why is a maximum of £10 million being put in to fund the proposals outlined by the minister today? Surely every penny of the £16.75 million should come back and all of it should be ring-fenced and used to assist the people and communities that have been afflicted and affected.

Belated action is better than inaction, but two points require clarification. First, £2.3 million is to be spent on a marketing and reassurance campaign, with regard to access. Will that include an intensive television and local radio campaign, both here and south of the border? Secondly, although increased marketing is important for businesses, they require to stay afloat. Eighty-one per cent of businesses in Scotland have a rateable value in excess of £12,000, and areas such as the City of Edinburgh are currently excluded from the relief. Given that the British Hospitality Association and the Scottish Tourism Forum, among other organisations, are arguing that that threshold is too low, will not the minister consider increasing the threshold to at least £50,000, as suggested by those organisations? Does he accept that all of Scotland is affected, not simply parts of it, and will he look to extending hardship relief to areas such as the City of Edinburgh, Midlothian and Lanarkshire?

I, too, welcome the consensual approach that has been taken, particularly by the minister. Perhaps the litmus test for the Parliament is not how we deal with the strongest or most vociferous of bodies but how we deal with the weakest and least vocal. Although the number of people who have been adopted or who are in care is not huge, individuals may experience significant emotional effects and, as others have mentioned, social problems.  In Scotland, we should look at things distinctively, to our own time scale and using our own methods. We have our own legal system and a system of children's panels that is unique in the United Kingdom. Like others today, I heartily endorse both those systems. I will make some short points, given that, despite the additional minute for speeches, time is at a premium. Although I welcome the introduction of legislation on inter-country adoptions, I think that it would be a mistake to hold the perception generated by the tabloid press that anyone who is involved in an inter-country adoption is a potential paedophile or is taking part for the wrong reasons. Many people have adopted from other countries for the best of reasons. Sometimes they have done so because of tight regulations in this country. Frequently, many people who went abroad to adopt had been told by the adoption agencies in this country that they were too old to adopt—not because they were in their 50s or 60s, but because they were in their mid or late 30s or 40s. That criterion may have been correct when it was applied, for reasons of supply and demand. We should not look at the case of the Kilshaws. Of course, we must have regulations, as there are people who hope to bring in children for entirely the wrong reasons, but many children who are adopted from abroad are brought to sound, stable and loving families. There is nothing wrong with inter-country adoptions so long as they are monitored and properly regulated. It is important to carry out a review. When I had been practising law for about 15 years, I was amazed to learn just how recently a law of adoption had been introduced. If I had been asked 10 years ago when the first law of adoption had been passed, I would have said that it was in the 12 th , 15 th or 17 th century. In fact, the first law of adoption in Scotland was passed in 1930, after the carnage of the great war, when there was still a follow-through of Victorian values. At that time, many children did not have a father to maintain them, so it was felt that steps had to be taken. Before then, adoption was dealt with through the law of testacy or intestacy. It is now the 21 st century and we have to move on. I welcome the changes that have taken place in Scottish family law and the move from custody and access towards residence and contact—we are moving away from the winner-takes-all situation. We should take time to use the best brains in the country to ensure that we get the law right. Some legislative changes will be required, but not all the changes will be legislative, as some issues can be dealt with in other ways. For example, when I was a practitioner, I used to have great difficulty with the question of contact and adoption.  I understand that that question is viewed much more liberally now but, for a few years in Edinburgh, contact and adoption was viewed as a no-no, notwithstanding the best advice from the likes of Professor Triseliotis and others. Their advice was that contact and adoption not only took place, but was beneficial for the child. I welcome that change. It is important that we ensure greater continuity in our small nation, so that such changes do not happen in only one local authority area. Agism must be addressed. As I said, one reason why many people went outwith the United Kingdom to adopt was that, at the age of 38 or 41, they were precluded from adopting a family. Social matters have moved on—many of those rules were introduced years ago, when people tended to be far younger when they had families. Irene McGugan spoke about resources and rightly said that we should make provision for people to allow them to adopt. I am grateful to Professor Triseliotis, who took some time to brief me. He flagged up the issue of the cessation of contact between the making of a freeing order and the adoption. It has been suggested that that cessation of contact is contrary to the ECHR. I believe that it is morally indefensible in many instances, but it must be addressed if it is also contrary to the ECHR. Given that time is passing, I will concentrate on fostering. Jack McConnell was right to suggest that we should consider the introduction of a hybrid system—something between formal adoption and fostering, which may mean amending guardianship arrangements. We must also consider resources. There is a fundamental problem in Edinburgh in relation to fostering. If someone lives in Edinburgh and their child goes into care, it is likely that the child will not be fostered in Edinburgh—he will be fostered in Bathgate or Blackburn, which are out in West Lothian, or in Midlothian. The Presiding Officer is indicating that I should close, so I shall finish on this point. I am not denigrating the families who look after kids in those places. However, a single parent who tries to maintain a link with their child but who does not have a vehicle must take three or four buses to get from Craigmillar or Muirhouse to Bathgate, for example. What quality time can that parent spend with their child in a strange town if the weather is inclement? We must consider providing more resources so that children can be fostered closer to home.

The subject matter of the bill has been discussed and debated at length in the chamber and in committee. Amendments have been few and this debate is to be brief, mainly because the bill is lacking in specification and detail. Committees have commented on the failure of the Executive to clarify the criteria that will qualify some for grants and ensnare most with a tuition fee. In the debate following stage 3, it is customary in the Scottish Parliament to applaud the passing of another milestone as our legislature embeds further legislation for our nation. I cannot and will not do so on this occasion. Obviously, the bill contains elements that are sensible and overdue. It is right, for instance, that our Parliament should address the iniquities that students face with council tax and the difficulties that many faced in the absence of a grant. However, while such elements are welcome, the bill has to be considered as a whole. The Scottish Executive cannot mask the iniquities in the bill by lacing it with overdue and inadequate legislative advances. Moreover, it is scandalous that the Scottish Executive should seek to ensure the passage of  the meat of the legislation by leaving it to regulations. The Scottish Executive has been told and knows well that the regulations cannot be amended but can only be accepted or rejected. Accordingly, Executive diktat is to be used to enforce the digestion of the Executive's unpalatable proposal. The nub of the matter, however, remains the same: a tuition fee is a tuition fee, whether it is paid at the beginning, the middle or the end of the course. Renaming a tuition fee a graduate endowment is not an abolition but is, in the words of Winston Churchill, a "terminological inexactitude". He who is guilty of the greatest terminological inexactitude is the minister responsible for a department in which language and interpretation is crucial—the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace. I am referring to his declaration before the elections to the Scottish Parliament—elections that were supposed to usher in a new era for Scotland and for Scottish politics. As a prelude to that new way of governing, Jim Wallace indicated that tuition fees would be killed stone dead. The phraseology may have changed, but the definition remains the same: students in Scotland require to pay for their higher education. Jim Wallace may call it a graduate endowment, but the effect is the same: it is simply a tuition fee by another name. It is yet another Liberal Democrat sell-out. Student debt will not be addressed by the endowment. Access to higher education for those from disadvantaged families will not be improved. This is a missed opportunity; this is not Cubie. The Executive partnership has excelled itself in hype and hyperbole. New Labour invents tuition fees; the Liberal Democrats rename them a graduate endowment. Then, both parties, sickeningly, claim credit for their abolition. When the bill is passed, the sycophantic Lib Dem clapometer will go off the scale. The Lib Dems will be claiming that the partnership that they brokered has delivered. However, when the minister signs the bill, she will also be putting her signature to two other things: first, an invoice—in due course—to an already indebted student community for the privilege of learning; and secondly, a political death warrant for the Liberal Democrats for selling out Scottish education, which they hypocritically claimed was so dear to their hearts. Those of us who benefited from the foresight of a past generation, in its provision of universal higher education, can take no satisfaction from the bill. Those who gained so much, but who choose to provide so little, must hang their heads in shame. The passing of the bill will not be a milestone for the Parliament, but will be a millstone for the student community, and a  tombstone for the coalition partners.

I am surprised that the minister and Mr Lyon have not read the amendment. The word veto is not mentioned. It says that representations are to be made, and thereafter, in part (b), that Scottish ministers must have "laid before the Scottish Parliament a written report of the response made by Her Majesty's Government to those representations." If Her Majesty's Government was not prepared to restore eligibility for social security benefits to students, that would not impede an Executive of any political hue in proceeding in the matter. It would, however, raise the opportunity of inquiring whether social security benefits should continue to be run from south of the border. People would have to make their own judgment on that. What we are asking for is the minimum amount to which we think that students are entitled. The bottom line is that the Executive should be prepared to go down to Westminster and at least  ask for benefits to be restored to students. That is what its members agreed with and supported when they were in opposition, although apparently they are now not even willing to go to Westminster to ask for that. We are not asking anyone to go cap in hand; we are asking the Executive to restore what we believe is the right of every individual citizen. Given that 50 per cent of our young people are now becoming students, the Executive is preventing 50 per cent of young people from obtaining benefits although they cannot work. That is why we have no hesitation in adhering to principle once again and in urging the Parliament to support amendment 2.

In moving amendment 1, I should say that none of the deputy minister's earlier comments satisfies the SNP that section 3 is anything other than a political fix. Notwithstanding the recommendations of the Cubie inquiry, the figure of £10,000 was fixed, and the Executive has sought thereafter to justify it. Only yesterday, on 28 March 2001, the deputy minister dispatched to the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee a letter that sought to justify the costs and calculations of the threshold. One would have thought that, if the Executive were progressing on that basis, it would have taken such a decision at the outset, rather than trying to justify its position the day before the stage 3 debate. This is a matter of principle; it is about the principles that lie behind the Executive's electoral commitments, the Cubie inquiry and universal education. The SNP has no hesitation in adhering to those principles; it will be for new Labour and agricultural Labour to make up their own minds about those principles. I move amendment 1.

Many of my points have been made previously by Dennis Canavan, Tommy Sheridan and indeed Robin Harper, not only in his role as an MSP but in his role as rector of Edinburgh University. This is also a matter of principle. The question of the restoration of benefits does not simply go back to the principles of the Cubie inquiry, which indicated that the lack of benefits was a clear factor in student debt; it goes back to the principles of the welfare state and of Beveridge, whom the members of agricultural Labour will recall was a Liberal. This issue is all about having the opportunity to receive a benefit as a citizen's right and entitlement if that individual is unable to gather or obtain any money. When I was a student—which was many years before Tommy Sheridan was a student—benefits were available. It was not a licence to scrounge, but an opportunity for a citizen to receive his right and entitlement. If he cannot earn, he should be  able to make such a claim.

Restoring benefits would not cause a deluge of claims by students, many of whom would obviously not be eligible if they were employed. However, those who are unable to obtain employment—which I hope would amount to a few—should be able to obtain a citizen's rights as a member of our society. Such principles were enunciated by the Labour Government when it set up the welfare state, and were adhered to by the Cubie committee. The Executive has acknowledged that the problems of student debt and of students' disinclination to continue their studies are not down simply to tuition fees or graduate endowments, but to many other matters, particularly the lack of benefits such as housing benefits and social security benefit at key times. As Dorothy-Grace Elder, Dennis Canavan and Tommy Sheridan have pointed out, students are under substantial pressure. Amendment 2 provides a limited opportunity for a student who does not receive a grant or has no income at summer or Christmas to benefit from society's assistance, as is their right and as, when I and other Labour members were students, we had the opportunity to make a claim for benefit if we could not obtain employment. We acknowledge that the Parliament does not have the power to deliver that, as social security is reserved. However, the very least that we can do and that our students are entitled to expect is for the Parliament to tell Westminster that social security benefits should be restored to students, as the Cubie committee and others have recommended. If Westminster refuses to do so, all we can do is return to Scotland and decide whether we should have power over social security instead of having to go cap in hand south of the border. I have no hesitation in moving this amendment not just because of the principles of the Cubie committee, but of the principles of the welfare state. I move amendment 2.

The threshold is set at such a low level—£10,000—as to put people off. Not only the disadvantaged will be impeded by the bill as it stands. I am sorry to spike Brian Monteith's guns. We accept the Executive's point that this is not simply a question of a graduate endowment or a tuition fee. Mr Rumbles can talk about the semantics, but the fact is that those who pay it will know what they are paying and they will not be affected by the terminology.

I am not going to do a quick calculation. Mr Rumbles has to understand two things. First, people are being put off going into higher education because they recognise that there will be debt. That is an impediment.

People are being put off going into higher education, yet Mr Rumbles goes on about getting 50 per cent of people in Scotland to go into higher education. Members should consider Finland, where they aspire to having between 60 and 65 per cent of people going into higher education. In Finland, they considered whether there should be tuition fees or a graduate tax and they decided against them because they would discourage people from going into higher education. This Government is being hypocritical. That is why amendment 1 is required.

I am sorry, but I have to move on. Many things put people off. The second thing Mike Rumbles has to understand concerns repayment. The threshold at which repayment will commence is at a level that means that people on limited incomes in difficult jobs will have to pay. That is unacceptable.

The whole purpose of the bill is to provide universal education. The real irony in this debate is that we in the SNP have no difficulty supporting Mr Monteith because his position is  more radical and more consistent with the principles of Andrew Cubie than what either of the Executive partners in the coalition has proposed. Mr Rumbles may think that, by semantics, he can avoid answering to people at the ballot box, but he cannot—a tuition fee is a tuition fee, whether or not it is called a graduate endowment. That is why we will move amendment 1.

I agree  with much of what Mr Canavan said and with some of what Mr Monteith said. The purpose of amendment 1 is to flesh out a bill that is rather scant and lacking. Everything in it is left to regulations. We have to go back and remember the original purpose of the bill. Let us be clear: the bill came about because of election commitments on tuition fees. That will no doubt be commented on by Mr Monteith, Mr Canavan, me and others. The First Minister himself instructed Andrew Cubie to carry out an inquiry. To some extent, the Scottish National Party did not agree with that; we just wanted election commitments to be adhered to. However, Andrew Cubie carried out an inquiry and it was made clear that the threshold should be £25,000. When the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee considered the issue, Mr Cubie and others indicated that a threshold of £10,000 was far too low. That is why we want Cubie's recommendations to be implemented, at least in part, by ensuring that no payment will start until earnings of at least £25,000 are reached.  Labour should consider what it is driving towards. Earlier this week, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning was quite rightly parading the fact that she is extending a pilot scheme from Ayrshire into Glasgow, West Dunbartonshire and Dundee to fund children to stay on at school. Mr Monteith disagreed with that. I find it rather ironic that he disagreed with that aspect of trying to improve access to education for the disadvantaged but is here today claiming that he is looking after the interests of the disadvantaged. We could see the logic of the minister's drive to pay youngsters from disadvantaged backgrounds to stay on at school. Our objection was that we did not know any of the details of the scheme or how long it would continue. We did not know whether what was happening was simply the extension of a trial. However, we certainly agreed with the principle. The minister is encouraging youngsters to stay on at school by paying them so that they do not have to go and work in McDonald's or in a shop but can stay at home and study—but there is irony in what she wants to happen when they leave school. In Dundee, West Dunbartonshire and Glasgow, those youngsters will be encouraged to stay on, and be paid to do so, because the intention is to get them into higher education. However, no sooner will they be ready for higher education—if, as Mr Canavan rightly said, they are not put off by the thought of incurring debt—when they will be put off by the fact that, at a very low level of earnings, they will have to start paying back.  Amendment 1 therefore seeks to ensure that the principles of Cubie are adhered to. It also seeks to ensure that the principle that the Conservatives and the Government are trying to promote—of providing access to education to those from disadvantaged areas—is met.

We are delighted that the apparently overworked and overwrought minister—if the papers are to be believed—is with us today. How could I possibly quibble with such an impeccable source? I wonder whether the Executive is now utilising the traditional Mutt and Jeff routine. When bad news is to be issued, or a committee stonewalled, Mutt is sent. However, when apparent largesse is to be dispensed, or credit sought, Jeff appears. Normally, when goodies are being dispensed by Governments, it is done in well-trailed and well-trumpeted statements. Lo and behold, in this case, a written answer to a hurriedly written Labour patsy's question is followed by the minister responding in a debate initiated by the Opposition.

That simply confirms—

I am not giving way.

That simply confirms—

That simply— [Interruption.] May I continue?

That simply confirms what we on this side of the chamber and many outwith it have feared. Despite the fact that a national crisis in tourism has been brewing, the Executive has been sleepwalking through it. We appreciate that the principal cause of the crisis is the foot-and-mouth epidemic. However, it would be remiss of us not to point out that problems in tourism have been endemic under this Administration, as a result of Labour's high pound and high fuel cost policy. There is, and has been, a need for urgency and action. However, what we have now is both belated and inadequate. No one is surprised by what has been proposed by the Executive—after all, most of it has already been intimated south of the border. Rates relief was documented last week in England. We do not think that that is adequate—and we will go into detail on that. Why did we have to wait? The crisis is not simply about the loss of revenue, but about the loss of jobs. It is not simply a rural problem, but an all-Scotland problem. That is disclosed when we consider the scenario that is  faced by Edinburgh zoo. It is not in a high-risk area and it is the third most visited attraction in Scotland. Yet, if it remains closed next month as well as this, it will have lost £0.5 million, and 50 employees who would have started next month will remain idle. That is why we need urgency and action, not belated and inadequate gestures. What is on offer? The offer is rates relief, not rates exemption. The buck has once again been passed to local authorities. The offer is restricted to rateable values up to £12,000. Moreover, it is restricted by local authority area. Stirling and Argyll are included, but Dunbartonshire is excluded. Has Loch Lomond moved? Are the bonnie banks now restricted to somewhere around Balloch? East Lothian is in, but Edinburgh is out. How does that deal with Edinburgh zoo? It is absurd. The proposals are belated and inadequate. What must be done? First, we need immediate measures to address the crisis. We have the worst situation tourism in Scotland has ever known; yet it was only yesterday that the new chairman of visitscotland was appointed. Moreover, when a steady hand is needed on the tiller, the minister can tell us that a new chief executive will be appointed within a fortnight, but is apparently unable to tell us when he or she will actually be able to start work on a day-to-day basis. Some crisis management. The Government tells us that an advertising campaign will ensue—but no wonder, because misinformation and disinformation are the cause of a significant element of the difficulties. Abroad, it took until last week, apparently, for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to instruct British representatives in a clear, coherent and consistent line. Meanwhile, at home, problems in the countryside were exacerbated by conflicting messages from a multiplicity of offices—even Government quangos were not consistent in their actions and advice. Why did not the Executive ensure that quangos in Scotland spoke with one clear, coherent and consistent voice? It is no wonder that into that void entered mistruth, rumour and gossip. It is for that reason that the Executive must ensure that it gets a clear, coherent and consistent message across. In the 21 st century the mass media are television and radio. The Executive can ensure that it produces public information broadcasts about lagging pipes in winter and arranging flu vaccinations for the elderly. Why cannot it address the matter of public information broadcasts about the crisis? For an Executive that is so obsessed with spin, it is sadly lacking in substance on that matter.  Measures must be taken to safeguard the industry through the immediate crisis. The current announcements are better than a poke in the eye with a sharp stick, but they fail to provide the answer for many businesses and individuals throughout the length and breadth of the country. The measures that the SNP proposes come with a cost but—as has been admitted—we have a national crisis. That is why the resources for those measures must come from the UK national reserve. A sensible individual puts money aside for a rainy day and a prudent Chancellor of the Exchequer sets aside funds for national emergencies. We have a national emergency. If individuals become unemployed and businesses close, tax and national insurance contributions are not paid and VAT is not received. Moreover, claims for social security will follow. We must invest in our industry in order to harvest a return; that would merely be prudent. Why not remove the burden of rates from businesses for the months of April, May and June? Those months are fast approaching and they follow a winter close-down. There is no money in businesses' banks and, in many instances, there is little prospect of visitors coming through their doors. Those businesses cannot pay out what they have not taken in. It is not the granting of relief that is needed, but the lifting of the burden. Not everybody will benefit from rates relief—some businesses will be above the threshold and will be excluded from rates relief. However, bankruptcy beckons the big businesses as much as it does the small businesses—another Labour poverty trap. Many individuals and some businesses do not pay business rates, but they still face the possibility that they will go under. A hardship fund is needed as much for the mountain guides in Glencoe as it is for the zoo in Edinburgh. Both are in difficulties, both need our assistance and both are currently neglected. Interest-free loans must be made available, as must financial and practical support for a marketing drive that will allow businesses to contact known customers. Those are among a range of measures that are not simply a wish list from the Opposition; they are the demands of the tourism industry, which met the Executive recently. Measures must be put in place to secure the coming summer season, including a proper marketing strategy with an adequate marketing budget. There is no point in sounding a fanfare for the new chief executive of visitscotland if the situation remains that the marketing budget of the Irish Tourist Board is greater than the entire budget of the Scottish Tourist Board. In addition, visitscotland must move from being a regulatory body to becoming a marketing organisation. There is a national obligation to sell Scotland.  Finally, for the coming and future seasons the matter is not only about the marketing of Scotland, but about access to Scotland. The shameful attitude displayed by the Executive towards air links and other modes of transport must end. We need visitors from overseas to come to Scotland directly, not as daytrippers from London. It is shameful that, under this Administration, less than 3 per cent of US visitors to the UK enter through a Scottish airport. In summary, the SNP makes no apology for being hard on the minister and her parliamentary colleagues, because there is a crisis in our land and they have been dilatory. Although we are grateful to the minister for indulging us with her attendance, we think that it is shameful that it is only because the SNP recognises the crisis and has initiated the debate that she is here. The package that has been announced is paltry. Scotland the Brand is wilting, and the minister has, so far, been tried and found wanting. The minister must return to the chamber in early course and in proper fashion, to make a ministerial statement to announce a package of measures that is adequate for the crisis in hand. If not, it is she who must go, not the tourism industry. I move, That the Parliament notes the grave impact which the foot-and-mouth crisis is having on the tourism industry; believes that conflicting information about the disease both at home and abroad further jeopardises Scottish tourism; believes that more must be done to secure the future of the tourism industry and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to implement the following recovery plan— (i) immediate action to enable and ensure efficient crisis management, including a public information campaign through the press and broadcast media to make people aware of what can and cannot be done in the crisis; (ii) interim support measures to prevent bankruptcy throughout the duration of the crisis including a rates relief package for the months of April, May and June; interest free loans for affected industries and an exemption to be sought by the Scottish Executive from Her Majesty's Treasury for VAT and National Insurance contributions over a similar period for crisis-affected industries; and (iii) a recovery strategy to ensure the success of the summer tourist season, beginning immediately and including an emergency Scottish advertising campaign in all key markets.

I am happy to enter into the consensus and broad unanimity that exist today. I have listened to points about credit unions being a poor man's bank; I think that the direction in which we want credit unions to go is correct. Our aspirations for credit unions are laudable and admirable. There is an initial need for credit unions to exist in many areas. The analogy that I would use in relation to many areas is not the choice between shopping at Jenner's and shopping at Kwik Save, but the choice between shopping at Kwik Save and not shopping at all. We want credit unions to evolve, but, in many areas, we simply need them to exist. I am happy to support the cause not only because of what credit unions can do but because  of what they can stop happening. The lack of credit is a significant problem in far too many areas of Scotland, particularly in peripheral housing schemes where there is no access to cash, finance or even a crisis loan at a time of need. The minister has made correct points about the cost of cash. One of the travesties that we face in the 21 st century is that, even as the price of power comes down, the poor are paying more, pro rata, for power because those of us who can pay our power bills by direct debit pay less while those who live in the cash economy pay more. There is something manifestly wrong with that. We live in a consumer-oriented society in which the mass media exert significant pressures on individuals to buy and acquire even if they cannot afford it. I do not know what the statistics show, and we will probably never be able to find out, but I bet that there is an increase in the number of people going to loan sharks in the period before Christmas when they want to buy presents that they could not otherwise afford, in order to meet what they perceive to be the needs or wants of their children. We have to address that. I also want to address the point made by Donald Gorrie. He mentioned the advertising of ways out of debt. I am appalled by many of the television advertisements that advertise ways of consolidating one's debts. Organisations that provide that service not only compound the debt but often end up removing people's houses from over their heads. People are suckered into a scheme that massively increases their debt and leaves them with no home. Besides, such a service might not benefit many people in Easterhouse who may not have the ability to obtain such a loan as they do not have the heritable security to go with it. It is important that we address that. What is important about credit unions is that banks will not provide the service that credit unions do. There is no commercial return. I endorse what Donald Gorrie said: banks should do more to help. I know of instances in which banks have been prepared to put in cash support to assist credit unions. There is no immediate commercial return for banks, but it might be in their interest to encourage people who are prepared to set up credit unions. Indeed, at a time when we are trying to encourage banks to keep branches open in rural areas, we would be shouting into the wind if we tried to encourage banks to open more branches in other areas. Credit unions can stop loan sharks. During the debate on warrant sales, it was suggested that, if we abolished warrant sales, we would put people into the hands of loan sharks. I never subscribed to that view and I thought that it was a nonsensical  and disingenuous argument. Loan sharks take advantage of the times when people cannot get money immediately—when the pay packet has been lost, when there has been a bereavement and so on. In rural Scotland and in peripheral housing schemes, people often have no access to a bank, no collateral and no heritable security. They are left with no alternative but to go to the person down the road whom they know, and who can give them money there and then. In such cases, the problems grow and are compounded. I view credit unions as laudable, but we need to address the direction in which they are going. What credit unions can do is important. During my career in politics, I have noted that it is very difficult for unemployed people, when they are in receipt of no salary and are claiming housing benefit directly, to be made to believe by politicians that society cares. Someone who is living in a damp house and who is unemployed cannot withhold their labour or their rent. Society has, to all intents and purposes, forsaken them. One of the benefits of credit unions is empowerment—which is more than just a buzzword. It is about persuading people that, if they come together, things can change. It is people's consciousness that can be raised. Des McNulty and other members have spoken about that as being the right direction for the development of credit unions. It is not just about addressing the plight of somebody who needs cash immediately; it is about realising that, collectively—and I am someone who believes that there is such a thing as society—we can change things on a micro, as well as on a macro, scale. That is why we have to support the motion. We cannot simply replicate practice in Ireland here. We have different needs, which need to be taken into account. The Executive's intention is laudable, and the support of the Parliament for the motion shows what can be achieved. I can only hope that credit unions go from strength to strength.

I concur with the sentiments that have been expressed by all members about the tragedy that has befallen farming. I am grateful to the minister for his acknowledgement that the crisis is not only deepening in agriculture, but broadening out into other areas, such as tourism and food. While I acknowledge that primacy in such matters must come from the veterinary and scientific advisers, I am intrigued by the concept of low, medium and high risk and where we should take those risks. From the perspective of tourism, a clear problem has been conflicting information and advice about what activities could be pursued. For example, the ski slopes were open, but the hills were closed. One could walk on the west highland way, but one could not walk off it. Such stories have come from a multiplicity of organisations. My plea is that the minister's office ensures that a clear, coherent and consistent message on the situation vis-à-vis agriculture is communicated in Scotland and, for the tourism industry, that that also happens outwith Scotland. More important for tourism, the message should let people know what they cannot do in Scotland. Can we ensure that there is one clear voice?

I would like to follow up on the points on recycling that have been made by others—by Robin Harper in particular. It is a matter of shame that we in Scotland recycle so little, that there is so much waste and that we are so far behind many comparable nations. The statistics show a substantial difference between Scotland and Denmark in terms of what is recycled. As someone who assiduously gathers in bottles and papers for recycling, I appreciate that the benefits of recycling are arguable, given that I often go to recycle those bottles and papers in a vehicle that uses fossil fuel, perhaps negating any benefit from the recycling. Recycling has to be dealt with strategically. It is not just a matter for individuals. There has to be an overall strategy, and that has to come from the Executive. The fundamental flaw at present is that we cannot consider recycling unless we consider the whole creation of the product. An absurdity in the devolution settlement is that this Parliament and the Executive are charged with responsibility for dealing with recycling, but responsibility for the definition of product packaging is reserved to Westminster.

The Westminster issue is important. Europe lays down directives that the Westminster Parliament and the Scottish Parliament must follow. It is an absurdity for us to want to have a recycling strategy if we cannot decide on the nature of what is first put into the system. The logical end of Andy Kerr's argument is to give recycling over to Europe. If he is saying that the Scottish Parliament is capable of dealing with recycling, it follows that it is also capable of dealing with the definition of packaging, bearing in mind the parameters that are set down by EU directives. However, at the moment, expecting the Parliament and the Executive to deal with recycling matters without being able to deal with packaging is to try to address the outproduct without being able to consider the inproduct. My second point relates to balance in the definition of sustainable development. Too often, people see sustainable development as retaining and sustaining; as setting in aspic; as keeping matters frozen. There must be a balance. If some  areas are to experience economic development, regeneration and social justice, decisions will have to be taken that are not environmentally friendly but are necessary. I recall being in Stornoway at the height of the fuel crisis. Many people have argued that we should have kept the fuel duty escalator so that the price of fossil fuels keeps going up, but areas such as Stornoway are haemorrhaging. When I read the Stornoway Gazette & West-Coast Advertiser , I noticed that it was the anniversary of the evacuation of St Kilda. Unless we bear in mind the economic needs of many areas of Scotland, some areas will continue to be depopulated. In some areas, we must ensure that economic development takes priority over environmental protection. It is a matter of balance, which must be dealt with on a local basis, yet taking a national perspective.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made regarding the appointment of the new chief executive of visitscotland. (S1O-2949)

Given the decline in visitor numbers, and yet the substantial increase in visitors to Scotland through low-cost carriers, will the minister direct the incoming chief executive, when he or she is appointed, to consider funding the promotion and marketing of low-cost carriers into Scotland from foreign destinations?

I speak in support of Fiona McLeod's amendment, which is meant to enhance not detract from Robin Harper's lengthy but worthy motion. I should make two preliminary points. First, green energy and economic growth go hand in hand. Green matters are often viewed as an impediment to—indeed, as antipathetic to—economic development. The motion presents a clear example of how the two can be intertwined and synonymous, and it is important that we proceed in that manner. Secondly, our climate and location are frequently seen as an impediment, either because of the country's distance from markets or because of its inclement weather. Indeed, just yesterday, Andy Kerr and I were asked on television about various difficulties that arise from our geography. However, Scotland's geographical location and much of its resulting climate present opportunities—such as onshore and offshore wind energy, wave energy and biomass—that we must harness and use. This debate is not just about the environment; it is about Scotland's economic  prosperity as well as individual benefit. Robin Harper and Nora Radcliffe mentioned wind power. Scotland was at one stage a leader in wind power technology. We have to learn lessons from that fact and apply them to wave power. As both members said, Denmark has numerous jobs in the wind power sector. A considerable proportion of Danish gross domestic product is generated by the technology for wind energy, and Danish exports benefit from that technology.

In view of Denmark's location in the North sea and its historical oil-development links with the Faroe Islands, I had always assumed that it was in the forefront of the gas industry. The nature of the Danish climate, geography and topography encourages the Danes to harness both onshore and offshore wind, but to say that that is the only factor is not true. The fact is that the Danes saw an opportunity. They took it up and ran to where we had been going. Howden and all the other firms in Scotland that had been at the forefront of developments lagged behind. We are now without that technology and are importing wind turbines. I hope that wind power jobs will go to Campbeltown, as there is talk about Vestas Wind Systems and whatever else. We should have been at the forefront of wind power technology. We have the opportunity to be at the forefront of wave power technology. That is why I do not agree with the Executive's sentiment that we should delete the requirement for a test centre from Robin Harper's motion. The requirement for a test centre is fundamental, as is improvement and enhancement of the grid. There is no point in reaping the benefit from the brains that we have in Scotland if we do not have the necessary capacity on the grid, especially on the west coast. That is the impediment. We have to deal with the infrastructure. Offshore wind power also gives Scotland an opportunity. We now have a significant abandonment and decommissioning problem in the North sea oil sector. Our subsea technology allows us to be at the technological forefront, far in advance of what had to be created from scratch in Denmark and other countries that are developing offshore wind power. We must encourage and enhance the development for which we have the opportunity. The technology for offshore wind power is distinct from that for onshore wind power. Yards that are idle because of the decline in the  North sea oil sector could be transformed into yards for offshore wind power technology. The real issue is that Scotland must speculate to accumulate. We must take the lead as a nation, rather than leave the technology up to the private interests of individuals. We cannot simply leave it to the entrepreneurial spirits and the brains. They will be siphoned off and taken away. They cannot be expected to operate in a vacuum. The wave energy entrepreneurs and brains are already being encouraged to relocate to places such as Ireland and the Azores. That is why wave energy is a national concern and must be addressed. It is also why we oppose the Executive amendment. The development must be led from the top, where there is an add-on from the Government; it must not just be left to individuals.

It is rather surprising to be responding to a Labour speech on an Executive glossy brochure that posed more questions for the SNP than on the matters that we are debating. I will do my best with some of the points the minister raised, even though she was not prepared to take my intervention. Despite the obsequious language of the motion, the Executive is to be commended for identifying the challenges facing Scotland as a nation in the 21 st century. I would be surprised if anyone here disputes that the challenge to Scotland and to individual Scots is "raising productivity, encouraging entrepreneurship, raising skill levels and connecting Scotland globally". It is one thing to identify the tasks, however, and another to provide the framework and funding to implement them. That is why the SNP amendment was submitted. We are happy to unite behind the ideas that have been flagged up, but we do not want unity for unity's sake; we want unity of purpose. If the tasks that are rightly identified are to be implemented, there must be not just tactics but targets, not just rhetoric but resources. There is and must be consensus and co-operation on the economic viability of Scotland. Accordingly, our points are made to add to the vision, not to detract from it. Raising productivity is essential for Scotland. We live in a global economy and no one owes Scotland a living. We may be geographically peripheral but that should not be an impediment. I quote from an article by Geoff Beattie in business a.m.  "There is a small northern European country with a population of about 5 million looking forward to a very prosperous year ahead. Over the years it has been invaded, dominated and bullied by its bigger, brasher neighbour. It suffered a terrible recession, most locals called it a depression, ten years ago when GDP dropped by 13 per cent over three years. Since then it has transformed its largely state-run economy into the high tech envy of Europe. In the third quarter of last year it posted an annual growth rate of 5.6 per cent. It is, if anything, expected to be even higher this year." That is not Scotland, or even Santa Claus land, but Finland. That is what Scotland must aspire to, but we cannot simply wish ourselves there. Practical steps must be taken. Entrepreneurship must be encouraged. For too long it was practised only by Scots absent from their native land. For too long the "I kent your faither" syndrome was prevalent. It is difficult to legislate for cultural change and that is, to some extent, what is required. The Parliament sets a tone that will hopefully resonate outwith, but it is not just the song—it is the singer. Too many people in the country are impeded in entrepreneurship by barriers to capital. If we want to support rather than just applaud such people we must ensure that the fuel that drives them is available. As a nation we must speculate to accumulate and the risk must be shared. I have no doubt that there is consensus on raising skill levels. We are lagging in sector-specific skills. A once-proud engineering country, we now have too few employers and, notwithstanding the colleges and universities on their doorstep, too few available skilled employees. The electronics sector in Scotland has a shortage of skilled labour. In Finland, Nokia alone hires a third of the electronics and software engineering graduates from Tampere University of Technology—many in Scottish academia and commerce are envious. Identifying skill shortages is not enough—industries flagging up problems include oil and gas and financial services as well as electronics—they must be resourced. The huge Scottish diaspora includes people driven from their native land through lack of opportunity as well as through desire for adventure. There are many Scots working in the financial sector in London and the oil and gas industries in the middle east. Why do we not do as our Irish cousins do and encourage our kith and kin to come home? When I asked a written question on the possibility of the Executive facilitating a trades fair to address skill shortages, as the Irish Government did, I was told that that was a reserved matter. If it is a reserved matter, why are we having the debate? The minister raised the question of putting digital Scotland on the agenda. Just putting digital Scotland on the agenda is not enough—action is  needed. BT says that one third of Scotland has no access to broadband. For the debate to be productive, the emphasis must be on telecommunications. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee is carrying out an inquiry into the new economy. So far, the evidence indicates that there is a window of opportunity. That window is closing fast and we must move with alacrity. A European—indeed, global—superleague is in the offing not just in football, but in telecommunications. Frank Binnie from ScotlandIS told the committee that the south of England, Sweden and Ireland are off to that superleague. Scotland remains dormant in the telecoms SPL. The SNP welcomes the fact that the minister has identified telecommunications as an area that must be addressed. However, identification must be followed by implementation. That is why the SNP is calling for a nationwide roll-out of increased bandwidth. If Sweden can deliver full broadband services to every household and business, why can not we? The Executive says that cost is the reason. The problem is that we do not know the cost. That is why there must be an investigation. Indeed, as Graham Moore said to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, there must be a partnership between the private sector and government. The minister's job is to facilitate that partnership. As Graham Moore pointed out, BT paid far more for its third generation telecommunications licences than it would cost to provide broadband to every household in Scotland. Two generations ago, a Labour Government, accepting that power and light were not only a citizen's right, but were essential to the sustainability and viability of the Highlands and Islands, created the Hydro-board—a dynamo for many communities. That social provision was seen as a right. Sadly, telecommunications and broadband are not seen as a right, but as a luxury, available only to the few. The technology that should liberate rural Scotland is being denied to it because of the area's peripheral nature. The fact is that air links are poor and expensive and ADSL is unavailable or unaffordable. Tom Johnston is rightly revered in households in the north of Scotland—Labour or otherwise—for what he did in the post-war years. Sadly, the minister is no Tom Johnston. In summary, the intention is admirable, but the mechanism is absent. We agree on what is to be done, but we differ in that the SNP believes that there must be a framework to ensure that action is not simply discussed, but delivered. The minister can rest assured that we will co-operate in achieving those goals. However, we reserve the right to criticise constructively where we believe there are deficiencies. That is why I have lodged  the amendment, to ensure that Scotland not only envies, but emulates Finland. I move amendment S1M-1610.1, to leave out from "the first" to end and insert: "calls upon the Scottish Executive to bring forward detailed proposals both for funding and implementing its plans regarding raising productivity, encouraging entrepreneurship and raising skill levels, and calls for a commitment, with regard to connecting Scotland globally, to roll out broadband communication services to all of Scotland within a defined timescale and to promote, in conjunction with the private sector, a dedicated Scottish Internet connector."

Will the minister give way?

Well, well, well. What a week this has been for the coalition. They say that bad luck comes in threes. Luck has nothing to do with it; the coalition has reaped what it has sown—pledges of an end to sleaze, commitments to care for the elderly, statements about killing tuition fees stone dead. In each and every one, the coalition partners have, in the words of Sir Stewart Sutherland, led us up to the top of the hill and led us down again. Things could only get better, said Peter Mandelson and his socialite acolytes. An end to Tory sleaze was promised. Now the prince of darkness has fallen on his sword, yet again. Last week, this Parliament debated a motion on care for the elderly that would have committed the Executive not only to the principle of free personal care but to a definitive time scale. Ironically, it preceded a members' debate on our famous bard, Robbie Burns. The junior partners in the one-party coalition were bought and sold not even for Labour gold, but simply for an unequivocal commitment from the Labour commissar—otherwise known as the Minister for Parliament—to bring proposals forward to implement free personal care for the elderly sometime, somehow, some way. It is no wonder that Mr Raffan did not know whether to resign. Today, there is a hat trick for the coalition, as tuition fees return to haunt it. The Minister for Justice and leader of the Liberal Democrats Scottish division—second division more like—pledged promised and proclaimed the length and breadth of the country throughout the duration of the election that tuition fees would be killed stone dead. Tuition fees have not gone away, because what we have got is students paying tuition fees at the end of their university education as opposed to at the start of it.

Not at the moment. The Liberal Democrats cannot wish tuition fees away. If it reads like a tuition fee, acts like a tuition fee and hurts like a tuition fee—[MEMBERS: "It is a tuition fee."] All the cosmetic dressing—

Not at the moment. All the cosmetic dressing in the world does not alter the individual pain that will be felt by this generation—and generations to come—of young people who would seek to better themselves educationally so that they might contribute more to society. The problem with the bill is that—as the saying  goes—the devil is in the detail. Like all the organisations that gave evidence—either to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee or to Cubie—the SNP welcomes some points. It is right and proper that the council tax anomaly should be dealt with, but what about addressing the right to benefit when someone is unemployed and their grant—sorry debt—does not stretch for the month of July, never mind the summer? The extension of student support is also welcome, but the dispensation of some offerings cannot disguise the educational black spot being placed in the palm of every student's hand in the shape and form of continuing tuition fees. As was said in previous debates, it ill befits those who reaped the harvest of universal education—who so clearly gained as a result—blatantly to trample the seedcorn of ambition of a subsequent generation. I do not know the educational background of the minister, but the benefits of a universal education that saw the lad o pairts rise from humble origins to the pinnacle of the elite and the establishment in this country is common knowledge. Take a bow Jack Straw, Gordon Brown and even Charles Kennedy?

Not at the moment. Their parents' generation did not saddle them with a financial burden for education. They not only lauded and encouraged, but financially provided. Those who inherited the most from their elders are now not bestowing a legacy, but leaving a debt—what a selfish act. What is the SNP's position? Our position—unlike that of the coalition partners—has stayed solid and true. No tuition fees: not before; not during; not after. In the previous debate in this Parliament on this issue, John Swinney said that Cubie's proposal for a graduate endowment "breaches the principle of free access to higher education. This Government's proposal to replace the old tuition fees with a new tuition fee called the graduate endowment should be opposed for exactly the same reason."— [ Official Report , 27 Jan 2000; Vol 4, c 499.]  Unlike others, we will not sell out on this point of principle. Although we did not support the establishment of an independent inquiry, we fully co-operated with it. When it was finally concluded after many months and at substantial cost, we accepted it—apart from where the tuition fee remained. Hence our argument for Cubie plus. It is for others to justify why, having invoked an independent inquiry, they have been selective in  their implementation thereof. Cubie was clear on amounts and thresholds—and I have listened to what the minister has said today. Moreover, not only was Cubie clear in his report, he was unequivocal in his condemnation of the proposals in committee. The suggestion that a person has financially benefited from a degree when they earn over £10,000 is "utterly ridiculous" in the opinion of the Scottish ancients, "woeful" in the opinion of the University of Stirling and "would give rise to a graduate tax" according to Andrew Cubie himself. Why is it that, when we have stood fast behind this principle, others have fallen by the wayside? We believe that education is not only in the individual's, but in society's, best interests. In this situation, there is a commonality of interests and a social responsibility. Education is not only the right of the individual; it is the responsibility of us all. The SNP believes that it is the duty of the generation that benefited from the rights bestowed upon them to ensure that a similar legacy is left for forthcoming generations. As a child of the 1960s, I grew up in a society that saw not only new schools at every level, but the availability of universal higher education without a tuition fee and with a grant. My generation, many of whom sit on the benches opposite, benefited from the foresight of the generations of our parents and grandparents. Those who took so much, but choose to leave so little, should hang their heads in shame.

We are talking about principle; we started—and are retaining—the principle of no tuition fees. This Executive likes to make great play of the fact that 40 per cent of youngsters in Scotland proceed into higher education. Although we welcome that, a small independent nation of approximately 5 million people aspires to 60 or 65 per cent and more. I refer to Switzerland. [MEMBERS: "Finland!"]  I am sorry—I mean Finland. The Finnish education minister set us an example when he told a higher education and the Scottish Parliament conference that he wants to provide higher education for 60 to 65 per cent of the relevant age group. He said that tuition fees were considered, but rejected; they play no part in delivering the Finnish minister's ambition. A report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development on the situation in  Finland states: "The student aid system has been instrumental to the extension of educational opportunities . . . changes have been introduced with the purposes of increasing security, reducing indebtedness and easing the strain on the students who are worst off". The Executive should learn from Finland. We must not discourage ambition for the future with a financial penalty.

No thanks. We cannot attract more people into education if every degree certificate is accompanied by a notice of demand for payment. This matter affects not only Scots who wish to study, but those from outwith Scotland—near and far—who wish to study here. Let me make it clear: we welcome students from south of the border or from abroad. They add to the cosmopolitan vibrancy of our society and contribute financially to a key sector of our economy. But what do we find? In Labour's first year in office, the number of applications from European Union students to study in Scottish universities fell by 18 per cent. In its second year, the figure fell by a further 10 per cent. It is the same story outwith the EU. The number of non-EU applications to Scottish universities fell by 6 per cent between 1997 and 1998, and by a further 16 per cent the following year. The Labour party—with the acquiescence of its Liberal Democrat lapdogs—is trying to cloak the retention of tuition fees with the dispensation of a modicum of largesse to the student population. Notwithstanding the time and effort of Andrew Cubie, who has been rightly recognised with an honour for his endeavours, Labour has reneged and ratted on his recommendations. While the SNP has consistently argued for Cubie plus, this bill delivers Cubie minus. The audience of students within and without this chamber will not be fooled by Labour's rhetoric or the clapometer of the eunuch partner in the one-party coalition; neither will it lightly forgive new Labour or agricultural Labour for the sins of its political fathers. A tuition fee is a tuition fee, whether paid at the beginning or the end. If the coalition rams through this bill, it hammers another nail in its political coffin. We will not forget—and students will not forgive.

The Scottish National Party broadly welcomes the minister's statement, but I seek clarification on matters from the perspective not so much of the individual as of the national interest. We face serious skills and labour shortages in tourism and electronics, for example. In engineering, 100 years after we were a world leader, we also have a serious deficiency in skills and labour. Will the minister ensure, for our national interest, that the  role and remit of careers Scotland will not simply be to find a job for the individual, but actively to identify and encourage youngsters and others to enter into those key, core sectors of our national economy? Although we cannot force them into employment, the new service must be proactive. Will the minister ensure that it is proactive in the years to come in identifying the areas in which we have those key, core shortages?

Will the minister give way?

The SNP appreciates the gravity and urgency of the situation. We are discussing vital services. We have never agreed with the use of the term "lifeline services". It appears to us that—irrespective of someone's geographic peripherality in Scotland—they are entitled to various rights as a citizen, including taking part in the social and economic fabric of society, which means that transport should be affordable and accessible. That is everybody's right and it is Parliament's duty to the people of Scotland to ensure that we achieve that. We have had a good debate and several important points have been made, but I would like clarification from the minister on two further points of detail. I turn members' attention to schedule 2 of the agreements that are before Parliament. Clause 1.1(b) talks about an appropriate lessee as an organisation that "is sufficiently financially robust". Would the minister tell us whether NorthLink is viewed as being "sufficiently financially robust"? If  not, who is to be the guarantor of the contract? Will it be the Royal Bank of Scotland? If—because NorthLink is insufficiently financially robust—the guarantor is to be the Royal Bank of Scotland, can the minister assure members that that is proper and correct? The second matter relates to page 9 of schedule 1 of the agreement between the ministers and NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries Ltd, which refers to "Return on Capital". That is the grant that is payable, which may be "retrospectively increased" in various circumstances. Is it the case that the return on capital was not mentioned in the invitation-to-tender documents? If so, is not that a fundamental change in circumstances that might have resulted in other bidders, such as Serco-Denholm or P&O Scottish Ferries, putting in different proposals and financial bids, had they known that there could be a variation in the return on capital? Is the minister satisfied that full information was made available to all those who were interested in tendering? Did the information indicate that there was the possibility of variation and, indeed, an increase in the return on capital, with an increased grant, if the capital return was not met? If not, might we in due course face litigation from companies that were interested in tendering, but which are now disappointed and disaffected? That is a worry, because we wish the ferry service not only to be up and running, but to provide an improved service.

I begin with two short questions. Is there a problem? Yes, there is. Is this the solution? No, it is not. That is  the position of the Scottish National Party. Many things have been said that I and the SNP would agree with and, notwithstanding Johann Lamont's intemperate tone, I accept that there is a problem. The Minister for Parliament has not been trying to railroad matters; he has genuinely gone out of his way to reach a compromise. The problem is that this is not the right solution. It is being viewed as a quick fix and will create problems that will have to be addressed further down the line. Other SNP members have commented on why we believe that the new system does not fit. We certainly believe that the idea of having two justice committees is not right, as that would cause a major problem. Having two justice committees might create a precedent for dealing with committees that have an overload of work in future. For example, if there were a problem in health, would we create two health committees? If there were a problem in social justice, would two committees be created to deal with that? There is a danger of setting a precedent here.

I do not believe that setting a precedent for having two Justice and Home Affairs Committees or two Health and Community Care Committees would be a good or sensible way to go. The real question is, where do we go from here? I was not at the meeting to which Mike Watson referred, but I am advised that the position was that all committees would have seven members. There has been a fundamental change—what was before the conveners group five weeks ago is not what is before the chamber today. It is not as if the SNP is reneging on its word. There is a genuine acceptance that there is a problem. What is the solution? I welcome what the Minister for Parliament said at the outset about how the committees came into existence. They did not come about simply because we voted them into existence, although we did so when we established their powers, but because the consultative steering group and others examined, analysed and discussed the issues and spoke to the people of Scotland—not only the great and the good but also the ordinary man and woman on the street—to decide what we required the committees to do. I believe that we need to follow that route now, as Lloyd Quinan and others mentioned.  We have reached a point at which there is no agreement and further discussion is useless. I can understand why the motion is before us today, but I do not believe that forcing this through Parliament is the best solution. We should do what we would do if we were another type of organisation. If the Scottish Parliament were a company with a similar problem, consultants would be instructed to investigate the matter and decide whether each committee could justify its existence, whether its work load was adequate, whether its remit was appropriate and whether it was delivering what it was created to deliver. A voluntary sector organisation would do the same thing, although it might not pay the same price for the same consultants. We should get an external person to examine the committees. In 2003, the members in this chamber will be put to the test when they go back to the electorate. Political groups will be put to the test in the same way. I fundamentally disagree with the Minister for Parliament's suggestion that the members are best placed to decide the role, remit and size of the committees. I do not think so. The public, the people whom we are elected to serve, are best placed to do so. That is why I think that we should remit the matter to the CSG or some other organisation that is capable of reviewing and scrutinising the system before giving it back to us for us to implement.

): Marilyn Livingstone said that we must look forward, not back. Although that has been the general ethos of this debate, I will highlight one caveat: those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it. We must look back if we wish to ensure that next year's exam results situation does not mirror this year's chaos. We have heard from two ministers this morning. We heard from the First Minister in the earlier debate. I welcome his further commitment to ensure that the crisis will not be repeated in 2001, notwithstanding the comments that were made by Professor Ward, which Annabel Goldie touched on. I trust that the resources will match the rhetoric, as Professor Ward clearly highlights a problem. Additional resources must be provided. As Mike Russell said, we must not simply wish that to happen. We also heard from the new Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, Jack McConnell. Where criticism is due, it is appropriate that criticism should be given; similarly, where credit is due, credit should be given. The Scottish National Party welcomes the outline of actions that have been taken to date, which was given by the minister, and the additional comments that he made today. We broadly welcome those actions and look forward to seeing the improvements that will be made as a result of them. It has been said that the reputation of Scottish education has been tarnished. That is true. It has also been suggested—although I cannot remember by whom—that, to some extent, we have been resting on our laurels. That is also true. For too long, we have dined out on our reputation. Much credit is due to the Scottish education system, the structure and ethos of which are correct. The broadly based education that it provides is to be welcomed and is superior to that which is provided elsewhere, including south of the border. However, as is the case with our transport infrastructure, the education system is creaking and groaning. It has been under-resourced and we have failed to address that fact. The situation must be addressed now. Education in Scotland is no longer simply a matter of educating our youngsters: it is part of one of the new economic sectors for Scotland in the 21 st century. We ignore that sector at our peril  if we fail to educate our youngsters for the 21 st century economy or fail to recognise it as a core sector of our economy. I reiterate what has been said by other members. I pay tribute to the members of both committees, the clerks and those who gave evidence and provided information. The committees' inquiries have contrasted with what takes place at Westminster and with the actions of members of the Executive and their predecessors in the Scottish Office. The Scottish Parliament's committees were clearly focused and worked with speed and urgency. They, and all who took part in the inquiries, deserve credit. Their actions contrast with the dilatoriness and dithering of the Executive, when alarm bells were ringing, and with previous actions of the Scottish Office. Recommendation 29 of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report talks about "a moratorium on the introduction of further phases of Higher Still until successful delivery of the 2001 package". It is clear that the problem was not only with the SQA. An attempt was made to fit an educational square peg into an educational round hole, by trying to implement higher still when teachers were saying that there was a problem and that it could not be done at that pace. That advice was ignored, reflecting an ethos that was perpetuated by Helen Liddell and encouraged by Tory Administrations, which held that the Executive or the Government knows best, not the teachers. We denigrate teachers and other public servants at our peril. We can never take Scotland back to the days when the dominie knew best and had a special place in the ethos and structure of our society, but we can certainly treat our teachers better. We should respect them and listen to what they say.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Ironically, the good that we can draw from all this is the fact that the Scottish Parliament is taking responsibility. I have been asked at meetings to name the most successful thing that the Scottish Parliament has done. I say that it has been to address this crisis. Nobody has suggested that we should return to direct rule. No member of any political party has said that we should hand over the Scottish education system to David Blunkett. When there is an error, whoever it is made by, it is the duty of this Parliament to address it. We must address the problems in our society and rectify them. Our education is heading in the right direction. If the Transport and the Environment Committee took over the railway network, and if  we empowered the Minister for Transport to look after the railways, we might expect a better transport system in future, just as we expect a better education system.

The nationalist party supports the framework document. I have no difficulty in saying that, although I was rather disappointed with the tone that the minister adopted. Not only do we support the Executive motion, but we are fully supportive of the Tories' amendment. We had hoped that the minister would find it possible to accept our amendment, especially in the light of an article by the First Minister in The Herald today. He says: "Above all, there are two imperatives that are particularly key to Scotland's success in the global economy . . . One of these is no surprise: education." He then states that the second priority is delivery of "the e-commerce ethos".

If we want to prioritise those areas, we must invest and make the resources available, but that is a judgment to be made once the budgets are out. Like the First Minister, we are saying that those are the two key matters. At the start of the new millennium and with a new Scottish Parliament, it is the duty of all members to contribute to and work towards a comprehensive economic development strategy, not just for one term of government, but for a generation. In the latter part of the 20 th century, the United Kingdom laboured under short-termism and stop-startism. Governments came and went and, even within Governments, ideas and directions were invoked and dispensed with. That is not an argument against change or innovation, but a call for stability and balance. At the start of the new century, and with the commencement of our new Parliament, now is the time to reject the errors of the old ways. We have the opportunity to learn from nations that practised a different method and reaped a better harvest, whether Scandinavia in the 1960s or Ireland in the 1980s and 1990s. There is a better way. Governments will come and go in Scotland, but the fall of each Government should not mean the upheaval of a major reversal of policy or a massive change in direction. It is the democratic right of any Government to decide its priorities, but it is also the responsibility of any Government to take cognisance of the national interest. Within the framework of the new Scottish Parliament, we have an opportunity to replicate the social and economic growth of Scandinavia and Ireland, which was based on parliamentary consensus on the national interest and on the general direction that the nation should take. Governments will still  decide their priorities, but the ship will be steered with a steady hand on the tiller and on a steady course of economic stability. That is not just desirable, but essential. What is the role of Government and what is the role of the strategy? The role of Government is to provide the framework and the facilities to allow individuals and businesses, indigenous or otherwise, to grow and expand in Scotland; to educate its people to ensure that the work force is available; to provide resources for research and development that can add value to and enhance commerce and industry; to provide the framework and infrastructure to allow our enterprises to compete; to provide assistance—financial or other—to add value to what business does; and, vitally, to sell Scotland abroad in every shape and form, in all economic areas and in all appropriate markets. What needs to be done? First, we must recognise that Scotland needs to run to catch up. We lag behind and are in danger of falling further behind. No one in this brave new world owes Scotland a living. If we are to prevent an ever-increasing number of people from receiving a giro of ever-diminishing value, we must build the base on which to progress. We have intimated our support for a strategy and a philosophy. Now it is time to turn to the practical requirements—education and infrastructure. That is not a mantra; it is an absolute necessity. We must invest in those areas to compete. They are the areas that we must prioritise and in which we must deliver. I will spend some time on each of them. Infrastructure falls into two parts: transport and telecommunications. Our transport network, whatever mode, is woefully inadequate. I do not want to use this debate for political point scoring. Accordingly, I will say merely that, given our geographic peripherality, ease of communication is necessary for trade and commerce. We are distant from our markets and we have impediments inflicted on us, such as the high value of the pound and high fuel costs. We cannot, therefore, allow additional impediments through inferior infrastructure. We are paying the price of a generation of under-investment by British Governments, whatever their political hue. In Scotland, we must prioritise transport infrastructure to wipe out the legacy left by the British and to create a future for the Scottish economy. We must allow our businesses to reach their markets easily, speedily and cheaply. Telecommunications is the new infrastructure and it matters in the 21 st century. It is as important as a completed A9, a constructed M74 or a railway that runs. However, on bandwidth and internet connectors, we are sadly lacking.

We cannot expect the private sector to do it all. British Telecom has made that quite clear. The Government at Westminster has received a bounty of approximately £22 billion from third-generation telecommunications licences. Should not that money at least in part be hypothecated to ensure that everybody in Scotland has access to something that should be liberated? The funds are there. We can use the money to develop our infrastructure or we can spend it. The SNP believes that it should be invested. BT expects that 66 per cent of Scotland's population will have access to asymmetric digital subscriber lines by 2002, yet the UK figure is 75 per cent. We must aspire to attain and go beyond the UK average. The tragedy is that rural Scotland, which should benefit the most, will receive the least. Far from being liberated by a new form of communication, people in rural Scotland will once again be imprisoned by their isolation. That must change. Ireland and Finland have stolen a march on us. We must invest and prioritise to catch up and compete. Investment in education—in schools and throughout people's lives—must be a priority. At present, too many children leave school inadequately educated and inadequately skilled for the workplace. Ministers have denigrated the success of the Republic of Ireland; that is not only insulting but fallacious. It should be noted that the economic success of the Republic of Ireland was built on a base not of European handouts but of investment in education. A generation ago, the Irish recognised that their greatest resource was their people. They invested in them and now they call to their diaspora to return home. We must do likewise. We face a skills shortage in numerous sectors while we have substantial unemployment in far too many areas. We need to skill up Scotland. We need to train the hands that are idle to do the work that we need them to do. We cannot live in hope of a major factory being fabricated in Scotland—we face too much competition from the southern hemisphere and eastern Europe. We must skill up our people and the jobs will follow from within and without. There must be a strategy, a philosophy and action. We must leave behind the British disease that afflicted us in the 20 th century. We must look to small nations that blossomed while Scotland withered. Ireland has often been mentioned in that context, and we can learn from other nations as well. Scotland has a population akin to Finland's.  Both countries are geographically isolated but, a generation ago, the Finnish people agreed a consensus, created a strategy and invested in education and infrastructure. They did not have the benefit of North sea oil off their shores, but they have delivered economic prosperity balanced by social responsibility. If we do likewise, we can create a small nation that is economically wealthy and socially just. That is the framework that we must follow. The Executive has its chance to prioritise and deliver. The jury is out. I move amendment S1M-1405.2, to leave out "and that" and insert: "and to that end insists that further investment is made in education and in the transport and electronic communications infrastructure to ensure that the aspirations of the framework document can be achieved; agrees that with such investment.".

Can the minister tell us why, since Labour came to power, student awards have fallen from 112,595 to 106,215—a drop of 5 or 6 per cent? Despite the minister's rhetoric, the fact of the matter is that the number of students in receipt of awards is down.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the anticipated costs are for the recruitment of a new chief executive to the Scottish Tourist Board. (S1O-2576)

Given that we have already spent £100,000 on the PricewaterhouseCoopers report, should we not be seeking to stop funding bureaucracy and to start spending on marketing Scotland abroad? Last year, only £1.8 million was spent by the STB's marketing department in our main markets of the USA, Germany and France. What figure will the minister recommend should be spent this year, given the collapse that is taking place in the tourism industry at present?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

This week, members of the SNP and of the minister's party met members of the Peoples Fuel Lobby. Were they a mob? If not, why were those same people, many of whom demonstrated five weeks ago, called a mob by the minister at that time? Will he now withdraw that scandalous remark?

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has to assist the road haulage industry. (S1O-2349)

Given that the average age of a heavy goods vehicle driver in Scotland is 52 and that driver training has significant costs of more than £900, what measures are being taken and what financial resources are being allocated by the Executive to ensure that more drivers are trained and that Scottish drivers will be in the cabs of Scottish trucks?

Here we go again. Only a few weeks have passed and yet again we are having a fuel debate. That should be no great surprise. It is a major issue, after all. However, it is an issue on which the UK Government takes no action and in which the Executive takes no interest, as is shown by the absence of ministers from the chamber today. We are left with an amendment in the name of the voice of agricultural labour and a summing-up by the voice of Brian Wilson. In the previous debate on this subject, we were told tales of a workers' Government faced down by a bosses' strike. If the Executive was to be believed, hauliers and farmers overtly and covertly colluded and connived to undermine the democratic fabric of our nation. We heard claims ranging from a Minister for Justice talking about mob rule to a Labour member raising the spectre of Allende. I trust that that will not be repeated today. It was repugnant then and it remains so now. The actions of the peaceful protesters have  been vindicated by a poll in The Herald . The actions were supported by 70 per cent of Liberal Democrat voters and 62 per cent of Labour voters. It may have been a bosses' strike—I do not think so—but it was a popular protest. Did the Government listen? It did not. Following the abuse and invective, we were faced with intransigence and arrogance. The Prime Minister acknowledged that there was a genuine and sincerely held grievance, but he refused to act. He said: "I am listening - but I was also elected to lead." There is merit in strong government. We cannot have leadership by whim and fancy. However, this matter is no mere whim of a small section of the population or a token fancy of a specific sector of our economy. It is a popular grievance on an area of legitimate social and economic concern. Governments in other countries have listened and acted; ours has sought to cloak itself in the language and imagery of Thatcherism. What has happened since the previous debate? Has there been a cut? Has aid been given to fuel-dependent industries? Has there been an acknowledgement that we are out of kilter with not just the rest of Europe but the rest of the developed world? Has the absurdity of the fact that the largest oil producer in the European Union has the most expensive fuel in the developed world been acknowledged? No. All we have seen is preparation for future demonstrations and blockades. Jack Straw, rather than addressing the underlying malaise, is tooling up for confrontation. The Government is seeking to punish those who protested. Legislation is being introduced to deal with the situation, à la Thatcherism. If they cannot be persuaded, they must be punished—that seems to be the Government's attitude. The Government is seeking to punish those whom they think have participated by default. In the Government's view, the guilty parties in that respect are the oil companies. Hence, a windfall tax is mooted. Again, if they cannot be persuaded, they must be punished. There is a need for investment in North sea development, and taxation has a role to play in encouraging and promoting that. However, the North sea oil industry in Scotland does not require punitive taxation that has been imposed by a Government in a fit of pique. What is the underlying situation? The problem has not gone away. The price of fuel gets higher, the social costs increase and whole sectors of the economy weaken. The tourism figures for outwith Edinburgh and Glasgow are down and are getting lower. Because of high fuel costs and the high pound, the Highlands and Islands are now a high-cost holiday destination. Lib-Lab policy is pricing  tourists out of Scotland, and the tourism industry may take years to recover. The haulage industry continues to struggle and the number of continental drivers continues to rise. This has been a matter not of taking freight from road to rail, but of taking jobs from Scotland and giving them to European competitors. The difficulties faced by a generation of fishermen continue to multiply. Despite having rebated fuel, they still require to compete with trawlers from France, Spain and elsewhere. Other nations are providing packages of support, whereas Labour's high fuel costs are an albatross around the necks of our fishermen. According to David Blunkett, farmers are subsidy junkies. Perhaps George Lyon will tell us whether he agrees with that. Doubtless the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic will advise us whether, as a representative for the Western Isles, he feels that farmers are subsidy junkies. He can support or repudiate that scurrilous remark. The costs are still high, but the banks continue to hound and hover above many a farm. Where has the real windfall gone? The prime recipients of the largesse that has flowed from the rising tide of oil prices are the Chancellor of the Exchequer and his Treasury war chest. On 1 February 1999, our illustrious First Minister sagely predicted that oil prices were likely to stay at around $10 to $12 a barrel for the foreseeable future. What happened? The price rocketed to more than $30 a barrel. As a result, the Treasury war chest burgeoned. On monthly oil price averages and National Audit Office estimates, the Treasury has received an additional £5.2 billion since the First Minister's bold prediction. The windfall does not stop there, however. The Prime Minister has been pleading poverty on the additional VAT that goes to the Treasury as a result of increasing petrol prices. At the height of the crisis, he told us that the additional receipts would not be enough to fund a reduction of a fraction of a penny in the price of fuel. His Government thinks differently, however. In a parliamentary answer, we were told that every additional penny on the pump price raised £50 million. Since the First Minister's words of wisdom last year, the price of petrol is up by more than 10p and the Treasury's VAT receipts will be up by more than £500 million. In that is the windfall and in that the solution. The Government in Westminster, which has the relevant powers reserved to it, has the available resources to act—the money is there. There need be no cuts in other budgets and there are no excuses left. Our motion accepts that this Parliament does not—at present—have power over fuel duty, but that does not mean that the Executive or other  elected members can absent themselves or abdicate responsibility on an issue that is so fundamental to our people, economy and country. Individuals have demonstrated and opinion polls have disclosed; it is now for this Parliament to articulate the nation's call for a cut in fuel duty. It is absurd that we have an Administration that takes perverse pride in the outrageous price of fuel. It is as if it has said, "We've put it up, so we'll put it higher; they've suffered, so they can continue suffering; we've started, so we'll finish." But it is we who are being finished off. That is why the most important point is that the cost of fuel must be cut. The key sectors of our economy must be saved. As has been said, some fuel-dependent industries are hanging on by their fingernails. A package of measures must be considered and must be implemented. Those measures will vary, depending on the industry concerned and on the outcome of discussions between representatives of those economic sectors and the elected representatives of the people. On road haulage, I wrote to the Minister for Transport and the Environment, asking her to consider an essential user rebate. She said that that fell under a reserved power. In committee yesterday, however, she indicated that she was considering extending the fuel duty rebate to community buses and other worthy schemes that we have been promoting for more than a year. What is the logic that allows her to extend the fuel duty rebate to buses but not to lorries? Why is the minister competent to give a rebate to the bus industry but incompetent to give a rebate to the road haulage industry? Similarly, fishing and farming need specific packages. That has been done in France and Spain, so why not here? The motion is about standing up for Scotland, about speaking out for Scotland and about representing our nation on an issue that is fundamental to our citizens, our industries and our economy. The power to vary the rate of fuel tax is of course reserved, but that does not mean that the Executive should have no view or say or that it should absent itself from the debate and from responsibility. Are Executive ministers not responsible for the economy? There is a Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. Do they not care about fishing and farming? There is a Minister for Rural Affairs. Do they not care about road haulage? There is a Minister for Transport and the Environment. Discontent over fuel prices has been growing, but when the going gets tough, the Executive goes. It is still open to the Parliament to discharge its duty to represent and look after the interests of the people of Scotland. Even if the Executive goes AWOL, members can still remain attentive. Even if the political elite in Labour does not have the  courage of the people's convictions, the Parliament can and must act. A clear message must resonate from this chamber in support of our people, our industries and our national interest. If there is not unanimous support for the motion it will be clear—and SNP members will make it quite clear—that Labour does not listen, Labour does not care and Labour is the problem. Get the price of fuel down or get them out. Roll on Falkirk West. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges that Scotland is the largest oil producer in the European Union yet has the highest fuel prices in the developed world; notes that the Scottish economy as a whole and fuel dependent industries in particular are paying a heavy price as a result of high fuel prices; recognises that both individuals and entire geographic areas, in particular rural and island Scotland, are suffering; further recognises that the root cause of high fuel prices is taxation; notes that as a result of the recent increases in world oil prices Her Majesty's Government will receive a revenue windfall in excess of £4.4 billion, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to hold a summit of interested parties to address the fuel situation, introduce a package of measures to address the needs of fuel dependent industries, and make urgent representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer requesting him to make an immediate cut in fuel duty and give a commitment to work towards the European average.

The Scottish National Party agrees with much of what David Davidson said. It is clear that high fuel costs and the high pound are fundamental to the problem. As the Conservatives borrowed our brief, we will borrow their phrase: the problem is Labour's double tax whammy. Until those issues are addressed, we will continue to face incredible problems. Yesterday, and when I was in the Highlands earlier this year, I met some Scandinavians, which took me back to the time when, many years ago as a student, I travelled by inter-rail to Scandinavia. The only people who could afford to go to Scandinavia during the 1970s were either the very rich or backpackers who were prepared to live rough. In the north of Scotland, we are losing the middle market; the only people who tour northern Scotland now are either backpackers, who are prepared to live off the land—as I did when I went to Scandinavia in the 1970s—or those who are affluent and can afford to pay the prices.

No. I do not have time. We are pricing out of the market people who used to come from Manchester, Liverpool and elsewhere for the fresh air and the break away  from the smog and the big city. We must address that problem. In responding to those issues, the minister talked about golf. If he had read the SNP brief, he would have noticed the reference to the ITB in Berlin. I spoke to a travel agent who visited that show, who said that the only country that advertised golf was Qatar. Scotland, which was represented at the British Tourist Authority's stall by a man in a kilt, did not advertise golf. The stall did not present an objective perspective of the services that are available in Scotland. The minister talked a good game about what airports are doing. Not that long ago, I asked what the Government proposed to do about the loss of the air link between Edinburgh and Vienna. Austria is a rich country and flights from Vienna should be coming directly to Scotland, bringing high-yield, high-spend tourists. The minister replied that that is a problem for the industry. It is not; it is for our Government to target how we bring people into this country. We want to bring Austrian tourists in directly.

I do not have time to take interventions. If Austrian tourists have to fly to Manchester or London, they cannot come to Scotland for a weekend. We must be able to bring them in directly. Whatever Mr Lyon may say, I am not bound by the strategy document, which states: "Scotland is an important and attractive brand for the BTA and it represents Scotland in 27 overseas offices, including all of Scotland's most important overseas markets." No wonder we do not get a good deal, with tourists going to competitor airports and competitor locations south of the border. We need to market Scotland ourselves and bring people into Scottish airports, not to Manchester, Newcastle or London. As for LPG, all I can say is that I think the minister must be vying with Allan Wilson to be the voice of Brian Wilson in this chamber. I would rather deal with the organ grinder than with one of the monkeys. The suggestion that LPG is a solution for the north of Scotland is lamentable. Are Italian tourists queuing up in their LPG motors now that there are apparently a few outlets in the north of Scotland? Where are they to fill up on the M6 or the M74? That pathetic excuse might well be offered by Brian Wilson, but his two comrades in this Parliament should know better and do better.

Can Kate MacLean tell me what the Executive is doing to ensure that every child will leave primary school keyboard literate? How much is the Executive spending on that? When will those policies be delivered?

Will the member give way?

Labour is spending more money on bailing out the millennium dome than Allan Wilson is proud of spending on this strategy. It is spending £40 million on bailing out the dome, but  £25 million on something that the member has described as fundamental. Does he think that that is right?

We have heard the future and it is mind-blowing—or perhaps mind-boggling. I have always thought that what, where, when and how were fairly basic matters when putting forward a strategy. When I was asked yesterday to speak in the creative economy debate, I wondered what the phrase "creative economy" meant. I consulted the Oxford English Dictionary , which defines "creative" as "able to create . . . inventive, imaginative, showing imagination as well as routine skill" and "economy" as the administration or condition of the concerns and resources of the community. That means that "creative economy" can be defined as the inventive, imaginative administration of the concerns and resources of the community. That sounds good. But what is the subtext of the motion when its terms are expanded and boiled down? The motion talks about "£25 million development strategy to support . . . and to ensure conditions in which creative industries will continue to flourish rapidly in growing world markets". So we are talking about £25 million and a wish list. Is that right, adequate or sufficient? For example, page 7 of the document talks about incubation facilities. However, the minister is not able to tell us about these facilities, where they will be located or how much they will be given. Although we support the motion as such and accept the benefits of creating a creative headline, the document and the motion do not address any needs. First, £25 million is a drop in the ocean. World markets have been mentioned, but £25 million will not allow anyone to compete in the football transfer market, never mind in the global economy. We have to run to catch up with the competition; for example, we are falling behind the US and south-east Asia. We have much hard work  to do and cannot simply wish the situation better. We need mechanisms and structures to improve that. For a start, we need a philosophy and theory about what we are trying to achieve, not simply a wish list. We require some definition of what we are trying to do, perhaps by providing financial and structural assistance to ensure maximum benefit for the stimulation and support of these industries, to allow us to compete in a global economy. Furthermore, we require a structure to facilitate improvements from top to bottom and to maximise benefit. How do we improve basic keyboard skills at the very bottom? How do we expand and improve the opportunity to enhance information technology and the creative skills base? How do we nurture and retain our current talent, which, in some instances, is moving? None of those issues is being addressed. Instead of £25 million, what about a steady stream and a pool that industries can drink from rather than letting them die of thirst?

We would probably take some money from the oil revenue that the Labour Government is currently salting into tax cuts. I do not have the books here, but the fact of the matter is that £25 million will not address the situation. Furthermore, I should tell the minister that other small nations do far better than the big nation that he is so proud of. I have two anecdotes about the situation as it is and the situation as it can be. My brother went to stay in the state of Texas, where every child is keyboard literate by the time they leave junior school for high school. How does that contrast with the position in Scotland? Sixty-five per cent of children in primary 7 achieve level D for reading. Level D is the curriculum guideline on which attainment in literacy is measured. Therefore, 35 per cent of children do not achieve that level of literacy, and only 43.7 per cent achieve level D in writing. Texans send keyboard-literate kids to high school, but in Scotland we send too many illiterate kids to high school. We should be ashamed of that. We have a skills shortage, not just at the top but at the bottom. If we want to address that issue, not just in manufacturing and on production lines, we must give kids the opportunity to gain keyboard skills, which will allow them to compete. I have been advised by the electronics industry that it also has problems, as simply not enough people who are computer and technology literate come through the education system. Has the Executive addressed that issue? I am told that the school system has been slow  to keep up with developing trends. At a recent Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee meeting, a witness complained that children were being taught redundant computer languages. I support the teaching of Latin, given the benefit that, as a lawyer, I received from that language, but, in the 21 st century, it may be a waste of scarce resources to teach a redundant computer language when the technology has moved on. I am also told that some teaching bodies have written to the minister to complain about the lack of technology subjects in the curriculum and about the fact that those subjects are the first victims when budgets are cut. The Executive is not addressing any of those issues. What about the situation as it could be?

Yes.

I will pay tribute where it is due, but the points that I made were given to me by the electronics industry in Scotland. I asked the industry what it thought the problems were and the brief that I received from the industry was that it perceives the problems to be a lack of skills in the education sector. It is not enough to examine the good points and wish away the fundamental structural problems. The view that I am articulating is not built on my personal prejudice or invective, nor is it based on the policy of the Scottish National Party. It is based on the policy position of those in the electronics industry who say to me, "This is the problem that we have."

Those issues go hand in hand and the e-mail that I received was courteous enough to mention that fact. I agree with Annabel Goldie's point, which I take on board, that the issues are complementary. However, people say: "Small countries cannot compete. This is a big world with big markets, and you need to be in the big league." Years ago, we used to pride ourselves in Scotland when the term "Clyde-built" meant quality and strength. In the 20 th century, "Clyde-built" was a world term—one could use it abroad and people knew what was meant. I have a Nokia mobile phone, but Nokia is not only a Finnish company—it is a small village in Finland near the location where the phones are manufactured. Nokia actually exists. We have moved on from the terminology of the 20 th century. Apart from whisky, what product do we manufacture in this nation of 5 million people that is a world brand term in the 21 st century? Nokia is one of the top five world brand terms, along with Coca-Cola and others. People say, "Well, you're too small. You couldnae do it," but how can Finland manufacture a world brand product given that it is a country of 5 million people that is geographically distant from its markets? Perhaps the Finns won a world lottery—except that a world lottery does not exist. Perhaps they discovered oil. Perhaps that is what transformed Finland, and perhaps that is why the Finnish people, in the 21 st century, have a global brand name that they can be proud of, while our shipyard industry has withered on the vine and disappeared into the Clyde. Maybe, just maybe, there are hundreds of thousands, or millions of pounds-worth—billions of pounds-worth in the future—of oil in the Gulf of Finland for the Finnish people to access. The fact is that the Finns did it by driving forward, by targeting, by resourcing and by funding. They did it by being able, when they were producing documents and strategies, to answer questions about how they would do it, where they would do it, when they would do it and how much it would cost them. It was not done using a glossy document that keeps a printer and a graphic designer in their jobs. What should we have? We must recognise that we need a philosophy in order to create a structure, to provide funding and resourcing. We need improvement at school level, an integration  in higher education, the provision of support for centres of excellence, the recruitment of new talent and skills and the retention of existing talent and skills. We are losing businessmen and businesswomen and companies to Ireland because they are being headhunted or taken away. We do not accept the Tories' amendment. We do not accept it and we will vote against it, because we view it as simplistic. Of course red tape needs to be cut down, but regulation has its place. We believe that, in any society, it is not just a question of the creation of a vibrant economy, but of how the weakest are looked after. We worry that when the Tories press for the ending of red tape, they put at risk the lives of individuals in an attack on health and safety matters, which are fundamental to a democratic and decent society. We also believe that those matters are complementary and necessary; we do not believe that cutting taxes is simply a good thing on its own. In the end, we have to address matters without moving towards a society with a Dutch auction—as will happen down in Westminster—between Portillo and Brown. We are voting against the amendment because we do not seek a society in which we know the price of everything and the value of nothing. We will support the motion, as it at least acknowledges that there is a problem but that there are also opportunities, although they do not go as far or come as fast as we would like. The document is not about a creative economy, but it is a piece of creative writing. In considering it and marking it, we should say, "Could and should do better," with more fact and less fiction, more reality and less rhetoric. It does not need to be this way; it can and should be different. I say to Ms McNeill that other small nations such as Finland have shown the way. Fundamentally, that is where the lesson for this nation lies.

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for his congratulations. The minister referred to glossy documents. Page 7 of the Scottish Enterprise document on the creative economy refers to a dynamic business environment, which will be "achieved by the creation of links within the sector . . . Incubation facilities for the development of new ideas and the transfer of ideas across the sector". What are they, where will they be located, when will we get them and how much will it cost?

I was grateful that the First Minister mentioned guidelines and guidance in his preliminary statement and in his response to Alex Salmond's question. However, it is all very well saying that the fuel will go to priority users and that success depends on good will and tolerance, but success also depends on clear and precise guidelines. A colleague has advised me of an incident last night in the west of Scotland in which a manageress, whose petrol station was queued out, with three police officers controlling the traffic jam, phoned BP for guidance and was told to take the police's advice. When she spoke to the police, she was told that they were there to assist the manageress in enforcing her decisions, not to make the decisions. What are the guidelines? Who are the priority and essential users? I ask the First Minister to spell out those points so that others—not just that manageress—will not be left having to make decisions that might present difficulties and have consequences for which they cannot be expected to take responsibility.

rose—

Will the minister take an intervention?

Does Andy Kerr accept that places such as Copenhagen and Helsinki have state-of-the-art public transport networks? Why is it that Finland, which has no oil—never mind its neighbour Norway, which has oil—can provide a state-of-the-art public transport network but we have not delivered that? We will not be able to do  it through this bill.

I will also comment on the continuing fuel dispute. The Minister for Transport and the Environment mentioned that she spoke yesterday to Phil Flanders. I am glad that she did so. I hope she realised that, at the time that she spoke to him—about the same time that I spoke to him—he was doing his best to bring matters to a sensible and safe conclusion for all. He was doing his best to ensure that matters at Grangemouth were dealt with carefully and safely for those who were involved and for those who were suffering from fuel shortages. It was not supportive of Mr Flanders—or of the situation at Grangemouth—for the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice to use inflammatory language such as "mob rule". It would have been better if Sarah Boyack had put on the record yesterday the inside knowledge that she gained from speaking to Phil Flanders. I spoke to Phil Flanders this morning—he made it clear that he has delivered sensible and constructive action by the Road Haulage Association. The protesters have made their point and have garnered public support. The people know that the fault lies not with the hauliers, the farmers or the fishermen, but with the taxation policy of the Labour Government in Westminster, and they know that the problem will not go away. I hope that Ms Boyack and her colleagues will speak again to Mr Flanders. I hope that they will consult, discuss and listen and ultimately, as is happening throughout the rest of Europe, act to resolve the dispute. Two points that have arisen from the dispute deserve some comment. First, we begin to realise that society is much more pleasant when traffic is lighter and there is less congestion. When I drove to Tayport yesterday, there were no tailbacks on the Forth bridge and the roads were a pleasure to drive on. The irony is that that was not achieved as a result of any deliberate attempt by the Government to foster a better climate. The Government had certainly not addressed the affordability or accessibility of an improved transport system. We would have a better society if we could reduce not car ownership, but car usage. We all know that in Germany car ownership is higher per head of population than it is in Scotland, but car usage is lower there. That is because in Germany there are affordable and accessible state-of-the-art public transport systems, which people use to go to work. The second point that the dispute has brought home to us is the importance of transport to our economy and society. A crisis arose in a few days because of the absence of fuel. As well as fuel,  the transport infrastructure—road, rail, maritime and air links—is important. We have to recognise that for generations we have underfunded and underprioritised the transport infrastructure. We must now get it right. The SNP's position on the bill is more sorrowful than angry. We believe that it represents a missed opportunity. We are prepared to consider what the minister has said and we are aware that there is cross-party support for the bill, with the exception of Murray Tosh's withdrawal of Conservative support for the part of the bill that deals with workplace charging. We are giving the minister the chance to go away, think it out, and get it right. Why is this a missed opportunity? This is the first transport bill in the 21 st century, in the first Scottish Parliament for 300 years. It is an opportunity to create a framework with a vision, on which we could build over a generation—over several Parliaments. The minister veered in that direction when, in "Making it work together" in the summer of 1999, she said: "We will build an integrated transport system, which meets our economic and social needs but does not threaten the health of our environment. This requires . . . the enhancement of all types of public transport." That is a big vision and big talk for a big issue. Why, then, is the bill a missed opportunity? This is our Parliament and our country and it is up to us to act—those who run their own country must take responsibility for inaction, for the wrongs that are done and for the malaise that creeps in. We have to sort it out. However, the bill does not address the problems. There is the problem of the stop-startism of previous Administrations: rail bad, road good; rail good, road bad. That continues in Westminster, where John Prescott says one thing and Gus Macdonald says another. Short-termism—living for today and paying the price tomorrow—is evident in the underfunding crisis in local authority road maintenance budgets. There is no long-term view in the bill and no national plan. The bill was an opportunity to consider, discuss and address the issues. It was an opportunity to lay a framework for the future and to lay the tracks for transport infrastructure. However, it does not do that.

No. Des McNulty has had a chance to speak on the bill at the Transport and the Environment Committee—he will be able to do so there again. The bill does not offer a philosophy or a strategy. There is no structure. What reference is there to a transport authority? A Highlands and Islands transport authority is mentioned, and we  support that concept, but what about an overall transport vision? What about a transport authority that plans ahead and prepares not just for tomorrow but 10, 15 or 20 years down the road as we need to do in transport? There is no mention of that in the bill.

No. Helen Eadie has made her points through the committee and will get another opportunity to do so later. Why does not the bill include other transport authorities? Furthermore, why does not the bill mention travel-to-work or geographic areas? We do not know what will be the description, definition or boundaries of the Highlands transport authority, nor what will happen to Moray if it is excluded from the arbitrarily drawn boundaries. What will happen to the Clyde links between Gourock and Dunoon? None of those matters has been addressed. The SNP's position is that if a transport authority is good enough for the Highlands, it is good enough for every other area. What does the bill have to say about modes of transport other than buses? It is silent on air and maritime transport and mentions only through-ticketing in relation to rail transport. Furthermore, there is no mention of construction and repair of roads.

No, I am in the middle of making a point. Are not air links important to our economy and should not they be included in a transport bill? The link between Edinburgh and Vienna has just been terminated. Is not it important for Scotland to have a direct air link to a major city of 5 million people in the European Union? The bill does not address such issues.

Wait a minute. On maritime matters, we welcome the Rosyth ferry link. However, we are an island nation, and there is not a cheep in the bill about a strategy for ports and harbours. As for rail transport, where is the prospectus for improving and enhancing the network? Where is the bill's vision that would give us the ability to build the Borders rail link instead of having to go cap in hand not only to the Westminster Government but to a strategic rail authority to which we can nominate only one representative? A Borders rail network is essential for the people—if we cannot get jobs to people, we can at least get people to the jobs. Furthermore, such a link is  necessary for our nation so that we can transport our freight as we improve transport between Edinburgh and London. On road transport, the bill does not mention the M74 north extension or the completion of any other motorway network that is necessary for this country, never mind address the crisis of local authorities' chronic underfunding over the years. What does the bill do? It gives us a Highlands and Islands transport authority some time, somewhere, with some powers. However, one would say in legalese that the bill is entirely lacking in specification.

Yes.

I have told members our proposals. I have said that it is necessary to lay down a plan, which we have tried to do in committee. I support the Parliament's committee structure, because it presents an opportunity to lay down a vision and plan of where we should go. There is no such plan in the bill, because there is no vision.

No, I have already taken an intervention. The Executive started off—

That point brings me back to the four main modes of transport: air, maritime, rail and road. Whatever Mr McLeish might have said, he will not deliver anything that is necessary to meet transport needs. The Executive had a trident—as in three- pronged—campaign involving road tolls, workplace charging and congestion charging. However, tolls have been deserted, workplace parking charges are the walking wounded and local authorities have been conscripted to do battle on congestion charging. We shed no tears about tolls—we opposed them and we are glad that they have been binned. Workplace parking charges must go. Although we do not support Murray Tosh's amendment, we will oppose the bill unless the minister rethinks that issue. The SNP believes that nobody apart from Glasgow City Council supports the bill. We support moves to encourage people to go to work by public transport because that is beneficial. However, such encouragement should provided by the carrot, not the stick. The Government is talking about a tax when it talks about workplace parking charging. As the saying goes, if it looks like an elephant and walks like an elephant, it is an elephant. The same thing applies to workplace parking charging. It looks like a tax and walks like a tax—it is a tax. The Minister for Health and Community Care was on the radio today, going on about the necessity for workers in the health service to have fuel to get to work. I hope that her colleague, the Minister for Transport and the Environment, will take into account the necessity of workers in the health service being able to afford to park their cars when they get to work. The minister should listen to the Transport and the Environment Committee and to what has been said in and outside the chamber. If she does not, we will seek to vote the bill down. We are broadly sympathetic on congestion charging. We accept many of the points that Mr Tosh made but, at the end of the day, our urban areas have problems with air quality. We know that directives are coming in from the European Union and we will have to address those. Even Conservative-led local authorities will have to address the mandatory air quality directives. The combustion engine and motor vehicles will be perhaps the most important element of that.

I do not think that congestion charging has to be mandatory. It is a case of horses for courses—each authority should introduce the measures that it thinks are appropriate. We have made it clear that it is not for  the Scottish Parliament to force charging on a local authority. I am not here to justify Mark Lazarowicz's £1-a-journey scheme. That is a matter for him. I agree with the minister's point about Norway—it has shown the way to go. If we can replicate what happens in Oslo and Trondheim, that would benefit cities in Scotland. I have been barracked on occasion by people saying that we cannot expect to have the state-of-the-art traffic network that Norway has. To them, I say that Norway discovered oil. Perhaps if we discovered oil, the resultant beanfeast would enable us to get a transport infrastructure such as that which the people of Norway take for granted in Oslo, Bergen and Trondheim.

No. I am advocating the use of oil revenue and the billions of pounds that the Government has in its oil fund, as has been done in Norway. That country's oil revenue has not only been used for the day-to-day benefit of its citizens since oil was first discovered off its shores—some of it has been put in the bank to ensure a better society for generations to come. In the UK, the problem is that the Tories used our oil revenue to undermine the unions by creating mass unemployment. Labour has gone along with that and has created a war chest to enable it to fight an election that will be based on who will offer lower taxes. We support some parts of the bill and are not prepared to throw the baby out with the bath water. On buses, we are sceptical about partnerships but we are prepared to go along with the proposal. We hope that the minister will take on board the point that was raised in the Transport and the Environment Committee by the Association of Transport Co-ordinating Officers that it must become easier to move from partnership to contract. That process must be accelerated and powers must be available for that. We support concessionary fares, but why are we not moving faster on the matter? In his transport bill, John Prescott is moving towards concessionary fares while we are still discussing them.

I am happy to allow the minister to make a point.

The SNP welcomes through-ticketing but notes that on the Øresund bridge between Copenhagen and Malmö, integrated traffic and ticketing operates across two countries—and that is before a referendum on integration into the euro. We are still trying to secure integrated ticketing between two cities in one country with one currency. As far as disabled people are concerned, the bill is a missed opportunity. It does not seek to address the needs of the disabled—it simply criminalises people who have orange badges, rather than tackling the problems that exist. The transport problems that are suffered by disabled people should be addressed separately—at least in a separate section of the bill—but not piecemeal. The SNP has considered the bill more in sorrow than in anger. We will not oppose it in whole or in part. At this stage, there are bits that we are willing to accept. It is not a transport bill, however—it is a bus etc additional regulations bill. It is not just a reshuffle of the Executive that is required, but a redraft of what masquerades as a transport bill.

At the outset, the SNP made it quite clear that the Government was not listening, consulting or acting, and nothing that we have heard in this debate has made us change our minds. Labour is not solving the problem; Labour is causing the problem. I have been asked to make a statement not on behalf of the Executive but on behalf of the Road Haulage Association. I have been in communication with Mr Flanders this afternoon and he has asked me to say that the Road Haulage Association has been deeply grateful for the marvellous support that it has received from the public. The Road Haulage Association does not want to jeopardise the good will that the public, motorists and pedestrians alike have shown. It is therefore asking its members to forsake any further action as of 7 pm tonight and to retreat with dignity and with their heads held high, knowing  that they have public support, that the Government has caused the problem and, more important, that the problem remains and requires to be addressed. Earlier, I saw Mr McLeish nodding his head. I understand that there are difficulties at Grangemouth and that the Road Haulage Association is coming under some pressure. The RHA's position is not assisted by ignorant, arrogant and inflammatory language from a Government minister. We are dealing with a difficult situation. To talk about mob rule, when individuals have behaved with dignity and when those who have been leading and advising them have acted with decorum, does nothing but undermine the position and manufacture a crisis, as has been reflected in the language and terminology used by Labour back benchers.

I will not give way. I addressed the demonstration at Ingliston yesterday, as one of three speakers. The other two speakers— [Interruption.]

At Ingliston, I did not address a mob and I did not deal with baying hounds; I addressed a dignified demonstration of men and women, justifiably concerned about their livelihoods and the future of their families, their industries and their communities. I was supported not by members of the Conservative party or the so-called country party—the agricultural voice of Labour—but by Jim Walker of the National Farmers Union of Scotland and Phil Flanders of the Road Haulage Association. There was no incitement of a mob; there was no mob.

Labour is the cause, not the solution. There are two crises in Scotland. One is at the pumps—it has to be addressed, and the Government is talking about that. We would appeal to those at Grangemouth and elsewhere to go away—as the RHA has said—with dignity, in the knowledge that they have the full support of the public and that the battle will continue to be waged. That battle will be won—sooner rather than later—when Labour is rolled out of office. The current situation at the pumps is a symptom, not a disease. It is a symptom of the  frustration, desperation and anger of those involved, who have been given support by members of the public. I have listened with incredulity to the language that has been used—it is the language of Thatcherism.

Not at the moment. I heard Andrew Marr—who is rumoured to be a BBC appointee—say that Tony Blair is becoming more like Margaret Thatcher every day. The language used is intemperate and wrong. On the road haulage industry and the miners' strike—

Sit down! I am sure that the Minister for Transport and the Environment will confirm that, in this country, a person must be 21 to have a heavy goods vehicle licence. As a Labour member said, the miners' strike was about 15 years ago. Unless someone is in their late 30s or older, they could not have been a driver of a Yuill and Dodds lorry at the time. The language that is being directed against those people is not only intemperate, but false and inflammatory, and it does not help a dangerous situation or address the crisis in our country. There is a saying in the SNP: "There's lies, damned lies and Brian Wilson." There have been lies in this debate—Alex Salmond dealt with that.

The point was made by colleagues on the Scottish National Party benches that this Government, unlike those abroad, is not listening. It is not consulting and it is not finding a solution. We have called for a summit, but it might be difficult to invite the Deputy First Minister to that summit unless he is prepared to apologise on record for his inflammatory language. Such language is not conducive to settling a dispute that is critical to Scotland's economy.

The crisis is not going away. It might be solved at the pumps, not by the Executive, but by the Road Haulage Association and other members of the rank and file—apparently so disparaged by Labour members—who will act responsibly and take with them the community's support. The crisis will not be dealt  with by the language of Margaret Thatcher.

These people want their community's problems to be addressed.

We need to address the crisis. However, the language of Tony Blair and the Labour party is not conducive to doing so. We need an Executive that will discuss, not dictate; listen, not lecture; and consult, not confront. [Interruption.]

Every opinion poll shows that the people of Scotland are fully behind the demonstrators' legitimate and legal actions. The people who are out of kilter with public opinion are the Labour Executive and its Liberal Democrat lapdogs. The Labour party is causing the problem; it is not providing the solution and its intemperate language must cease, as such language is not facilitating a settlement, but provoking matters.

Will the member give way?

Amendment 28 seeks to ensure adequate democratic scrutiny in this chamber. It is meant to enhance the input of Parliament and parliamentarians. For the benefit of the Executive, I will say that it seeks to do so within the bounds of the existing Scotland Act 1998. It does not detract from the Executive amendment; indeed, it adds to and complements it. It ensures greater scrutiny and interaction from the Parliament. The Executive amendments ensure greater interaction and scrutiny from the public. We are trying to replicate the opportunity for parliamentarians to take part in the consultative process before matters proceed. I am speaking to the amendment not as a member of the SNP but as the convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. This is not a committee amendment, but I point out that the suggestion for a super-affirmative procedure was carried unanimously in the committee and continued to receive the complete support of the committee even upon review at later stages. I should indicate that subordinate legislation is an important part of the democratic process. If every matter that we deal with had to go through stages 1, 2 and 3 in the Parliament, we would make no progress. Clearly, there is a need for speedy methods of dealing with matters that will not be opposed in any way. I do not want to rehash the arguments about whether national parks should have proceeded by way of enabling legislation. The fact is that subordinate legislation is, in the main, non-contentious. That is shown by the number of occasions on which members of the Parliament have used their powers to move against any statutory instrument that has appeared. A problem arises only when enabling legislation is used for matters that will be complex. We will spend all afternoon on this bill. We have had debates on the bill in numerous committees and in this chamber. The difficulty is that we have not yet decided where a national park will be, what its boundaries will be, what its geography and domain will be, who will be a member of the national park's authority, nor how those members will be elected. Many important issues still have to be examined. There has to be local democratic input, but there also has to be a way for those who represent areas that are not in the park area to progress matters and participate. That will not conflict with  the ability of the Executive to move matters speedily and with efficacy; it will still be able to do that. Even with a super-affirmative procedure, this Parliament will be left only with the ability to say yes or no to a proposal, either to move against it or to accept it. My amendment would focus matters for representatives of all airts and pairts of Scotland. I welcome the additional mechanisms to provide consultation at local level, but I believe that members of this Parliament should also have the opportunity to take part in the consultative matters. That will ensure that, when subordinate legislation goes through this Parliament, it will be focused. We will know what people are commenting on and will have before us the Executive response. Members will still be left with either a yes or a no, but at least they will have a better view of what is being debated. This amendment enhances the democratic process—and the democratic nature of this Parliament—and adds to the powers that we should have. It does not detract from the ability of the elected Executive to process speedily matters for which it has already obtained the enabling powers.

I echo the comments of my colleague Roseanna Cunningham: it is important that the committee structure be taken into account, because it is one of the strengths of the Scottish Parliament. We should be able to knock about ideas, take evidence and consider matters in a consensual forum. The democratic process is endangered if we try to push matters too quickly—the checks and balances break down. The Subordinate Legislation Committee had to deal with the bill apace. I welcomed the fact that we took oral evidence. One of the things that I enjoyed in my 20-year experience of being a solicitor was cross-examination, and having witnesses in the Subordinate Legislation Committee added to that enjoyment. The three aspects of the bill should be considered separately. First, in respect of bail, my colleague Winnie Ewing touched on the question of process. The anomaly that existed, whereby someone who was already in custody could not receive bail on another matter, has been addressed. That situation was rather perverse. We should realise and appreciate that bail is a question of rights and obligations. It should be a citizen's right if he faces an allegation; similarly, if trust is put in that citizen by the sheriff, the citizen is obliged to abide by those criteria. If someone is in custody on another matter, a sheriff should not be precluded from deciding on bail because an obligation has been put on a person to abide by matters, whether or not he is subsequently released. There should be guidelines for sheriffs, but it is important that the decision should remain at the sheriff's discretion. During 20 years in the law, I began to realise more and more that sheriffs had a master of their brief, knew where they were coming from and, in the main, considered matters sensibly and rationally. As a result, that element of discretion should remain with them. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Malcolm Chisholm raised points about the second aspect—the treatment of victims. It is not appropriate to put a victim's statement to the sheriff; that matter is best dealt with through the office of the procurator fiscal. However, we must recognise that the system should be changed, and I hope that the minister will address that. It is clear that there is intimidation in Scotland. For 20 years, I have practised within the jurisdiction of the city of Edinburgh and elsewhere,  and I know that victims are intimidated. I once represented a woman who had allegedly been raped. She met the perpetrator, who lived in the flat opposite and had been released on bail without her knowledge. People face intimidation in whole areas of our country. An example of the intimidation that is faced by witnesses is that when we enter Edinburgh sheriff court on Chambers Street, we go through a metal detector as in an airport. We have to take cognisance of that situation and, moreover, realise that mental as well as physical intimidation is involved when witnesses meet accused people on the street. As for sheriffs, the Executive amendments might address some problems. Although I will reserve my judgment, the Deputy First Minister's opening speech addressed many of the points that I would have raised. However, the principal point about sheriffs is that a sheriff is a sheriff. Part-time sheriffs should be treated exactly the same as full-time sheriffs. Although there might be differences in wages or pension entitlements, that should not take away from the fact that a person remains a sheriff, and how they are appointed and arraigned should remain the same. That applies in most other jobs, whether full-time or part-time, and should certainly apply to the important position within our democratic process of a sheriff. I regret that we are viewing temporary sheriffs differently from permanent sheriffs. On the issue of justices, it was made clear during an evidence session at the Subordinate Legislation Committee that it is important to examine the whole nature, ambit and remit of the district courts. Having practised in some of those courts, I feel that some of them should be physically done away with, because they are not acceptable in the 21 st century and, in many cases, were not acceptable in the latter part of the 20 th century. Of course we must investigate that issue, just as we must take into account the fact that there have been demographic and geographic boundary changes in Scotland. Courts are located in places where the population no longer exists to the same extent and, as a result, we need to change the district court structure. The real problem that was flagged up at the Subordinate Legislation Committee was that, because there did not appear to be an immediate crisis with ECHR compatibility, we did not need to deal with the situation now. As a result, I do not see why we are rushing ahead with the justices issue. I am open minded about the running of the courts and about questions such as who should preside in those courts, how they should be clerked, where the funds should go and where the buildings should be located. Depending on the priorities of the minister and his colleagues, the Parliament needs to consider those important questions over the next few years. Unless there is  an immediately urgent situation—which was not suggested at the Subordinate Legislation Committee—we should not go ahead piecemeal. Let us examine the panoply of aspects of district courts and their place in our judicial system in due course, not rush to fix something where there ain't a problem at the moment.

Were no checks made at the scientific trial at Daviot when the scandal with Advanta's GM-contaminated seeds first broke? If not, why not and what sort of trial is it? If checks were made, why were we not told before now?

rose—

Will the minister take an intervention now?

rose—

It would be cheaper.

Why is it that, down south, when differential car prices vis-à-vis Europe are a problem, the minister can apparently consider legislation immediately? As I said, when Murdoch proposed to take over Manchester United, instructions were given for the Office of Fair Trading to investigate. However, it seems that the present Labour Government can do nothing about differential fuel prices, and is waiting 16 months, 18 months or longer for the OFT to report. If Labour can legislate on car prices, why cannot it legislate on fuel prices?

Does Murray Tosh accept that if Scotland got its pro rata share of £140 billion over 10 years, the projects that I mentioned could be delivered in that time scale? Does he also accept that if that money were available, we could address the crisis in our rural emergency and other essential services, such as road haulage? Does he accept that the level of funding that is being talked about by John Prescott—and on which the minister would not comment—would provide for the delivery of that aim?

Was John Prescott lying—or was The Independent misquoting him—when he said that £140 billion was to be spent over the next 10 years? If that is not a lie, or a misrepresentation by The Independent , we will get our share. Can we not spend that share as we wish, to provide the assistance that we need in those areas?

In moving this motion, I am minded of Labour's campaign song in recent elections: "Things Can Only Get Better". Well, well, well. The singer remains the same, but the words of the song have changed. Now, it is "Petrol Can Only Get Dearer" or, "The Price of Diesel Can Only Get Higher". When people ask me, "What's the price of voting Labour?" I say, "£4 a gallon."

Maureen Macmillan will have to wait until I have got started. What has happened to the price of fuel under the Labour Administration? It has gone up, up, up. In 1997, the Tory foot was no longer on the fuel duty accelerator and the iron lady was replaced in the driving seat by the iron chancellor. Not only did he continue to keep his foot on the accelerator—he pressed harder. Labour's turbo-charged taxes have sent petrol and diesel prices rocketing, while fuel-injecting the chancellor's burgeoning war chest. Last autumn, concerned that petrol prices had gone up by 25 per cent, I asked the minister in committee what representations she had made to the chancellor about the escalating cost of fuel. She replied that he had not asked her. Since then, they appear to have discussed matters on several occasions. Mea culpa—why did I ever ask? What did she say to him? The situation is worse now than it was then. Petrol has now gone up by more than 40 per cent and the price of voting Labour in May 2000 will be £5 a gallon.

We made it quite clear during the vote at Westminster, when we voted against fuel tax rises—as did the Deputy First Minister—and that is what put matters on the record. The Labour Government put its foot on the accelerator and has continued to press it. We, to our credit, have said no to the fuel tax rises. Perhaps the Liberal Democrats can tell us why the Deputy First Minister argues one way down in London but  votes a different way up here. People know that the chancellor takes 80p in every £1 spent on fuel, but let us look at it another way. If fuel were an ordinary commodity, what would the retail mark-up be? What would be a fair profit in the circumstances? The chancellor's mark-up on a litre of petrol is not 3 per cent. It is not even 33 per cent. It is a scandalous and outrageous 333 per cent. If we consider other commodities, only cigarettes are marked up higher. At least in that case there is a health argument and an argument about costs to the national health service. Even alcohol comes nowhere close: the chancellor makes 62 per cent on wine and 40 per cent on beer.

Not at the moment. What about a comparable fuel? What about the Government's mark-up on electricity? That stands at 5 per cent. This is the ultimate usury—Labour is preparing for an election in which it proposes to offer unseemly tax cuts to the rich while extorting money from those who have no alternative but to buy fuel but who have few resources with which to pay for it. What other tax is at that level? Not basic rate tax, not higher rate tax and not even corporation tax. This is not about targeting congestion, nor is it about promoting transport alternatives; it is about raising £2.25 billion for a war chest. This is about fleecing us through fuel. Why is fuel important? Its price affects every facet of our life. It is not only at the pumps that we pay; price increases affect the cost of every journey, personal or commercial. It is not only the end cost of products that we have to consider, but the wrecking cost on our road haulage industry.

If Murray Tosh will sit and wait, all will be made clear. I mentioned the wrecking cost on our road haulage industry. This Parliament has had debates on other industries in crisis—from shipbuilding to the textile industry; from fishing to farming. Let us be clear: the Scottish road haulage industry is in similar trouble. There may be environmental Luddites who think that that is beneficial, but the cost of fuel has not reduced the number of journeys by a truck or lorry; it has simply reduced the number of journeys by a Scottish truck or lorry. Our hauliers are trying to compete on an open  highway when the chancellor is weighing them down with an extra load—higher fuel costs and higher excise duties. They are losing out to foreign competition, which is fuelling up on the continent and back-loading on the journey back. Fuel accounts for about 70 per cent of a road haulier's costs. In Scotland, a haulier will pay more than double the fuel cost of his continental competitor. Jobs are at stake and an industry is threatened. But there is more. I have been pursuing the hidden costs that have been imposed by Labour's fuel tax and I have discovered some disturbing figures. For example, in rural—and, indeed, in urban—Scotland, transport to school is not a luxury but a necessity. I am not talking about the cost of parents embarking on the morning school run; I am talking about the massive cost to local authorities of carrying out their statutory duties. When I asked the Minister for Children and Education about the cost of running school buses, I was told that in 1997-98 it cost Scottish local authorities nigh on £80 million. Some of my colleagues will detail the costs to individual local authorities, but I would like to concentrate on the overall national picture. It is a picture of money flowing south from the oil off our shores, of money flowing south from the pumps on our forecourts, and of a chancellor awash with our money. Meanwhile, here in Scotland, council taxes go up and the quality of council services goes down. This is the only country in the world to find oil and find itself getting poorer. All across the council spectrum, irrespective of the political colours of the council, the price is being paid in the increased costs of public services. Let us consider the emergency services. We cannot do without them. We heap praise upon them for their selfless dedication, yet those essential services are cash-strapped—in contrast to a chancellor who is cash-rich. A paramedic says to me, "What is the price of voting Labour?" I say, "It's £3.21 million a year to put petrol in ambulances." A policeman says to me, "What is the price of voting Labour?" I say, "It's over £5 million a year, simply to fuel the vehicles."

Not at the moment. A fireman says to me, "What is the price of voting Labour?" I say, "It's £18 million in transport costs since Labour came to power."

As I said to Murray Tosh, Mr  Macdonald should wait and he will be told. What can be done? Two schemes deserve to be considered. First, a fuel duty rebate scheme is within the competence of this Parliament. Is it not within the wit and competence of the Executive to consider extending the fuel duty rebate scheme to school buses and other services? Has that been investigated or costed? At yesterday's meeting of the Transport and the Environment Committee, I asked the Minister for Transport and the Environment whether she had considered or costed that option. She said no. That is unacceptable. Secondly, cheap fuel is available to certain categories and classes of vehicle, which may answer Mr Macdonald's question. The Finance Act 1995 allows the following classes of vehicle to use rebated fuel: tractors, diggers, mobile cranes, road rollers, gritters, snowploughs and mowing machines. Worthy machines and a testament to man's mechanical ingenuity—all have played a part in the construction of the civilised world. Seriously, I would not want to stop rebated fuel for gritters and snowploughs or any other of those worthy vehicles, but what is the logic of giving rebated fuel to those necessary machines but not to police cars, fire engines or ambulances?

I do not know what papers Mr Macdonald reads, but I read The Independent.    "Prescott gets £140 bn boost for transport". Mr Macdonald may see it differently, but it seems to me that petrol and transport are related. Is it not possible that £140 billion might mean it is possible to say that police cars, fire engines and ambulances are as worthy of rebated fuel as mowers, diggers and tractors? Can he tell me why they are not? The £140 billion will be spent on "a £500 million extension for Manchester's tramlines, a new £180 million system in Nottingham and extensions to the Docklands Light Railway in London and the similar Tyne and Wear rail network". Moreover, "The Government will give priority to proposals that . . . will blitz congestion 'hot spots' such as the M6 and M25 motorways." What about the areas where we have problems? What about rural Scotland's problems rather than just the M25 urban corridor?

I do not know whether Maureen Macmillan is reading that from joined-up writing or whatever, but that is not the position. I believe there should be parity of prices. I do not see why someone who lives in rural Scotland should be discriminated against. I bet if the minister's Mondeo was filled up in Stornoway rather than in Edinburgh, we would see the Government doing something about it quickly. To return to those worthy machines—is a tractor or a mower of greater social worth than a panda car or Medic 1? Apparently they are. Why do we not tell the chancellor that that is nonsensical and must cease? Let him provide from his ill-gotten gains the resources for our essential services. The price is being paid by ordinary Scots with no alternative to using fuel. Yesterday, I actually received an answer to a written question. The question was: "To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the Chancellor of the Exchequer regarding the classes of vehicles which are entitled to rebated fuel in Scotland." That extends Mr Macdonald's question. What are we going to do about it? His colleague, Sarah Boyack, who is not here today, gave me an illuminating answer: "The Executive keeps in regular contact with Treasury on a range of reserved issues which affect Scottish interests." Blow me—that gave me a good explanation of why a mower gets the rebate but Medic 1 does not.

Like my colleagues, I do not understand the basis of Mr Rumbles's nonsensical question. [Laughter.] The fact is that the extension of rebated fuel— [Interruption.] Let us be clear: the 3.1 per cent— [Interruption.]

We are talking about the same fuel rebate that is given to ferry services and diesel trains, but which the Government chooses not to give to road hauliers. Why can that rebate  be given to the mowing machine and the road roller, but not to Medic 1 or the police car? Why can it be given to the diesel train and the ferry, but not to the road haulier who carries the same goods that may be carried on the train or ferry? The Executive should give a better answer to those questions than that it is holding regular discussions with the Treasury on matters of interest. My argument applies not only to someone who lives in the Highlands and Islands, but to many a shift worker, such as nurses or policemen, in the central belt. The price is paid not by environmentally unfriendly truckers but by those who come from Scotland. It is paid not from Westminster bounty but by cuts in essential services. It is nonsense that 25 years after North sea oil started to flow, and when Scotland is the major oil producer in the European Union, we have the highest petrol prices in Europe if not the developed world. Action must be taken and the Executive must stand up for Scotland. London's great fuel robbery must cease. We have a proposed Trident campaign. First, we must end the disparity of fuel prices in rural Scotland—a litre of petrol is a litre, wherever it is bought.

No. I am winding up. Why is it that when the Government worries about Manchester United being taken over by Rupert Murdoch, the Office of Fair Trading is able to report in a matter of weeks, if not days, but when there is a crisis in rural Scotland about the price people pay at the pumps, we wait for nigh on a year and a half? The Executive can take action—it could say that it will legislate unless that disparity is ended. Secondly, there must be immediate action on emergency and essential services. We must let the chancellor know that—rather than simply have discussions with the Treasury about mutual interests. We must tell him that it is absurd that we are not providing those essential and emergency services with rebated fuel. Thirdly, we must freeze fuel duty until we have a level playing field with our European competitors. I move, That the Parliament notes that since 1997 petrol and diesel prices have risen in excess of 25%; further notes that Scottish public services are being forced to operate under ever increasing financial constraints; recognises that the increased cost of fuel is a burden which must be carried not just by motorists, but which falls on all Scottish citizens through rising fuel costs to the public sector; believes that it is unacceptable that money should be diverted from over-stretched Scottish public service budgets to the Treasury in  Westminster, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to consider extending the fuel duty rebate and to examine the possibility of extending the availability of rebated fuel across Scotland's public services in order to ensure that money spent on Scottish services is spent here rather than being returned to London.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the Chancellor of the Exchequer regarding the impact of the rate of fuel excise in rural areas of Scotland. (S1O-1884)

The minister will be aware that the Finance Act 1995 allows rebated fuel to—among others—tractors, mobile cranes, mowing machines, road rollers, gritters and snow ploughs, but not to police, fire or ambulance services, nor to school buses or road hauliers. From her discussions with the chancellor and the Scotland Office, can she tell us the logic of that? What representations has she made about the issue, and what does she propose to do about it?

When?

We have had fine words and eloquent speeches—explanations and exhortations as to why the railway to and through the Borders is needed. Let us be clear: we are talking not about building a new railway but about restoring a previous network that, as a result of underfunding and short-termism, was wrongly closed. We are not coming cap in hand to ask for special treatment but seeking to restore to a constituent part of our nation what was theirs and is theirs by right. There are two clear reasons why the Borders rail  link must be reopened. As others have said, it is a prerequisite for social and economic progress in that distinctive area. If jobs cannot be taken to the people, the least that can be done is to take people to the jobs. Initially, the work opportunities available in Edinburgh could be taken up by people from the Borders. In the longer term, it would allow the economic boom in Edinburgh to resonate outwards and southwards. In the 21 st century, we pride ourselves on looking forward, but let us learn from history. In the 19 th and early part of the 20 th century, opening up the rail network allowed the economic expansion of the industrial revolution. Rail lines opened up investment and towns and communities were born. It was not the cavalry but the iron horse that opened up the west, in the USA. The corollary to social and economic expansion is social and economic decline. That is what has been happening, in substantial part as a result of poor transport infrastructure. We owe it to the Borders to restore the rail link in order to revitalise its economy and to bring it into the social and economic hub of a vibrant Scotland in the 21 st century. The Borders rail link is a strategic part of Scotland's economic future. It is not simply a Borders issue, but an all-Scotland issue. As the Borders is geographically isolated within Scotland, Scotland is geographically isolated from its economic markets. As a nation, we are located on the periphery of the economic trading block in which we operate—location has advantages in some fields, but disadvantages in others. We need to trade to survive, for no one owes us a living. We require access to our markets. In a global economy, transportation time is vital. We require to ensure that we have the capacity to transport all our goods, and on time. Business demands it and our customers expect it. We look forward to improvements on the east coast and west coast main lines. We envisage a time when the railway to London and points in between competes with airlines. I can see advantages in being able to walk to Central or Waverley stations, and pick up a train, on the hour, which will get me to London in three hours or thereabouts. However, there is a downside. The more passenger trains that move, the more difficult it is to move our freight. The strategic economic advantage and the reason, touched on by Elaine Murray, why the line to Carlisle must be restored, is to allow an alternative line to ease capacity problems, if not in the short term, most certainly in the long term. The restoration of the rail line is necessary for all the Borders and for all Scotland. What then is to be done? We could end this  debate basking in the glow of the hot air created by the rhetoric, but that rhetoric will not lay one sleeper nor advance the track by one mile. We need to ensure that we lay the solid foundations on which the line can be restored, and that we fuel the engine that will run upon it. In Scotland, the tragedy is that our Government has washed its hands of responsibility for rail. Power has not been devolved to this elected Parliament but given away to an unelected quango, outwith our land. That organisation will be dealt with in other debates, but at present, that is the body which holds the purse strings and which has the power to restore the railway or not. The money involved is small beer compared with what has been spent elsewhere. For example, £2.5 billion has been spent on the Jubilee line. As I mentioned in the intervention that Murray Tosh kindly took, one station costs between £70 million and £100 million. The Channel tunnel link cost £1.8 billion. Yesterday, Prescott pledged £140 billion over 10 years. I read that the programme will include "a £500m extension for Manchester's tramlines, a new £180m system in Nottingham and extensions to the Docklands Light Railway in London and the similar Tyne and Wear rail network." Before the cacophony of voices rises in protest at yet another spending pledge, answer me this: how come John Prescott can think so big, yet the minister aspires so small?

I am winding up. Let the resolution of this Parliament be that we welcome progress south of the border towards an enhanced rail network, but we insist upon similar progress and similar aspirations in our land. If the strategic rail authority is supposed to represent this United Kingdom, it has a duty to be equitable in the dispensation of its largesse. In summary, we are saying that it is time to stop the talking and start the constructing. We are not satisfied with a dream, but wish to make the dream a reality. Let us tell the strategic rail authority that the settled will of this Parliament and of the Scottish people is that the authority restore the Borders rail link as a matter of priority.

Does the member accept that the construction cost of one station on the Jubilee line—between £70 million and £100 million—would pay for the construction of the Borders rail line at least as far as Tweedbank?

Will the member give way?

Did the minister see the front page of The Independent yesterday, which said  "Prescott gets £140bn boost for transport" under a "Ten-year plan"? The article went on to indicate that "the programme will include a £500m extension for Manchester's tramlines, a new £180m system in Nottingham and extensions to the Docklands Light Railway in London and the similar Tyne and Wear rail network." Is that a rash promise, or is John Prescott actually delivering something? Why are we leaving the railway with Scottish Borders Council? Why do we not get our share of the £140 billion and just build it?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review the guidelines for genetically modified crop trial sites and in particular the exclusion distance between genetically modified and conventional crops. (S1O-1774)

Would the minister care to comment on where the power seems to lie with regard to the recent scandal involving Advanta? It would appear that the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food was told about the contamination on 17 April, but that information was not transmitted to the Minister for Rural Affairs until 15 May. When did the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food find out from Advanta, when did he tell the Minister for Rural Affairs and when were the rest of the members of the Scottish  Parliament advised? Is it not the case that, in areas in which power is devolved, this Parliament should know contemporaneously with Westminster, and that it is not up to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food south of the border to decide when, on a whim of fancy, he will tell us?

I support the comments of my colleague Linda Fabiani, who regretted the method by which this legislation is proceeding. It is within the prerogative of the Executive to proceed by way of enabling legislation. The difficulty here—and I shall outline two specific problems—is that we are  dealing with matters in the abstract. At present, there appear to be only two areas in the frame for the creation of national parks, both of which are accepted as being distinct and diverse, and the issues that have been highlighted by individual members will have to be revisited on another occasion, perhaps with a democratic deficit. It is right and appropriate, in certain instances, for the Executive to proceed by way of enabling legislation. However, in this particular instance, when we are talking about the creation of only two national parks and all members accept that we are not talking about a multiplicity of national parks, it might have been better to consider primary legislation for each location—given that they are distinct and diverse—instead of proceeding by subordinate legislation. Other members, including Alex Johnstone, Keith Raffan and Dr Elaine Murray, have commented on that.

I do not want to misquote Mr Raffan, who has had the opportunity to set the record straight. I will continue to explain why I think that the way in which subordinate legislation allows scrutiny is inadequate. The first problem concerns marine parks, and has been touched on by Linda Fabiani and Irene McGugan. Rightly or wrongly, the issue of marine parks has been regarded as an add-on. The difficulty is that we do not know how such parks would operate or what the mechanism for creating them would be. In questioning during the Transport and the Environment Committee, the civil servants were unable to explain the interaction of that mechanism with EU directives and regulations, with retained and devolved powers, and with whatever else. In the creation of marine national parks, whether terrestrially related or wholly marine, I have some sympathy for the environmental interests that would have to be consulted and satisfied. I have received representations from organisations such as the Scottish Wildlife Trust and the World Wide Fund for Nature, and I appreciate where they are coming from. If section 29 is totally worthless and cannot be implemented, it would be wrong to keep it in the bill. Either it can be implemented, and marine national parks are worth while, or it should be jettisoned. We should not live a lie and go down the road of trying to delude people that marine  national parks can be implemented, offering warm words and fine support for them when it may not be possible to introduce them.

I do not disagree with that. However, I want the information to be beefed up. At present, I am dissatisfied with the way in which we would introduce marine national parks. That process must be thought through. If there is a problem, it would be better to address it now rather than to introduce the legislation only to find out that section 29 is inoperable and have to go back to the beginning two, three, four or five years down the line. The second problem, which was touched on by Keith Raffan, is the potential democratic deficit. The nature of our electoral system is to have checks and balances. We have an Executive that can be checked by the Parliament, and a Parliament that can be checked by the judiciary. The difficulty with subordinate legislation is that it creates problems for parliamentary scrutiny. There is a role for subordinate legislation—I am convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee—but I have no wish to foist on the Parliament numerous debates on amnesic shellfish poisoning orders or whatever else. Clearly, such issues are not the subjects of dispute between parties. They are matters on which there is broad consensus in the chamber and it would be wrong to waste chamber time on examination of such matters. Some matters will be pivotal and there will be difficulties when individual areas and party political groupings take different positions. In such cases it would be wrong to use a system in which the only options for members or party groups are acceptance or rejection. When we are doing something as fundamental as creating a national park, we must ensure that there is a procedure regarding subordinate legislation that will allow open, full and frank debate. If, for example, people in Dr Sylvia Jackson's constituency accepted that there should be a national park, but that a specific area should not be included in it, it would not be fair to say to members that they had either to accept or reject the whole park. There will be strange and unusual circumstances in which issues are clearly matters for debate, in which there is no consensus and there is a need for amendments to designation orders. I seek an assurance from the minister that a mechanism will be created that will allow for full debate and amendment procedures, and that such  debate and changes will take place in the chamber with more options than to either accept or reject the legislation.

Transport is an integral part of the social and  economic regeneration of Glasgow. It should be acknowledged that Glasgow has many advantages. In the underground and the local rail network, it has a transport network that cities such as Edinburgh can only aspire to. However, there is one significant and growing problem: congestion on the M8—the Kingston bridge in particular—which will not go away and must be addressed. The only way to address that problem is to construct the M74 north extension. Congestion is not simply a traffic problem; it is a social and economic problem. It jeopardises jobs and prevents jobs being brought to the area. Only a few months ago, the Evening Times highlighted what Glasgow City Council was pointing out in private: that it could not invest in areas such as Easterhouse to generate jobs because it could not cope with the resulting increased traffic on the M8. An area with one of the lowest rates of car ownership in the United Kingdom—yet one of the highest rates of male unemployment—losing out on jobs and investment as a result of congestion is a travesty and an injustice. That is a Labour double whammy. Socially, jobs are integral to the regeneration of the city. It is not all down to work, but work plays a significant part. Unless we give people a sense of self-worth and take away the opportunities that the devil finds for idle hands, the city's problems will continue. That is why it is socially and economically necessary to improve the transport infrastructure by proceeding with the M74 north extension. Whatever needs to be done, it will not be done by warm words or workplace charging. If we check the records, we find that in 1992 Strathclyde Regional Council—the former holders of the building that we are in today—published a proposal for the M74 north extension. Eight years on, the Minister for Transport and the Environment gives us a further consultation document, to be carried out by the precursors and successors of Strathclyde Regional Council. That is not acceptable. Janis Hughes asked how the scheme would be paid for. Allow me to give some facts in response. First, the motorway network south of the border has been completed. Secondly, the oil revenues from off our shores have bankrolled Governments—Tory and Labour—for a quarter of a century. Thirdly, fuel duty at 80p in the pound continues to fund the Chancellor of the Exchequer's burgeoning war chest. Yet Glasgow continues to wait. Not one metre has been laid. I believe that the M74 north extension is critical and is a national responsibility, not a responsibility for the council tax payers of North Lanarkshire and the city of Glasgow. Scotland and the chancellor  must provide the funds. People ask where the money will come from. I remind Janis Hughes that a few months ago John Prescott said that he had more than £80 billion to spend over 10 years on transport infrastructure. If we had our share of that, not only could we complete the M74 north extension, we could probably pave it with gold. Rightly or wrongly, people worry that they will get the problems associated with roads, not the benefits. People worry that they will have a motorway laid over the top of them while the jobs pass by them. We have to address those fears. One way to do so would be to create enterprise zones up to a mile or a half mile adjacent to the newly constructed road or, indeed, in areas not too far away. That would show people that the issue is one of bringing in not just goods and commuters, but jobs and employment. Will anyone suggest that many of the areas that have been blighted by the flight of past industries would not benefit from an influx of new ones? That view would help avoid people seeing only the problems associated with the extension. The Executive and its cohorts in Westminster must provide the funds for this important piece of transport infrastructure for Glasgow and Scotland at the beginning of the 21 st century. I say to the minister: get a grip, construct the road, create employment and get Glasgow going.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made or proposes to make regarding the electrification of the east coast main line. (S1O-1664)

Given that Virgin and Great North Eastern Railway are seeking a 21-year or 22-year franchise, if a generation is not to pass without electrification, will the minister confirm to the Parliament that she will give direction and guidance that will make it a condition of the franchise that there will be electrification north of the city of Edinburgh, allowing electrification from London through to Aberdeen? Will she make that a condition? Will she give that direction and guidance?

As others such as Des McNulty have done, I put on  record my thanks to the members of staff of the Transport and the Environment Committee. In many instances, I was simply an advocate for views arising from their diligent research. I am glad that many of them are here today to see the fruits of their labour. I, too, welcome the report. This has been a consensual debate, which shows the agreement and unanimity that exists in the Parliament. Three interventions—two from Richard Simpson and one from Murray Tosh—were all made in a supportive rather than a point-scoring spirit. However, there have been difficulties in bringing this matter to debate today. The fact that the debate coincided with the publication of the Stewart report at 10.30 am has caused problems. I was not alone in trying to speed-read a report and fathom matters earlier this morning. I do not blame anyone for that, but it is a matter to which we will have to return. Difficulties are also caused because we have received only an interim response from the Executive—I appreciate that the Executive has to await the voice of Parliament. The one point in the debate on which I take issue is Nick Johnston congratulating the Tory Government on rolling out the mobile phone network. The reason why we are having this debate and why the Transport and the Environment Committee and Sir William Stewart and his colleagues have had to do such intensive work is that the Tories did the equivalent of building a fast car with no brakes. Matters have proceeded apace and local authorities and individuals have suffered, with little democratic right to change things. Many members—in particular, Cathy Jamieson—touched on that.

I should be happy to acknowledge that the Conservatives are learning from the past, although I would not go beyond that. The most important issue is to decide where we go from here. There is a general acceptance that the report is to be welcomed. There are three clear principles: first, full planning permission; secondly, the precautionary principle, which has been added to by the Stewart report; and thirdly, openness and transparency. Thankfully, the need for a register is also mentioned in the Stewart report. It is important that the Executive takes that on board and acts speedily. Sylvia Jackson and Dr Richard Simpson mentioned two important factors. If we do not move with speed and alacrity, we might face  problems. I worry that a plethora of companies might attempt to move in before the window of opportunity closes and local authorities have the ability to regulate matters. Therefore, a moratorium is a constructive idea. We also have a relevant power in the Parliament, if we make speedy progress on a bill. As I understand it, it is possible to specify the relevant date as the one on which the bill is lodged. Adam Ingram, who is lodging a member's bill on leasehold casualties along with Pauline McNeill, told me that. It might take some time for a bill to go through Parliament, but the date that matters would be the date on which the bill was lodged. I want the Executive to take on board the principles recommended by the Transport and the Environment Committee, which I expect to be supported by Parliament today. The Executive must also take on board the additional benefits of the research by Professor Stewart and move speedily. The legislation that the Executive introduces must make it clear that the relevant date is the date on which the bill is lodged. The phone companies must not think that they will have a window of opportunity of six months or a year in which to put up masts around the country and avoid any local authority controls or input from individuals. I ask the minister to consider that. If the Executive were happy to accept the proposal of a moratorium, I should be happy for us to use that method. If it does not accept that proposal, we must use the powers that exist in the parliamentary framework. Richard Simpson touched on the fact that a substantial bounty is available to Gordon Brown. I appreciate that the £18 billion is to be paid over several years, yet it is a considerable amount. We must use that to help society; we might consider the provision of some recompense. There will be additional costs for local government—we must ensure that additional income is provided so that it does not have to cut back on other services. As Richard Simpson suggested, we might ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer to provide incentives to encourage operators to relocate their masts. I would prefer it if operators were to move their masts voluntarily and, as the third-generation technology is rolled out, to accept that they should move equipment to better sites. However, if push comes to shove and the only way to shift operators is to pay them, perhaps we should provide some financial incentives. My researcher provided the initial response from the telecommunications industry and the industry appears to be happy to go 50:50. However, with that offer, the 50 per cent commitment from the Government must come out of Gordon Brown's bounty. The jury is out and the committee has not been  able to show that many people who claim to suffer ill health as a result of the installation of masts and related technology have suffered for that reason. However, when canvassing in a recent by-election, I heard the complaints of people living in the Oxgangs and Firhill area. It was pointed out to me that two young women—in their 30s and 40s—had contracted cancer within a year of two masts being erected opposite their homes. If it can be shown that there is a link, I ask the chancellor to consider whether those people can have some recompense for the misery and injury that has been inflicted upon them. After all, we recompense people who suffer criminal injuries. Can we not use the bounty available to recompense those who have suffered from the actions of the telecommunications industry? I support the report.

In a week in which oil is at $27 a barrel, it is tragic and ironic that the privatisation of our skies continues relentlessly. The people of Scotland are entitled to have us take stock. In the first flush of victory, the Executive appointed Scotland's first Minister for Transport and the Environment. Prior to 1707, such a remit would not have been countenanced, given that we had neither rail nor aviation and that neither John MacAdam nor even General Wade had begun their creation of a transport  infrastructure. Nigh on 300 years since then, and one year since the arrival of a Labour Administration which promised that things could only get better, just what is the state of the nation? Let us look at transport on a modal basis, starting with the railways. The document "Travel Choices for Scotland" intimated that there would be a right to instruct the shadow strategic rail authority on matters related to Scotland. However, Westminster's Transport Bill deleted that right and inserted "directions and guidance". That waters down the powers of this Parliament, and the dilution continues, as the directions and guidance will apply only as long as they do not conflict with those issued by the Secretary of State for the Environment, Transport and the Regions. Why does the Executive aspire to so little, when there is so much to be done? Why is it beyond its wit and competence to seek the electrification of the east coast main line? Why is it beyond its imagination to provide a rail link to the Borders? Why is the limit of the Executive's horizon in connecting the capital of the Highlands to the capital of Scotland to reduce travel time by five minutes by 2004? At that rapid rate of progress, the length of the train journey might match that of the car by the time a child in the Highlands picks up his pension. What about aviation? Apart from the subsidy to Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd, the powers and plans are pathetic—the Executive has nothing to say on the privatisation of National Air Traffic Services. Aviation is important to us as a nation, given our geographic location and the fact that we now have a truly global economy. Why are both Ireland and Iceland, with smaller populations, better served for direct flights? The Executive is not flying high: as far as aviation is concerned, it is grounded on the runway. On maritime issues, it is absurd that, at the start of the 21 st century, an island nation such as Scotland finds that its main ferry port for exports is Hull, a town located many miles away in a neighbouring country, and accessed by a poor road network. Links to the continent were superior before the union, never mind before the Executive. Why was it easier to get to Europe in the days of sail than it is now with the new generation of fast ships? Far from having the wind behind it, the Executive has not even set sail. That brings us finally to roads. It is probably apt that we finish on that subject because it appears that the Minister for Transport and the Environment is more the minister for potholes. Studies aplenty have been carried out; in fact, such is her fondness for consultancies that we have studies into studies. As I have said before, how many studies must we have before the Executive finally builds us a road? The tragedy is  that, with so much to be done, so little has been achieved. There is work to be done on every mode of transport: our nation has the talent to design and build what is needed. Regrettably, as in previous generations, those skills are used for construction in lands far away. In 1968, when Robert Kennedy sought the Democratic nomination to be President of the United States, he finished his speeches by saying: "Some see the world as it is and say why. I prefer the world as it can be and say why not." The difference between the Executive and the Scottish National party is that the Executive sees Scotland as it is and says, "We cannae do it," but we say, "Yes, we can." We can aspire and deliver; we can build a nation for the 21 st century. The key to the future is independence.

Will Mr Wilson give way?

This appears to be another case of blaming a European directive rather than the interpretation placed upon it. Has the minister considered the fact that, in Spain, Transmediterrania, which operates services in the Balearics, appears to be a wholly owned state subsidiary; that SeaFrance is wholly owned by SNCF; and that in countries such as the Netherlands, ports are municipally owned, which means that artificial subsidies are given to them and economies made? The SNP fully accepts paragraph 11 of the minister's statement, which suggests that benefits such as economies of scale and cross-fertilisation of services will come from keeping CalMac tendering together. As a result, will the minister ensure that the tendering process includes the whole service, not part of it? If that does not happen, there will be a cherry-picking of routes and lifeline services will be neutered and damaged.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assurances it can give that pollen from GM test sites will not be allowed to contaminate the wider environment. (S1O-1532)

This is a matter that causes some concern. Will the minister insist that the test sites are subject to the same requirements as other activities such as driving a car or running a medical, legal or dental practice? Such pursuits must have mandatory public liability insurance. If there is a claim for compensation against a GM test site, what guarantee can neighbouring farmers and others have that they will receive recompense?

I want to pay tribute to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for  bringing this matter before Parliament; I concur with the points that he has so eloquently made. This matter is worthy of debate; it should be debated in public and it should be the subject of a public inquiry. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, it has been suggested in an article in the Edinburgh Evening News that the minister does not approve of the scheme. If that is true, the minister should have the courage of her convictions and ensure that a public inquiry takes place—she should act as her heart and head tell her. The danger is that not only Midlothian Council, but the minister, will drive the proposals through in the face of objections. The remit of the inquiry should be expanded. The A701 is not simply about extending and expanding the road at Straiton; it is a fundamental link from Midlothian to the city of Edinburgh. It affects more than Midlothian—it affects points north and south. The debate and inquiry would be equally relevant and important to the Borders and points north. We must consider the effect on other areas of building the road, not simply the effect on the land on which the concrete is laid. That, after all, is what an integrated transport policy is all about. The road would have a substantial impact on the south side of Edinburgh, the city bypass, points leading towards it and related areas further south. The matter needs full consideration. Full consideration means a multi-modal study. Not just road, but other options, particularly rail, should be considered. The possible reopening of the Bilston Glen line is one such issue. Some people have registered opposition to the road and others have campaigned for the reopening of the Bilston Glen line; I pay tribute to them. Today, I have managed to obtain a copy of the report by Scott Wilson to Midlothian Council. The report refers to the reopening of the line, which was closed only in 1989; it is viable and could be opened up quickly. To some extent, that line runs in parallel to the road. Any inquiry should consider that option. To be fair to Midlothian Council, it has viewed the matter not as either/or, but as both. We cannot proceed with the road without considering not only the effects mentioned by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, but the other options. I refer members to the first point in the executive summary in the Scott Wilson report: "Reinstatement of the disused branch line to Loanhead is technically feasible for an estimated cost of £4.8 million based on single train operation." That is significantly lower than the costs that will be incurred by building the road, never mind the knock-on effects on health and other matters. The report goes on to say:  "Corridors exist for subsequent extension of the branch line to Penicuik, either via Roslin avoiding the Bilston Glen Viaduct or through Straiton." That also should be considered. If it is not, Burdiehouse and other areas will become glorified park and rides, similar to areas close to where I stay in Edinburgh, which have, in effect, become park and rides. The report also says: "Options exist to reduce the funding gap, including sourcing external funding and the potential benefits to be obtained by combining a rail service to Loanhead or Penicuik with parallel rail proposals, such as the Edinburgh CrossRail project." As the crossrail project has been given the green light, it is essential that we consider where we take and extend that project. We have already had debates on the Waverley project and the Borders rail link. Here is another option. Let us consider all options, not simply the A701. I accept that, as the executive summary states: "The anticipated demand for the rail service is unlikely to generate sufficient revenue to meet operating costs, either to Loanhead itself or with an extension to Penicuik." However, very few, if any, rail lines in Scotland would qualify on that criterion. It is our duty as parliamentarians to ensure that we do not become a society that knows the price of everything and the value of nothing. We need to consider all options. That is why I pay tribute to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and say that we should open up all aspects of this issue to public inquiry in a multi-modal study of how the city of Edinburgh, the Borders and other areas will be accessed in the 21 st century. Let us raise our horizons and have some vision.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it intends to make to the strategic rail authority regarding electrification of railways in Scotland. (S1O-1466)

Thirty-eight per cent of the UK rail network is electrified, but only 23.6 per cent of  the network in Scotland is electrified. When does the minister think that we will have reached the UK average, and what lines does she propose to electrify to ensure that we get up to that average?

It is one thing to be neither pro nor anti, but actions speak louder than words and if trial testing is given the go-ahead, that will take matters a quantum leap ahead. At the outset, I want to indicate our support for my colleague Robin Harper's amendment. The facets that are addressed by that amendment are separate and distinct, but he has our full support. This debate is long overdue; it is also far too short, and it must continue. The Parliament has been in existence for nigh on nine months; the GM debate has progressed at pace, and serious and important events have taken place without the Parliament having the power of veto, or even a by your leave. That is a scandal. As we begin the debate, we should examine our current situation and the factors that are before us today. In Scotland, we are fortunate enough to have a pioneering biotechnology industry. We have scientists whose work is recognised beyond  these shores and whose reputation is justly world renowned. It is a matter for considerable national pride that the Roslin Institute and the Rowett Research Institute are household names. Scottish science is once again a pioneer in progress and is pushing out the parameters of knowledge. Although we want such technology to be progressed in Scotland, boundaries must exist, as in any other field. We welcome the advancement of knowledge, but do not worship at the altar of applying untried technology for its own sake. We are not prepared to sacrifice the rural economy of Scotland, the proud reputation of our quality farming industry or the health of our people. Boundaries must be placed and regulations followed. That is not meant to impede scientific progress, but it is meant to ensure that science is not applied beyond our control in unforeseen circumstances and with possible catastrophic consequences. What is the current situation? First, we should scotch some of the myths. Myth No 1: GM crops will feed the world. With genetically modified loaves and fishes, Monsanto will end world hunger in an act of altruism unknown for nigh on 2,000 years; a company founded on sheer capital for profit's sake will be moved to the provision of seed corn for humanity's sake. Aye—that'll be right. The tragic images of starvation on our television screens should lead not only to charity but to an analysis of the cause and the solution. The cause is not food shortage, but unfair distribution and supply. There is more than enough food in the world to feed the whole human race. The United Nations World Food Programme reckons that enough food is grown to feed the world one and a half times over. If so, why should one seventh of the world's population go hungry and one in four children go to bed hungry tonight? GM foods are not the great white hope from America's corner coming to deck the dark, rampaging scourge of hunger; they are being used to increase Monsanto's profits, boost its share capital—and hell mend the consequences. They are indeed a food steroid in the environment ring. If the Executive is determined to increase food production, it should put some of Scotland's 77,000 hectares of set-aside land back into production and create jobs and produce. Myth No 2: GM foods pose no threat. Who says? This is not a criminal prosecution; the burden of proof is not based on the concept of beyond reasonable doubt and the onus of proof is not on us. We are told that there is no evidence to show that GM foods are unsafe. However, that is not the issue. The Executive has rightly used the terminology, "precautionary principle". This is not a matter of proving beyond reasonable doubt that GM foods are unsafe; it is about the  manufacturers satisfying all of us beyond reasonable doubt that they are safe. Myth No 3: GM foods will improve Scotland's agricultural reputation. Although Scotland's agriculture industry needs assistance, this is a helping hand from the devil. Scotland's reputation in the food industry is, to some extent, based on high-quality foods for niche markets. Like everywhere else, we grow the basic crops, but the image that we market of "Scotland the Brand" is top of the range: fresh, clean and pristine pure. Organic farming is the only growth sector in Scottish agriculture at the moment, and we must encourage it instead of jeopardising it by planting environmental time bombs. As for the SNP amendment, it is one thing to conduct tests in a laboratory where conditions are safe, secure and isolated; it is quite another thing to jeopardise all in an unrestricted, unrestrained, open experiment in the Scottish countryside.

The bottom line has to be the precautionary principle. The simple fact of the matter is that if we cannot be satisfied that testing can be done in any other way, we must not proceed with it. As the legacy of Chernobyl testifies, the environment knows no boundaries. That event was on a macro-scale; we cannot risk something similar happening on a micro-scale. In the same way that GM foods have not been proven safe beyond reasonable doubt, the parameters that have been set do not suffice. I do not believe that there is such a thing as a safe distance or an exclusion zone; the only safe exclusion zone is within the confines of a laboratory or in a similar restricted environment. A generation ago, army veterans in fields in Australia were told that if they turned their backs and put their fingers in their ears, all would be well as an atomic bomb was tested. There, the safe exclusion zone was shown to be flawed, as radiation penetrated the victims unfelt and undetected. Can we be absolutely certain that, as the wind blows and the bee flies, not one grain of pollen will cross the 50 m exclusion zone set by the Executive? For those who would accuse me of scaremongering, I produce in evidence the statement of the chair of the British Medical Association's board of science of education, who said: "Once the GM genie is out of the bottle, the impact on the environment is likely to be irreversible." Plant in haste, repent at leisure.  At the moment, there is one test site, but up to 24 more are possible, located throughout our land, whichever direction the wind blows. They would be environmental time bombs and we cannot take the risk. We acknowledge the progress made by the biotechnology industry and the benefits that it can provide to our society. However, exactly as in day-to-day life, no one is above or beyond the law, neither in science can anyone or any institution be beyond control or regulation. We seek to impose not unnecessary constraints, but safeguards for a yet unproven technology. Just as we have learnt the lessons of Windscale and now recognise the risks involved in moving nuclear fusion from the lab to the field, we must be conscious of the possible consequences of moving GM technology from the lab to the field. We are playing with fire. We risk, in the event of a technological meltdown, a disaster for our agriculture industry, our natural environment and our people. If we play with fire and are not careful, we are likely to get burned. We cannot take that risk. The devastation of the fire would be too great. I move amendment S1M-675.2, to leave out from "commends" and insert: "recognises the Scottish biotechnology industry's excellent work and record to date; notes the concerns regarding crop testing expressed by bodies such as the British Medical Association, and calls for a moratorium on field crop testing until all legitimate causes for concern have been satisfactorily addressed."

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Health and Safety Executive over the environmental implications of the decommissioning of nuclear installations in Scotland. (S1O-1443)

In view of the appalling track record at Dounreay, and at Sellafield or Windscale, why is it that accountability on decommissioning is to Westminster rather than here? What will the minister do to return accountability to this Parliament and to the people of Scotland?

What powers does the minister have over the HSE?

I would previously have begun a speech on the police by saying, "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I ask you to disbelieve the evidence of the police officers." However, times have changed, as has my employment. In this instance, I have no hesitation in asking the minister and the members present to accept the evidence of the police. There are two aspects to this motion. The first relates to the increased policing requirements of Parliament and the second to the increased policing requirements of Edinburgh. Those aspects are interrelated, but the effect is the same. The police in Lothian and Borders are required to do ever more work, requiring ever more resources, without any significant increase in funding. I am aware, as are the police, that there is no bottomless pit of money. I am aware that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has funded in part the Parliament police unit. I think I speak for everybody, within and without the chamber, when I say that the members of that unit, to a man and to a woman, have acted courteously and affably and have been extremely professional. Their presence is reassuring to all in the Parliament; they have been open and friendly, while providing security for the Parliament. They have maintained a warm welcome, not only for MSPs, but for visitors and tourists alike. However, the parliamentary unit cannot cope with all the additional requirements of the Parliament. Indeed, evidence of that was seen as recently as Tony Blair's visit, when additional officers were required and were brought in from  elsewhere within the jurisdiction. While the current unit can cope with the day-to-day running of the Parliament, it is not in a position to deal with the ever-growing burden of responsibility that is brought about by the knock-on effects of the Parliament. This motion is, in part, a request that—like the Parliament's recognition of its responsibility for increased policing requirements—there should be national recognition of and responsibility taken for Edinburgh's increased policing requirements, which are, in whole or in part, brought about by Parliament's existence. It would be wrong to expect Lothian and Borders police to cut its uniform, so to speak, to fit its budget, or to expect council tax payers in Lothian and Borders to meet the increased costs alone. While everybody in Edinburgh and its environs welcomes the Parliament, it would be unfair to burden them with its total cost. Edinburgh has moved from being a capital city in name only, to being a capital city with all the needs and requirements that go with that. What are some of those additional requirements? First, there has been a growth in the number of foreign consuls locating in the city. They provide us with status that is welcome. Secondly, VIP visits—by Tony Blair or others—are on the increase. Such visits are mainly the result of the establishment of the Parliament and the creation of a focus for visiting this city. I understand that there were more than 160 such visits from VIPs and royalty last year. Thirdly—and this is, to some extent, related to VIP visits—there has been an increase in the number of ceremonial occasions such as the opening of Parliament. Fourthly, there has been a growth in the number of conferences, which is partly due to the opening of the Edinburgh International Conference Centre and the availability of facilities such as hotels. However, the recognition of Edinburgh as a capital city and its growing cosmopolitan status have, no doubt, added to its attraction as a conference venue. Those events and occurrences require to be policed. Some of the occasions might simply require traffic management and crowd control. These are serious matters that require significant planning and forethought. Other matters, such as the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting and the NATO conference, constitute a significant security risk. Accordingly, heightened police presence is required, with the increased pressure and planning that that involves. Although payment was made directly for the policing of CHOGM and the NATO conference, such payments are not always applicable. Moreover, the payments that are made do not adequately reflect the costs that are incurred.  Although recompense is made for the use of police officers, nothing is provided for the disruption that is caused elsewhere in the force's jurisdiction. Edinburgh's gain for events such as those conferences is at the expense of policing in places such as the Borders. Those are some of the technical reasons for more police, but there are other structural and demographic reasons. Edinburgh is booming—it is not only a capital city, but a cosmopolitan one. As a long-time resident of Auld Reekie, I welcome the change, but I think that it puts increased strain on the police service. The growing number of visitor attractions such as Dynamic Earth brings in tourists for the day or longer. They, too, require increased police resources while they are guests in our city; they require to be kept safe and secure. However, their presence is often a magnet for a criminal element who see easy pickings and who prey on such crowds. The hogmanay and festival attractions are added to by the city's growing international reputation, which is partly fuelled by its capital status. From a policing perspective, they are a significant consideration and require substantial resources. The level of policing for the millennium celebrations was considerable—Lothian and Borders police officers were not at liberty to celebrate the new millennium with their families or friends when the clock struck 12. Lothian and Borders police, partly—if not mainly—as a result of the Parliament, directly or indirectly faces increased responsibilities. The landing of the Parliament in Edinburgh has created not so much a ripple but a tidal wave for police requirements. The motion in my name seeks recognition that Edinburgh, and Lothian and Borders police, must be given additional resources. This is not a request for a blank cheque, but a plea for recognition of changed circumstances and a clear additional need. The circumstances that Edinburgh faces are not unique, as the English capital, London, has similar significantly increased requirements. I do not seek to put the needs of Edinburgh on a par with those of London, but Edinburgh should receive additional resources in recognition of its increased responsibility. The Metropolitan police service receives additional money for a variety of its functions—many such functions must also be undertaken by Lothian and Borders police. The Metropolitan police receives a substantial additional payment to cover its extra responsibilities, which mirror some of Lothian and Borders police force's additional responsibilities. It would be unfair to burden the council tax payers of London with a responsibility that should be met by everyone in the United Kingdom. Similarly, it would be unfair to burden people in Edinburgh or  in the rest of Lothian and the Borders with such a responsibility. Last year, the Home Secretary made an additional payment to the Metropolitan police of almost £180 million. Members and the minister will be glad to know that the chief constable of Lothian and Borders police does not seek that much. He seeks sufficient funding—£600,000—to employ 25 more officers. That will enable the creation of a dedicated city-centre community police team, which will ensure continued high-profile and active policing in central Edinburgh. That police team will add to the security and protection of the Parliament and the increased number of visitors and visiting VIPs to it. Such a resource is necessary for Edinburgh, which is now truly a capital city. Such funding must be in addition to the usual grants that are made to police authorities. Edinburgh does not seek special treatment. This is simply an acknowledgement of the special circumstances that face Scotland's capital at the start of the 21 st century. To some extent, Edinburgh is a victim of its own success; it cannot allow itself to become a victim of crime as a consequence of that success.

The minister is right to impose obligations, but they need consequent resources—it cannot be all stick and no carrot. Can the minister tell us what representations she has made to the Chancellor of the Exchequer and whether she will seek to ensure that the climate change levy and any funds gathered from green certificate trading will, first, be hypothecated for environmental, and especially renewable energy, matters, and secondly, that Scotland will get her fair share of those hypothecated resources. If not, why not?

On behalf of lawyers on all sides of the chamber, I would like to point out that Nelson Mandela was a lawyer, but I have never yet heard anybody criticise the large fees that he is alleged to have charged before spending a generation languishing in Robben Island.

I welcome the long overdue incorporation of the ECHR and I welcome the generally consensual tone of the debate—albeit grudgingly consensual on the part of the Conservatives. I will deal later with the incorporation of the ECHR in this country's law. I do not intend to rehearse the criticism about implementation that others have already made today and which I have made previously. I stand by the averment that in some, if not many, instances the Executive has been caught unprepared and ungowned. I want to address the philosophical reasons for supporting incorporation of the ECHR and the amendment to expand its remit and role to establish a human rights commission. Why is a human rights commission needed? The Deputy First Minister said that the matter presents a challenge and an opportunity. I agree. I also believe that that should—as Roseanna Cunningham said—dovetail with a written constitution and a bill of rights. It is nearly 25 years since I embarked on studies for a law degree at the University of Edinburgh. I studied opaque subjects such as constitutional law and  jurisprudence, and I was astonished at the absurdity of the situation in the United Kingdom, in which Parliament is sovereign. Recently I discussed that briefly with Gordon Jackson. It seems utterly nonsensical that in the 21 st century a Government could—theoretically—bring in legislation to outlaw all those with blue eyes or who happen to be beneath the height of 5 ft 4 in. It may be purely theoretical, but if a Parliament is sovereign, that is what the Government could do. I believe in the separation of powers, although that is a different matter, and the protection of the rights of the individual. It is possible—Scott Barrie commented on this—to have democratically elected fascism. Recent events in central Europe have resulted in Governments taking power that might not pay due cognisance to human rights. We must ensure that we protect the individual against the excesses of a Government that may be elected with a democratic mandate, but which might chose to exercise powers that conflict with the legitimate rights of the individual. The Deputy First Minister was correct to point out that we used to have the right simply to go to Europe, whereas we now have the right to challenge a ruling. We may have a fast-track procedure. A fast-track procedure is better than a no-track procedure or an outside-track procedure. I have been a practising lawyer and had people approach me, looking for advice and assuming that they would be able to take their case to Europe. I have had to say to them that they need to wait five years or more, while they exercise every avenue of appeal available to them in Scotland and the United Kingdom, and an inordinate amount of time after that while their case is processed. A procedure that will accelerate that process is long overdue. There have been questions about the implementation of the European convention on human rights. I do not blame that on Europe—there is no need to bring in any element of xenophobia. The problems have come about because of the way in which we have implemented the convention and because in many instances we were philosophically wrong. I do not want to rehearse the problems of implementation that others have dealt with, but we must consider that, in some instances, it was not undertaken correctly. The situation surrounding judicial appointments was not only handled wrongly; it has been wrong in Scotland for generations. We need to address that. We also need to address the age of criminal responsibility—sooner rather than later. Scotland might find itself in a position similar to that which followed the tragic shooting in Michigan by a six-year-old. Were the child three years older, would he face a murder charge for shooting a  classmate? We must consider whether a child of eight or nine should face a murder charge for such an action and be put on trial, or whether the parents—or collectively, society—has a deeper, underlying responsibility. We should welcome what has come from Europe. We should see this as an opportunity to address matters that are at fault. There have been changes in Scotland; the introduction of judicial reviews has been of great benefit, allowing individuals to take action against authorities where previously immediate redress was not possible. That is why I welcome the call for a commission in the SNP amendment. That would put the onus on being proactive. The concept of the commission would need to be fleshed out—skin and meat need to be put on the bones of the idea—but it would allow us to be proactive and enable other public bodies to initiate matters, rather than simply react to judicial reviews and court decisions.

Well, well, well—the Lord Advocate has resigned. Not before time, in my opinion, but what a sense of timing. Various issues need to be addressed: why he was right to go; why he should have gone long before; why, in the 21 st century, the manner of his elevation following his resignation is allowed to continue. Let us deal with the first matter: why he was right to go. I believe that he has been presiding over chaos and shambles. In 20 years as a practising solicitor, I have never known the courts or the profession to be in such disarray. I have never known so many aspects of the law to suffer such mishandling, if not downright incompetence. As Roseanna Cunningham said, the buck stops with the Lord Advocate. In the Procurator Fiscal Service, morale has gone through the floor. There has been the shambles over temporary sheriffs—an accident waiting to happen. Everybody in the profession knew about it; the sheriff clerk's office had an emergency strategy. Did the Lord Advocate have an emergency strategy? No, he did not. What happened did not sneak up on him; he just failed to prepare for it. In the judiciary, we have a shortage of judges, due partly to the fact that the Lockerbie trial requires various judges to go to the Netherlands. How does Lord Hardie deal with that crisis? He appoints himself to the bench. That smacks of a sinecure. Why is Lord Hardie's timing wrong and why should he have gone before now? He should have gone after the Ruddle affair. That did not sneak up on him. I asked various questions to find out why  Ruddle's agents attempted to negotiate a conditional release, which would have offered the public some protection from Mr Ruddle and might have offered Mr Ruddle some protection from himself. I was told that the Executive could not comment on the actions of a previous Administration. I was being told that the Scottish Executive would not comment on the Scottish Office, even though, since May, we have had the same Lord Advocate who was Lord Advocate for the Scottish Office. Perhaps the Executive refused to answer because the conditional discharges were on offer and were not taken and because the public paid the price until the loophole was closed. The Lord Advocate was the constant factor. He has left only when there is a shambles about shrieval appointments, when disaster beckons on the European convention on human rights and a stench of on-going cronyism permeates the profession. As Roseanna Cunningham said, we now face the biggest prosecution in Scotland's history—probably the biggest prosecution in the world since the Nuremberg trials—yet the man who was supposed to preside over the trial, to ensure safe hands and continuity, bailed out a few months before it was due to start. What happened next? Lord Hardie's resignation was followed by his immediate elevation. Most folk who resign and leave under a cloud go out with a P45 and a bleak and uncertain future. This man has walked out the door, across the road and up the stairs to a salary in excess of £100,000 per annum and a sinecure until he reaches the age of 70, unless he chooses to retire on the grounds of ill health. He appoints himself just weeks after the publication of newspaper articles accusing him of cronyism in his appointments to the shrieval bench. New Labour cronyism extends to the judicial bench and the shrieval bench. Lord Hardie should have gone long ago. His delay has continued to cause chaos and turmoil and I shed no tears for his departure. However, I am appalled that, in the 21 st century, a Lord Advocate can elevate himself, using the power of patronage that might have been appropriate when Walter Scott was at the bar, but that is certainly not appropriate in Scotland today. This is supposed to be an open and transparent Scotland and all those other things that Labour has harped on about.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the strategic rail authority regarding the rail franchises in Scotland. (S1O-1145)

In "Travel Choices for Scotland", it is made clear that "we"—meaning the Labour party— "are proposing that the Scottish Executive should be able to issue instructions and guidance in relation to passenger rail services which both start and end in Scotland; this will enable Scottish Ministers to instruct the Government's proposed new Strategic Rail Authority". Clause 183 of the Transport Bill launched by John Prescott at Westminster has removed the word "instructions" and indicates that the Scottish Executive can give directions and guidance so long as they do not conflict with that given by Mr Prescott. Would the minister explain why we are no longer able to instruct the strategic rail authority, but can only give direction and guidance, as long as that does not conflict with the views of John Prescott?

I will talk about two issues—first, airports and air links as economic resources and secondly, how Scotland is marketed abroad. Airports are economic resources and should be a conduit to boost business and tourism. It seems absurd that tourists should fly into London for a few weeks in Edinburgh or Glasgow when they could fly there directly. We should fly our visitors in directly, rather than have them packaged up for a weekend from London. Why do American and other tourists fly into London for golfing holidays in Scotland? They pay an additional cost, and our hoteliers and other businesses lose extra income. Direct flights would bring in more tourists. It would reduce their travel costs and increase their capital spend when they are here. It would make Scotland a more popular destination, by making it easier and cheaper to come here. Unless we get the punter in, we are more likely to lose out on the amount that he will spend. Justice must be done and be seen to be done. I am not referring to recent appointments to the shrieval or judicial bench—I am dealing with how Scotland's marketing strategy should be addressed. I tried to work out why the direct air links to Scotland are so poor. I have been going round asking why we have so few direct air links and why so many tourists fly into London and are sent up here on a hub and a spur. I asked Scottish Airports Ltd, which said, "It's not us." I asked the airlines, which said, "It's not us." They said that it was down to marketing and how Scotland is sold abroad, so I asked the STB, which said, "It's not us, because we are not in charge of marketing—that is done by the BTA." I therefore decided to investigate the British Tourist Authority and its relationship with the Scottish Tourist Board. I told the minister earlier that it is unhealthy that the BTA and the English Tourist Board share the same address, the same telephone number and the same fax number. The only reason why I do not know whether they share  the same e-mail address is that the BTA does not have an e-mail address in the civil service directory, but the ETB does. The minister may think that that represents prejudice against the English on the part of myself or one of my colleagues, but I say that it is absurd, and that it would not be replicated in a Franco-Belgian alliance or a Canada-USA alliance. Any such alliance would think that there is something fundamentally wrong when the BTA and the ETB appear to be synonymous. Indeed, when my researcher phoned the BTA yesterday and asked to be put through to the English Tourist Board, it was done immediately. That would not be replicated north of the border. It smacks of cronyism. Having looked at the civil service directory to find out who was who and how matters compared and contrasted, I decided to investigate the make-up of the board of the British Tourist Authority. I found out some interesting things. We do have a Scottish representative—I think that Lord Gordon is here today—but who else is on the board? It is not just in the case of Lord Hardie that we are seeing new Labour cronyism. First, sitting on the board of the British Tourist Authority, which represents the marketing abroad of Scotland's interests, we have none other than Mr Bob Ayling: friend of new Labour, chairman of British Airways and chairman of the New Millennium Experience Company—in other words, the London dome—since 1997. Mr Des Wilson, the director of corporate and public affairs at the British Airports Authority, sits on the board of the British Tourist Authority. The chairman of the BTA is Mr David Quarmby. If the minister wishes, I can provide him with details from the Scottish Parliament information centre's copy of "Who's Who?" According to "Who's Who?" Mr Quarmby has been chairman of the BTA and the English Tourist Board since 1996. Along with Mr Bob Ayling, he is a director of the New Millennium Experience Company, a position that he has held since 1997. Since 1996, he has been a chairman of South London Business Leadership, and since 1998, a director of London First. He has been deputy chair of the South London Economic Development Alliance since 1999. Scotland is marketed abroad by an organisation that has on its board a representative of an airline that masquerades as a national airline, but is predicated upon flying people into Gatwick, Heathrow and Stansted. There are representatives on the board from the British Airports Authority, which owns Gatwick, Heathrow and Stansted. On the board of the British Tourist Authority are representatives of various organisations, including the new millennium dome, which has been seen as the great new thing to take Britain into the 21 st  century. The board includes people who have an interest in using their planes to fly people to London, with the cash that is generated from that going to their organisations and boosting their economic development down in London. Meanwhile, we lose out. Is it little wonder that Scotland is marketed so badly abroad, when we are represented by people who are concerned with looking after interests south of the border? It smacks of new Labour cronyism. This is not about representing Scotland the brand; it is more about a skit out of "Scotland the What?"

Does the minister accept that the bulk of responsibility for marketing Scotland abroad will lie with the British Tourist Authority? Does he think that there is anything untoward in the British Tourist Authority and the English Tourist Board sharing the same office address, telephone number and fax number? Is not that a conflict of interests?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to encourage and facilitate air freight into Scotland. (S1O-1082)

Does the minister accept that an opportunity exists for increased freight and refuelling business for Inverness airport, if it is open for 24 hours a day? Assuming that he accepts that, will he provide additional financial assistance to ensure that Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd can pursue that economic opportunity for the betterment of the area?

I listened with interest to the list of representatives of various industries whom the minister has met and was surprised to note that there were no representatives from the air, rail or maritime industries. Are we not discussing an integrated transport policy? I wish to deal with the proposals on the Forth road bridge and its trunk roads. The A8000 is a national trunk road, and trunk roads elsewhere have, to date, been paid for and provided by central Government funding. Will the minister guarantee that the motorist from Fife—or elsewhere—will not face a triple whammy from fuel duty, excise duty and tolls for evermore,  simply to pay for a national trunk road?

Can Helen Eadie assure this chamber that fuel prices will not escalate in next month's budget? We may have to face a fuel duty escalator with a different name, given that the Deputy Prime Minister at Westminster talked about the hypothecation of money that might be raised from increased fuel prices. Is Helen Eadie saying that the fuel duty escalator, in some form or other, is not coming next month?

I am grateful for the tenor and spirit of the minister's speech. It may come as a surprise to some in this chamber and elsewhere that I do not seek to take issue with the principles and intentions of the Executive's motion. As I have previously intimated, to some incredulity from Labour and Liberal members, there are areas where it is my party's intention not simply to oppose, but to be supportive. There are issues that divide us, as in this morning's debate, but sustainable development is different. The concept requires us all to plan to create a better society. I hope that the minister will accept the sincerity of my remarks and I look forward to being able to provide the Executive with support and assistance. I am grateful for the minister's comments about our amendment, but I wish to press it none the less. It has been proposed not just by the SNP, but by the World Wide Fund for Nature, which approached the minister earlier this week. The amendment is meant to be constructive and to flesh out the bare bones of the motion. It is intended to ensure that noble aspirations can be quantified and met, and that the rhetoric of this Parliament is matched by action in public. What is sustainable development? Definitions abound, but I am taken by the one coined by the World Commission on Environment and Development, to which the minister referred in her speech. It defines sustainable development as "meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs." On that, the minister and I are united. We are now in the 21 st century and we all recognise that the earth's resources are finite. Generations ago, no thought was given to the possibility that some resources that seemed abundant would run out. That is not a condemnation of those who came before us, as they did not enjoy the knowledge that is available to us. They lived at a time when the prospect of exhausting resources was simply inconceivable. Just as, before Christopher Columbus, it was believed either that the earth was limitless or that people would fall off the edge if they went too far, until recently we were blind to the environmental disaster that was fast approaching. Times have changed, however. We have opened our eyes—where once we were blind, we now can see. We can quantify our world. We can calculate the resources that we have used and squandered and measure the limits of what remains. We can  quantify the damage that we have inflicted on our planet and the danger that faces it unless we change our ways. Sustainable development is about more than environmental protection; it is about planning the interaction of our economy, our environment and our society to their mutual advantage. Those three elements cannot be examined in isolation. Their interaction needs to be in harmony. If we distort the balance, we run the risk of jeopardising one of the components, each of which is vital. That is why the promotion of sustainability must be an underpinning philosophy, not a mandatory policy to be applied rigidly without proper appreciation of its effects. There are occasions when a particular policy may have negative consequences for the environment but must be implemented for economic or social reasons. Similarly, a policy may be economically advantageous but have to be rejected because of the damage that it would inflict on the environment and because it would undermine society. We cannot pursue short-term growth at any cost, because the future competitiveness of Scotland as a country in which we live, work and play depends on safeguarding our priceless environmental assets. A socially progressive policy, too, may have to be curtailed because of its economic or environmental impact. Sustainable development is not environmental Luddism; nor is it the slash and burn of unrestrained free-market capitalism or unlimited social libertarianism. It is simply a sensible balance of environmental protection, wealth creation and social justice. United they stand, divided they fall. Some small nations have already shown the way; where they have led, we must aspire to follow. The Netherlands, for example, has sustainability written into its constitution. Its commitment is exemplified by article 21, which reads: "The public authorities shall endeavour to ensure a good quality of life in the Netherlands and to protect and enhance the living environment." When people ask us why we need independence, I tell them to look at the Netherlands, and then to look at us. They have a constitution that has sustainability written into it. We have Trident on the Clyde and a nuclear industry that we neither sought nor need. Let me give an example of where sustainable development should be pursued through a coherent national plan. It is widely recognised—and the minister touched on this—that many in Scotland suffer appalling fuel poverty. However, we have rich energy resources over which we have little or no control. We have a nation  jeopardised, and sometimes poisoned, by a nuclear industry that we do not need and did not seek. We have been given an opportunity that we have not yet taken—an opportunity that could be even more advantageous than the discovery of North sea oil off our shores should have been. We are ideally placed to harness from nature what has been given in abundance by wind, wave and sun. We have a bountiful opportunity to harness an environmentally friendly resource for the national collective good, with substantial economic potential for socially liberating advantage. As a nation, we have an opportunity collectively to move away from mass exploitation of expensive, finite resources towards exploitation of energy resources close to home that are both sustainable and renewable. We have been bequeathed greater advantages than many other nations. So far we have not used them, but abused other resources that cannot be replenished. Now we have the opportunity to leave a legacy of affordable, accessible and renewable energy for future generations. We have to aspire to utilise those resources socially, economically and environmentally for our benefit. In Scotland, the number of people employed in the wind industry is 200; in Denmark, it is 10,000. We can create jobs. In Scotland, 15 per cent of our electricity comes from renewable resources, but in Norway 100 per cent does. We can create a cleaner, better environment. No longer should young and old Scots huddle around fires in winter, unable to heat themselves, never mind their houses, while other resources, which cannot be replaced by future generations, are squandered. Scotland entered the 20 th century with one in five people having some involvement with the mining industry; we enter the 21 st century with one deep mine in Scotland, a landscape in the central belt that was savaged by that industry, and communities and individuals scarred and diseased by the pursuit of coal. We now have the opportunity to ensure that history does not repeat itself for our current energy resources. We can create a sustainable, renewable energy policy. We can and must build a better nation for a fairer world. In summary, we are happy that the minister has raised this matter. She can rest assured that her worthy intentions have our support. Our criticism—if we have any—concerns the lack of detail and the limit of the aspiration. We believe that our amendment adds to the detail and provides the mechanism to achieve the worthy aims that she espoused. I move amendment S1M-486.1, to insert at end: "and urges the Scottish Executive, in order to fulfil that  commitment, to prepare, through consultation, a strategy for implementation including an analysis of principal issues to be addressed, an indication of the targets and standards expected to be met, arrangements for independent monitoring and strategic direction for those expected to meet such commitments."

rose—

rose—

Come on—give way.

Can the minister tell me when he met a representative of Federal Express? If he did not do so, which of his colleagues in the Executive has done so since 25 August 1999?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

What about a supplementary?

Will the minister clarify what he meant by the continuing negotiations to which he referred? The press release from the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions on 25 August notes that "Discussions with the US will include consideration of Federal Express's parallel application for full rights at Stansted Airport". It goes on to say that "the absence of reciprocal rights in the US would have a negative effect on UK carriers and jobs." What was the reciprocal right that the UK was seeking in the USA? Was it fifth freedoms or was it to allow the British Cargo Airline Alliance the opportunity to carry internal cargo in the United States? Is it true that Prestwick lost out because the Government supported the British Cargo Airline Alliance in its desire for access? What were the negotiations about?

Will Mr Tosh give way?

What is the purpose of this motion? It is to highlight the importance in the 21 st century and in a global economy of air links and infrastructure. It has been suggested that the strength of the Scottish economy can be observed in the vibrancy of the Edinburgh to London shuttle, but it should be clear that air links, if not an economic weather vane, are certainly an integral part of economic growth. We must not compound the problem of our geographic peripherality by imposing a cost penalty on access to our markets. At the moment, however, we restrict access by routing almost everything through London and compound that by having a pricing structure that economically disadvantages our nation in general and individual areas of it in particular. Air links are not simply about flying our businessmen to London for a mid-morning meeting or packaging our tourists off for a fortnight's break in Benidorm. They are about bringing in business and tourists. For too long we have been looking through the wrong end of the telescope. We must set our sights higher, because in the 21 st century nobody owes Scotland a living. We must access the markets and promote our industry. What do we face at the beginning of the new millennium? Privatisation of the national air traffic control system. Surely the word "national" should indicate the responsibility that the service has to the nation and the clear duty that the nation has to retain it in public hands. I will not say too much on that issue, as my colleagues will speak on it in greater detail, but I believe that there is neither an economic case nor a safety argument for privatisation. I am taken by the comments of the former transport minister—

Not at the moment. Gavin Strang said in the Edinburgh Evening News on 29 July 1999 that the three priorities for air traffic control should be safety, safety and safety. He added:  "I do not believe that privatisation should have a role in the future of our air traffic control." He said that privatisation of air traffic control was not proposed to make air traffic management safer, but was put on the political agenda last July as part of the comprehensive spending review. It is a pity that the Minister for Transport and the Environment has chosen not to say what her position is or who speaks for the Labour party in Edinburgh. Moreover, who speaks for the Edinburgh East and Musselburgh constituency Labour party—Dr Strang or Nurse Deacon? Are they for or against privatisation? In preparing for this speech, the SNP conducted significant research to try to find out whether any other nation has privatised its air traffic control system. We had been misled by Dr Strang, who had misdiagnosed the situation. He had said that no other country had done so, but I can reveal to this chamber that Fiji has sold its air traffic control system to Australia. That is an absurdity. In this part of the chamber, we had assumed that the unedifying race to privatise any asset that stood still long enough had ceased, but what have we seen? Harold Macmillan said that the Tories were selling off the family silver; new Labour is selling out the family safety. Secondly, I will address the issue of job losses at Federal Express. It is a bit like the Hampden fiasco.

One month the Executive trumpets a supposed success, the next its cover is blown and the gaffe is shown. What has happened? On 25 August 1999, the eminent and esteemed new transport minister, Lord Macdonald of Tradeston, told us: "Prestwick's emergence as an economically important air cargo hub could be encouraged by granting US companies 'fifth freedom' rights there, while continuing to pursue a wider deal—and this is what we have done today." So proud was the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions in its boasts that its press release, a copy of which I have here, is entitled, "Prestwick cargo cleared for take-off." The proposal did not even get to the end of January before it crash-landed at Prestwick causing casualties to the work force in Ayrshire. Ayrshire and Scotland have been sold out to preserve the interests of bigger corporations in the south of England.

I will explain when I come on to that matter. Glasgow Prestwick international airport will tell inquirers that it can turn around cargo in four hours, whereas it takes 48 hours to do that at Heathrow. Rather than having companies pulling out and workers being laid off, the area and the work force should be booming. Let us examine the situation. I received a short call yesterday from a quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisation seeking to blame FedEx. I then received a call requesting that I speak to a representative of FedEx. Although I was engaged on other matters at the time, I arranged to meet the representative last night for a lengthy chat. I understand that Mr Scott of the Liberal Democrats took advantage of the opportunity to speak to the representative this morning before he flew out. I understand that FedEx met the Minister for Transport and the Environment in July, prior to Lord Macdonald's gushing declaration. I was advised that FedEx had offered to meet her on several occasions between then and the recent announcement of job losses, but that she had declined. I asked whether FedEx had met other members of the Executive about this crisis and was told that it had not. That is an absolute disgrace. When Scottish jobs are on the line, is it not the duty of the Executive at least to discuss with the employer the possibility of action or assistance? The Executive did nothing. Success was claimed south of the border and Labour sought to bask in its afterglow up here, but when everything goes belly up, Labour shies away. We will not let it do so. Air transportation may be a reserved power, but Scottish jobs remain a devolved responsibility, and this is nothing short of a shameful abrogation of responsibility. At the meetings that matter on air transportation, the First Minister, the Minister for Transport and the Environment, and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning sit voteless, voiceless and anonymous, like the three wise monkeys—hear no crisis, see no crisis, speak no crisis. I return to Cathy Jamieson's intervention: what is the background to this? FedEx did not arrive in August—it has been here for 10 years. It was not a new business start with the possibility of exponentially boosting air freight from Prestwick. FedEx's main European hub is not at Prestwick or Stansted but at Charles de Gaulle in Paris—because it does not have full UK rights. In a nutshell, it operated big and small spokes. Prior to  August and since 1978, the routes were Prestwick to Charles de Gaulle and back via Stansted. Since 1978, FedEx has had rights to go to nine centres—what are called beyonds in the trade. Were and are those centres the main hubs, the vibrant economic bases, of Europe and the European Union? For sure they include Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium, but thereafter they are Iran, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, Turkey and India. I do not wish to be disparaging of those nations, but they are not economic powerhouses. FedEx wanted fifth freedom rights throughout the UK, particularly in Stansted, to pick up and go beyond on routes from the USA. In August, nothing was agreed. Labour trumpeted its achievements and FedEx pressed on, on the basis of good will and negotiations. To be fair to Lord Macdonald, the small print of the press release of 25 August says: "Discussions with the US will include consideration of Federal Express's parallel application for full rights". Although FedEx welcomed fifth freedom rights at Prestwick, it wanted similar rights at Stansted. It welcomed continuing negotiations and proceeded in expectation of a successful conclusion—an opening up of the skies. FedEx made that very clear. Notwithstanding the PR hype and fawning praise Labour heaped upon itself, no deal was concluded, no document was signed and no jobs were secured. New Labour claimed to have built a future, but it was built on sand. What FedEx saw as an advantage for itself would also have been an advantage for others—its competitors would have been boosted by Stansted's operation being opened up. It was made abundantly clear that the price for Prestwick was fifth freedom rights in the UK. Labour trumpeted a success, but the jury was still out. At national level, Labour was still negotiating with the USA, with parallel discussions with individual operators. Labour decided to play poker with the USA and Prestwick was a chip to bet with. Lord Macdonald was negotiating not for Tradeston, but for London. What were the other bargaining chips in that game of international poker? The USA wanted fifth freedoms and the UK companies that lobbied Lord Macdonald wanted access to US domestic markets. Those UK companies wanted not to boost incoming freight and trade, but the right to fly in the US domestic cargo market. The opportunity to boost companies that wanted access to the American cargo market was the goal, not the growth of Prestwick as a cluster zone. The British Cargo Airline Alliance represents the interests of those companies and none are located in Scotland—they are located at co- ordinates south, such as Bournemouth and Stansted. They are nothing to Scotland and do not represent our interests. They are Channel Express, a supplementary air operator; Atlantic Air, which operates one scheduled flight from Liverpool to the Isle of Man; and Air Foyle—its speciality is filling up large planes of east European origin. What do they want?

I am trying to. Those companies want not fifth freedom rights but access to the US domestic cargo market. Lord Macdonald gambled that he could get that for those companies and boost them. The bluff was called and Scotland and Prestwick paid the price. Fifth and even sixth freedom rights are not a threat, but an opportunity, for Scotland. What Scotland needs in fifth freedom rights is not unusual in Europe. The USA has long-standing agreements with the Netherlands and Luxembourg. On 22 December 1999, while negotiations between Lord Macdonald and FedEx were still going on, Portugal signed an open skies agreement with the USA. At the same time as we were being sold out, Portugal was signing up for economic advantage. We have seen it all before in Scotland. As a West Lothian boy, I saw it at BL Bathgate. The day that factory closed every product that was assembled there was still being produced—but south of the border. We saw it at Ravenscraig when Scotland was sold out for Shotton and Llanwern. We saw it when Rosyth was sacrificed for Devonport. The fact of the matter is that an independent Scotland would not allow that to happen to Prestwick. We would put Prestwick, not the interests of big business south of the border, first. It does not need to be this way; we can fly Scotland into the 21 st century. The solution, as I said earlier, is political will, political power. We can make Scotland fly, so I condemn the motion and I condemn the Executive.

I move, That the Parliament recognises the vital importance of air links and air infrastructure to Scotland and the Scottish economy in the 21st century; acknowledges the potential for economic growth through improved air links; condemns the proposed privatisation of National Air Traffic Services and Her Majesty's Government's failure to ensure that FedEx remains at Prestwick, and calls for government action to retain air traffic control in the public sector, save associated jobs and promote economic prosperity by increasing direct air passenger and freight links to Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to make any representations to the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions in respect of the proposed Transport Bill as it relates to railways in Scotland. (S1O-936)

Is the minister aware that section 192 of the bill transfers the powers of the British transport police to the strategic rail authority and not to this Parliament and that section 194(2)(c) gives the powers to make byelaws prohibiting and restricting the smoking of tobacco to the strategic rail authority and not to this Parliament? Is that not both evidence of a democratic deficit and an absurdity?

The Scottish National party welcomes the minister's statement. I have never given great credence to consensus politics, but this is an area in which we can work together. I take on board the fact that while we recognise that we have local initiatives, we must also have international action. With regard to the objective on PM 10 particles, I note that the advice of the expert panel for an excess limit of four days has been derogated to one of 35 days. On how many days, at the sites that are monitored at present, was the 35-day limit breached? If the answer is none, or on very few occasions, why are we aspiring to such a low level instead of the previous high level—of four days—suggested by the expert panel?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it has put in place to prevent radioactive pollution escaping into the atmosphere from landfill sites. (S1O-897)

Considering that SEPA has identified radioactive tritium levels that were some 200 times higher than background levels in the Lanarkshire landfill site, and given that the Executive has cut SEPA's funding by 6 per cent, how does the minister propose to monitor and police such abuses?

Listening to the Minister for Finance and his deputy, I am minded of the line in the Proclaimers song, which says: "But I can't understand why we let someone else rule our land Cap in hand". What a poverty of aspiration—boasting and bragging about expenditure levels that are inadequate to meet the needs, never mind minister the aspirations, of our people. At this time of year, people have their mind on family reunions and enjoyment. We should remember that we are the fifth largest oil producer in the western world, yet one in five of the youngsters sleeping rough on the streets of the city of London are Scots kids driven from their native land by a lack of housing, lack of employment and lack of hope. That is a badge of shame which every man and woman should wear until that wrong is righted. The draft budget is tokenistic and only tinkers with the nation's serious problems. We are the only country in the world that discovered oil and got poorer. Other nations discover oil and make the desert bloom; we discover oil and see the creation of an industrial desert in parts of the central belt. In what way is the budget an advance from the years of financial famine that we experienced  under Thatcherism? The adage that there are lies, damned lies and statistics comes to mind when figures trip from the lips of the minister and his supporters. Their tarty publication attempts to mask real-terms cuts with cash-terms statistics. After years of Tory under-investment, it seems that Labour can do no better than the Tories. Scottish spending on transport during the next three years will be about £360 million less than if it had remained at the inadequate level that was inherited from the Tories. In October, the minister sounded a fanfare and announced that Ms Boyack would have an additional £35 million to spend on the roads programme. However, that would not cover even half of the long-overdue safety improvements on the A77. Incidentally, in the financial fog of the figures, I have been able to find only an increase of £20 million. However, I am not interested in pursuing a paper-chase that—in relation to the investment that we need in our infrastructure—amounts to a pittance. Two-Jags Prescott says that £80 billion for transport is available in the next 10 years. What is our share? Under current spending levels, the Scottish transport budget would be only a cumulative £3 billion in the next 10 years. In another fanfare of publicity, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced the abolition of the fuel duty escalator. Was it really abolished? The name of the mechanism might have changed, but we face an increase next year, although this time the money will be ring-fenced for transport. What will our share of any ring-fenced fuel duty increase be? Just 1 per cent of any increase would pay for the much-trumpeted new money for Ms Boyack's budget. As I said earlier, John Prescott announced that £750 million would be made available to councils in England for bus priority and integrated transport schemes. Mr Raffan and others have criticised the Scottish National party for wanting to spend. I was criticised by the minister for saying that we should implement the strategic road review in full, even though I said that it should be implemented during a certain time scale. That £750 million would almost meet the strategic road review in full.

That is just what I am moving on to. The situation does not need to be as it is. We do not need to go cap in hand to London. We are an oil-rich country. We are also a highly taxed  country. I will leave it to others in other debates to confirm the wealth of our country and to articulate the fact that only with independence can we build the nation that our people need and deserve—that is on a macro level. However, resources are available on a micro level to provide what we need. The minister offers a one-off investment of £2.5 million to Scottish local authorities to implement a waste strategy, while £40 million a year—and rising—is sent to London to be hypothecated to reduce employers' national insurance contributions. That is neither green nor environmentally sound. As has been said, we have the only airports in mainland UK with more than 4 million passengers but without direct rail links. However, £65 million—and rising—is paid in air passenger duty. Some £12 million is given to the Exchequer from fiscal fines, principally road traffic fines, at a time when we still have to pay tolls for bridges long since paid off. I say to Mr Raffan that the Erskine bridge makes a profit, as does the Forth road bridge, as the Automobile Association pointed out. When platitudes are uttered about cycle training and other such worthy measures, no funding is available to support them. We would not have to touch our oil revenues—a fraction of that £12 million would suffice. I could go on and on, listing Labour's hidden stealth taxes. The Labour party provides us with so-called financial cake but steals the bread from our mouths at every opportunity. Let us be clear: we do not need to live that way. Let this Parliament run our country. Labour can keep its charity; we will keep our oil revenues, our excise duties and our taxes.

John Prescott has promised £80 billion.

I noted in yesterday's The Scotsman that Mr Prescott, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Transport and the Regions, announced £750 million for councils in England for bus priority and integrated transport schemes and that more details would be announced in the House of Commons today. How much are we getting?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve rail links to Scottish airports. (S1O-809)

Is the minister aware of the report that was published in September 1997 by the Association of European Airlines that indicated  that there should be rail links to airports that have a traffic volume of around 3 million passengers? That report also indicated that the only two international airports on the mainland of the United Kingdom that did not fit that criterion were Edinburgh and Glasgow. Those airports now have passenger turnover of approximately 6 million per annum and £54.6 million was paid in air passenger duty last year. Surely it is lamentable that there is still no rail link to either of those airports, which serve 6 million passengers.

Very wise, Presiding Officer. The only mention of funding in the statement was of the £2.5 million that local authorities will be given to help them to prepare and plan. Extra funding for SEPA was mentioned, although it is noted that that organisation has had a 6 per cent cut in funding. It might be better for the £40 million a year that  goes to the Exchequer from landfill tax—80 per cent of which is ring-fenced for a reduction in employers' national insurance contributions—to be used to expand recycling and an alternative waste strategy in Scotland. Would it not be better if the minister kept her £2.5 million and allowed local authorities and the operators to use the £40 million that they currently send south to promote recycling and a new strategy in Scotland?

On a point of order.

No, it is a different one. My point of order relates to draft ministerial statements. There is a convention that ministerial statements are provided timeously to Opposition spokesmen. I was advised yesterday that Sarah Boyack's statement was not available, but that it would be delivered at 8.30 this morning. I duly arrived at 8.30 and awaited a copy of the statement, which was eventually delivered at 10 to nine. I understand that a copy was delivered to my friend Robin Harper at the same time. I appreciate that we had 40 minutes before the minister made her statement but, as the outside of the statement says, it contains approximately 1,600 words. If ministerial statements and the questions that follow are not to be simply a game of charades in which spokesmen and others have to pre-guess what the minister will say, there should be a ruling as to how much time should be provided prior to statements being made.

I wish to deal with the transport aspect of the debate. I am conscious of the time limitation and the breadth of the subject. I will make some general comments, but my fundamental aim is to call for a national concessionary fare scheme for buses. The transport problems that face the elderly are affordability, availability and accessibility. The lamentable pension entitlement after a lifetime's work has been dealt with by my colleagues already; the pension—or the lack of it—affects the mobility of the elderly. Those who are limited to a state pension are curfewed by cost. The average pensioner who is dependent on a state pension spends, on average, 6 per cent of his income on  travel. That is an expenditure of £5 per week. Around half of pensioner households fall into that category. The average retired person whose main income is from sources other than a state pension can afford to spend 10 per cent of their income on travel. That is an average expenditure of £16 per week. Expenditure of £5 to £16 is hardly a king's ransom, but it is not enough to meet the fares so that people can remain actively involved socially and economically in our society, or maintain contact with friends and relatives either near or far. Obviously, part of the problem for many is the cost of fuel. We in the Scottish National party are conscious that notwithstanding our proposal, access to the motor car will remain vital for many urban and rural pensioners although, as I have said previously, that is a matter for another day. There is a multitude of schemes for providing concessionary transport. Some are good, some are not so good and some are downright deficient. The problem is that they are diverse, diffuse and unco-ordinated. We need a national scheme. We must put an end to the national shame of older people having to hop on and off buses, in and out of various schemes, to visit a friend or relative several counties away. We must have a national lead. The Executive is to be applauded for supporting a national concessionary fares scheme for the blind. It stands condemned for leaving local authorities to foot the bill, as a national scheme is a national obligation and should be funded as such. Now that the Executive has paved the way and proved that a national concessionary scheme is possible, there is neither rhyme nor reason why such a scheme should not be extended to other groups of people, especially pensioners, sooner rather than later. The Scottish National party proposes a national concessionary fares scheme for older people, which would provide them with benefits and entitlement anywhere in our nation. We propose to build on the best practices of the best local authorities and to top up the existing benefits that many receive. Our proposal would not replace or supplant concessionary fares, or the absence of fares, operating in many authorities. It meets the criteria of added value and additionality. We propose a scheme of half fares nationally. In areas where a better deal is on offer, that will remain. For example, in Fife, pensioners travel for free. Unless Fife Council changes its policy, that will remain the position. We propose to extend the scheme by allowing access to all points beyond the county boundary, at no extra cost to the local authority. How do we propose to fund that? I note that Mr McNulty is not here with his so-called wish list. The answer is simple. We will fund it through the  fuel duty rebate scheme that is in operation. I will digress to remind the chamber of the operation and history of that method of supporting public transport. The fuel duty escalator has driven up the price of diesel to one of the highest rates in Europe. However, the fuel duty rebate has not kept pace. Although last year an increase was made to compensate, there is still a considerable gap between the rebate and the fuel duty escalator. The rebate is 35p per litre, compared with 50p of duty per litre. Thus, the rebate covers only 69 per cent of the duty. If the fuel duty escalator is wrong and the fuel duty rebate is right, surely now is the time to right the wrong and level up the rebate to meet the real cost of fuel. The maximum cost of that would be £19 million. That is small change in comparison with the bounty that the Chancellor of the Exchequer has obtained through fuel duty, VAT and petroleum revenue tax. It is affordable, practical and essential. It is only one aspect of transport policy for older people, but it would go a long way to lifting the financial curfew and breaking the transport chains that imprison many in the older generation. The problem in the chamber is not only the poverty of pensioners; it is the poverty of aspiration of the likes of Mr McNulty.

rose—  [Interruption.]  [Laughter.]

I am grateful for this opportunity. I am tendering, with immediate effect, my resignation—as a bus convener of the tartan army. [Laughter.]  I hope that on this occasion I have not overindulged your favour, Sir David. I will put my question to the minister. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to help Scottish local authorities switch from landfill as the main waste disposal option. (S1O-688)

I note that the minister mentioned misunderstanding. I presume that that was the case when he voted with the Tories on social justice yesterday. The Tories might have given me the red card, but they got the red card from the people of Scotland when they were rightly thrown out on their ear after 19 years of Thatcherism. Does Mr McAveety think that it is right that of the £40 million—and rising—that has been raised by landfill tax, 80 per cent goes to the Westminster Exchequer to reduce employers' national insurance contributions by 50p? Will not he concur that money raised in Scotland should be spent here to assist local authorities and others to advance recycling and other environmentally friendly alternatives?

Is it a good thing that the A8000 is not being progressed?

rose—

Does not Mr Scott accept that the Scottish motorist, the Scottish consumer and Scottish society are paying backdoor taxation through the level of excise duty put on them by this Government? That is taxation.

I wish to preface comments on the substantive matters before us by thanking you for your earlier ruling, Presiding Officer. As a courtesy, I was provided with a copy of the strategic review at 12:30. However, substantive matters seem to have been made available to individual press representatives days ago. The purpose of the media, I believe, is to report matters in this chamber. The purpose of this Parliament is to challenge and to scrutinise. There will be a substantial democratic deficit if actions or leaks result in matters being reported unchallenged and unscrutinised. I was going to say that I was delighted to see that the minister had not been hung out to dry and that the Labour front bench had come, team handed, so to speak, to ensure that it was seen that a collective decision had been taken. It appears that I got that wrong. The minister has been hung out to dry on the issue of tolls. Looking back, we were led to believe that the Executive wanted tolls, but that the minister did not. We were then told that both the Executive and the minister wanted tolls. Now we understand that neither the Executive nor the minister wants tolls. To further complicate the matter and perplex the average MSP—and me—we are told that the Executive and the minister want tolls, but the Secretary of State for Scotland does not. What a shambles—perhaps they could sort it out peacefully, constructively and in a dignified fashion over a drink at the bar at the next Labour conference.  The Labour party's policy on tolls seems to have been formulated in the nursery. Like the grand old Duke of York, the Labour party has marched us up to the top of the hill and it has marched us down again. Now it is thinking of taking us halfway up, so we are neither up nor down. It is not going to toll old roads, but reserves the right to toll new roads. Leadership, vision, strategy? Come on down. What a shambles. What of the strategic roads review? Was it worth the lengthy wait? It has taken two and a half years to deliver a patchwork quilt of a road system and now there will be further investigations and further delay. Will it be the same time scale of two and a half years or more? This announcement falls between two anniversaries. Tomorrow is Guy Fawkes day. The announcement has produced not fireworks, but a damp squib. Tuesday past was the 40 th anniversary of the opening of the M1, which links London to Birmingham. Forty years on, through the failure of the Executive and its Conservative predecessors, we still do not have a motorway that links our two major cities, Edinburgh and Glasgow—nor, indeed, do we have one that links the lowlands to the Highlands. What a disgrace. There has been a volte-face and a humiliating U-turn on the toll tax. Are we supposed to be grateful for small mercies? That would not be surprising, given the cap-in-hand attitude of the Executive. If the Executive thought that it could hide paucity of effort behind the smokescreen of saving us from the toll tax, which was and remains a nonsense, it is mistaken. That is not a sign of a listening Executive but of a fumbling, panicking Executive. We need to consider what we want transport to do in society. That takes us back to philosophy and purpose. We view transport as an economic fundamental in a global economy and as a social necessity for a better community, underpinned always by the requirement to take cognisance of our duty as custodians of the environment and habitat in which we live. This is piecemeal policy—there is no consideration of the bigger picture nor of the strategic importance to the Scottish economy of the transport infrastructure. The review is a sop. By being so geographically disparate, it tries to convince all parts of the country that something is being done. What strategic overview has been taken, when the entire county of Clackmannanshire, which has already been stuffed in terms of the public transport fund allocation, is stitched up in the trunk roads review and left isolated without even a connection to the trunk road network? Clackmannanshire is not a community on the  periphery of our nation; it is located at its heart. Is Labour taking economic sanctions against a nationalist administration? The sum of the parts counts and the total, in terms of tasks and expenditure, is inadequate. This is not a trunk roads review; it is a continuation of a B-class road system in Scotland. Failure to implement the policy in full over a defined and reasonable time scale is not environmentally sound or ecologically friendly. Clearly, road building has environmental and ecological effects—it would be absurd to pretend otherwise. However, we must consider matters in a utilitarian light. The failure to construct new roads also has environmental and ecological effects. Moreover, the Executive's inadequate proposal gives rise to serious economic and social costs.

I will give way in a minute. Why do some people suggest that new roads are bad? Does that make an old road good? Alternatively, if all roads are bad, should we be digging them up and grassing them over? The proposition that an inanimate object that lacks any consciousness—moral or otherwise—can be good or bad is absurd. Surely what matters is how a new or improved road meets the criteria on which it will be judged. That takes us back to the economic, social and environmental criteria. Let us be quite clear about the nature of the roads under review. Only one new build—the M74 northern extension—is included. The other roads are upgrades and improvements where substantial difficulties and dangers have been identified over the years. They were chosen neither arbitrarily, nor as the result of a call to a road review hotline—Ralph or Clarence; they were selected under a fundamental roads review as part of a strategic and integrated transport policy.

Malcolm should sit down and listen—I will get to that in a minute. The failure to deal with all the roads over a defined time scale undermines the strategy and destroys the integration of our road network. On the M74, the emphasis has been on the cost of building, but I want to consider the cost of not building it. The M74 is vital to the west central economy and, arguably, to the whole of the Scottish economy. Six thousand jobs are  jeopardised and, unless the matter is addressed, the Executive will be writing the P45s. The calls to build the M74 north extension come from a wide and disparate section of the business and civic community. The people making those calls do so from a desire not to pave the west of Scotland in concrete, but to build an industrial community capable of providing jobs and income into the 21 st century. The minister will have to answer the question of how to square the circle and pay for the M74 and the other requirements. The SNP will not become involved—I am about to address Malcolm Chisholm's point, so he may want to take note—in horse-trading over what should or should not be done. As far as we are concerned, all the roads are of equal priority and the debate should be about timing, not construction. Some of my colleagues will address in greater detail the finances available to carry out this urgent task. Let me make it quite clear: the SNP's priority is to build our nation and its infrastructure, not to promulgate a policy of tax cuts to satisfy middle England. The Executive is keen to trumpet the fact that Scotland's economy is growing. No one here today would not say that that growth needs all the nourishment and assistance that it can get. Why, then, has there been a massive cut in the proportion of the nation's wealth that the Executive is prepared to invest in transport?

We are not in the Executive, so how can I possibly answer that question? As far as we are concerned, there should be a strategic, integrated policy. The strategic roads review came about because the roads were regarded as necessities in their areas. We believe that they are all necessities; if Mr Scott does not agree, he should tell us which ones he thinks are unnecessary. At least the minister had the guts and the gumption to do that.

Not at the moment. Well, as it is you, Tommy, on you go.

The figure comes from information provided by the campaign and action groups; it is based on what could happen to British Airports Authority plc, IBM (UK) Ltd and other  companies located west of Glasgow, whose future would be threatened by the failure to build this much-needed road. In the last year of the Tory Government, 1.03 per cent of gross domestic product was spent on transport and the environment. Over the next three years, less than 0.7 per cent of our national wealth will be reinvested in transport and the environment. In money terms, that means that some £739 million extra would have to reinvested in Scotland just to keep spending apace with growth. Meanwhile, in London, the chancellor is happy to draw money from Scotland's account to line a £12 billion war chest, rather than to reinvest the money in the nation to nurture the economic growth that we badly need. When the south of England needed the M25 orbital, it was built. When Newbury blocked access to English channel ports, it was bypassed. When areas in the south and west were isolated, that was solved by road construction. Not one of those schemes was privately financed, and certainly none of them was subject to tolls. What an absurdity—some nations discover oil and make their deserts bloom, but we discover oil and the Executive attempts to create an industrial desert. In this country, many of our citizens face absolute poverty. The problem in the Parliament is not absolute poverty, but the Labour leadership's poverty of aspiration. Things do not need to be this way. Let us aspire to what is seen as normal and as a matter of right in comparable small European nations such as Denmark and Finland. This is not the statement of a minister for transport—it is the statement of a convener of a committee for filling in potholes. It is a B-road scheme from a second-rate Executive.

Does the minister rule out tolls on new or existing roads in Scotland?

New and existing.

On a point of order.

Yes. I wish to raise the concern that my colleague just made regarding repeated statements to the press before matters are announced in this chamber. Last week, a public transport fund allocation was intimated in a press release. Like Fergus Ewing, I heard on the BBC this morning that there will be a recanting with regard to road tolls in tomorrow's debate on the strategic roads review. Neither of those matters have come before the Transport and the Environment Committee, any other committee, or this chamber. Sir David, I ask you to rule that that democratic deficit is unacceptable and that matters should be brought to this chamber first, rather than the press corps.

I concur with the minister's statement regarding the tragic accident in London. Does the minister agree that the bill transfers responsibility to the Scottish Parliament but not control of the budgetary allocation? We will have responsibility without revenue and control of the trains but not the track. Will the minister confirm that apart from any revenue gain on a franchise agreement, the only way in which the Parliament  can expand the rail network within the block grant allocation is to cut jobs and services in some other area, such as health or housing?

It is reasonable to expect that the announcement of expenditure plans to the Scottish Parliament will be an opportunity to outline a vision and to dispense goodies to an eagerly awaiting nation. What we have heard so far amounts to little more than crumbs swept from the table—crumbs that are not bound together by any great vision, because there is neither a big picture, nor a big idea.  What is the current situation in Scotland? As others have said, in London, Gordon Brown's UK war chest is being built up in preparation for a Dutch auction at the next election. Labour is involved in an unseemly scramble with the Tories to cut direct taxation further, at the same time as it continues to introduce indirect taxation by the back door. Fuel duty is the classic, crippling example of that. Eighty-five pence in every pound that is spent by the Scottish motorist finds its way directly to London, no doubt thickening the lining of Mr Brown's war chest. Scotland may be Europe's major oil producer, but Labour dictates that we have the highest fuel prices on the European continent. Even air transport is not exempt. Last year the Treasury raked in from Scotland £54 million through air passenger duty, but we do not even have rail links to our major airports. We heard an announcement of £45 million for roads, but Labour's accident tax will be covered in three and a half years from Scottish motorists' increased premiums. We are paying for it through the back door. Transport infrastructure forms the backbone of a stable economy, creating jobs and wealth. That backbone is crucial to a geographically remote nation such as ours. Let us consider the priority that the Executive has given transport. The rhetoric may be fine, but it is belied by a lack of financial commitment. The Executive's proposals would cut transport expenditure by more than £200 million over the first three years of this Parliament, as compared with the last three years of Tory rule. We may be becoming a wealthier nation, but under Labour a smaller proportion of our wealth is being invested in our nation. Our wealth is being extracted to fund a tax bribe promised by a London chancellor. In 1993-94, 0.56 per cent of gross domestic product was spent on roads and transport. According to "Serving Scotland's Needs", by 1999-2000, that will have fallen by about a third. If spending had remained at 1993-94 levels, this Parliament would have had an additional £488 million to spend on transport. A comparison of the last three years of Tory spending with the plans that have been published for the first three years of this Scottish Parliament indicates that expenditure on motorways and trunk roads is on course to fall by some 70 per cent. That leaves Sarah Boyack as not so much the Minister for Transport and the Environment, but the minister for potholes. Do not ask for Ms Boyack—it would be as well to ask for Ralph or Clarence, as that is all that the budget will pay for. Under the trunk road maintenance review, road  maintenance may be hived off, privatised or undercut. Local authorities are worried about that. Where is the money for the big projects? Where are the plans for infrastructure to allow us to be economically competitive? London is a great deal less geographically peripheral than Scotland, but the Government seems happy enough to pour money into its infrastructure.

I am sorry, but I will not give way. The Presiding Officer has made it quite clear that other people wish to speak. What about the £2.5 billion for the new Jubilee line in Docklands? What about the £440 million for Heathrow Express? What about the £1.8 billion channel tunnel link? There is even talk of a second Eurotunnel, when we in Scotland do not have a direct link to the first one. No visionary projects of that sort are contained in Scotland's budget statement. A mere £35 million would cover the upgrading and electrification of the Edinburgh-Shotts link. Just £15 million would open a freight and passenger service connecting Stirling, Alloa and Dunfermline and £180 million would provide us with the M74 northern extension, which would boost the economy in the west of Scotland. The cost of just one station on the Jubilee line would be enough to upgrade the A77 to motorway status. At a time when environmental issues are becoming more and more important, when Kyoto is climbing up every agenda, with a need for closer monitoring and tighter regulation, we discover that the environmental watchdog, which we trust to look after and monitor our environmental needs, faces a 6 per cent budget cut. On the environment, Labour's commitment does not match the rhetoric. We need a basic change in philosophy. We need to recognise that investment in community and country is essential. We must invest for the common good, not withdraw for the individual gain, in order to compete economically in the global economy, which is a prerequisite for us to be able to implement our plans for social justice. In today's statement, the Executive has fallen lamentably short. It has been subject to examination and it has failed.

Can the minister tell us how expenditure on transport and the environment seems to have increased by £600 million on 1995-96? That is a massive jump—where does that figure come from?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order. An allegation has been made, that I said that I supported road pricing. I did not say that. I would like Sarah Boyack to withdraw her remark.

Yes.

How does the member propose that by 2005 Scottish cities should meet the air quality directives and address the problem of environmental pollution that we are suffering in urban areas?

I support what Mr Kerr says about home zones and speed limits, but why are such things reserved matters? Why is the hypothecation of speed camera fines, which the police in Scotland want, a matter reserved to Westminster and dealt with by the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions? Why are we not competent to deal with speed limits, never mind to decide what we do with speed camera fines?

The chancellor chooses to spend the money down south. Why did Stansted have a rail link built to improve access and create a better gateway when we have no rail link at Aberdeen, Glasgow or Edinburgh?

I was astonished when the minister criticised the Tories for their over-ambitious programme in government. We have always criticised the Conservatives' lack of ambition in our country during the same years. The debate has centred on the issues of current costs and of who is to blame for getting us into this  situation. However, we believe that there is a bigger issue to address. As I think the Tories pointed out, with the millennium approaching, we are part of a global economy and transport is fundamental for our nation to be viable and to survive economically. We need trade links to allow the economy to boom. However, we lag behind other nations because of the lack of good transport links to the south, to Europe and internationally, and that will damage us. We need to work out a strategy to address the problems. I would like to provide a definition of the purpose of transport. First, transport should facilitate the movement of trade, commerce and people to provide a base for economic advancement in a global economy. Secondly, it should provide the structure by which people in urban and people in rural areas—who are currently excluded through geographical isolation—can be brought into the economic and social fabric of our society. That should be the fundamental ethos behind our transport policy. Such a policy should allow us both to trade externally and to look after people internally whether they are isolated in an island region or stuck in a peripheral housing scheme in one of our larger cities. To assess the current situation, we have to examine the existing transport infrastructure. Our trunk road network is inadequate, despite the Executive's suggestion that there has been an ambitious programme of road building. We have poor ferry communications and ferry links. We await the opening of the ferry link to the European continent—and about time, too. However, of the three organisations mentioned in connection with the link in yesterday's Edinburgh Evening News , not one was the Scottish Executive. Where is the Executive's drive and desire to achieve that link? We have limited air links. We talk about the financial service sector in Edinburgh but, although there are flights from the Republic of Ireland to five German cities—to the main hub and axis of the European economy—in Scotland, we can fly to only one. It is an abomination that we are used as a spur to Heathrow and Gatwick. We were promised a direct rail link to the European continent, but that has not happened. Our trade is restricted and people going to Europe have to change at King's Cross or Euston and travel across London. That is not good enough. Furthermore, access to rural areas is poorly resourced. Although I welcome any further funding for rural areas, the fact is that the air service in the Highlands and Islands is inadequate. Part of the problem is terminology. We should not talk about lifeline routes as if we were speaking about medivacking old grannies who are ill; we should be bringing in commerce and industry and  allowing people to access those areas. My grandparents have benefited from being flown out to Raigmore hospital. However, if we are to make the western isles part of our booming economy in the next millennium, people should be able to fly, using a cheap and reliable service, from Stornoway either to Glasgow to make a connection or to Schipol airport. How did this situation arise? I am a bit incredulous at the Tories' comments, which were disingenuous. I meant to ask Murray whether there had been any benefits from our rail privatisation. Perhaps he will tell us now.

The SNP is not going to take lectures from those who privatised the railways, deregulated the buses, left the public to pay the price and left a poorer service with higher prices. The only gain from rail privatisation is the gain in Railtrack's profits. Everything else remained static.

I will not take another intervention. Let us look at the facts. Between 1979 and 1997, when the Tories were in office, traffic increased by 75 per cent. During the past 10 years, there has been a 32 per cent reduction in the number of bus-passenger journeys. The number of rail passengers has remained static; indeed, in terms of the railways, all movement has been static apart from Railtrack's profits.

Not at the moment, Murray. We must remember that, while we were getting the M74 and the other much-needed road improvements that were mentioned, the infrastructure down south had already been built. The problems south of the border—on the M3 and the M25—are to do not with the lack of infrastructure, but with congestion. The links have been built south of the border; SNP members want Scotland to have x infrastructures and x links built, too. The cost of motoring affects us all—motorists, consumers and businesses. It is crippling people  and harming our economy. There are two aspects to that: the fuel price escalator and Government excise duty. We are told that the fuel price escalator was introduced by the Tories, first at 3 per cent plus inflation, then at 5 per cent plus inflation and then at 6 per cent plus inflation. The fact is that the ground has shifted under the Government's feet. The Government has to answer for its culpability in not making appropriate representations and protecting Scotland's interests. When the fuel escalator was increased to 6 per cent plus inflation, it was assumed that inflation would be 2.5 per cent. Oil prices have doubled, however, and that has meant that, in the past eight months—

The Government does not set the price of petrol except in terms of excise duty. The price of petrol is set by the market price and by the excise duty that is charged thereafter. SNP members are saying that the fuel duty escalator should stop. The money that the Government gets must also be returned to Scotland. We do not accept what we are told—that we get our fair share.

No, not at the moment. I have taken plenty of interventions. Donald Dewar stated his position in the Scottish Grand Committee on 1 February this year, and his decision was predicated on the following. He said: "The oil price is likely to stay at about $10 to $12 a barrel at least in the foreseeable future." The First Minister is not here, but the foreseeable future from 1 February would presumably include 16 September of the same year. He continued: "Therefore, we are worlds removed from the oil prices and production levels of the mid-1980s".—[ Official Report, House of Commons, Scottish Grand Committee, 1 February 1999;  c 8 . ] Contrary to those claims, the price of oil has risen from $10.2 a barrel to $18.9 a barrel in only seven months. That is a 65.6 per cent increase and we are paying the price. That is why it is not good enough to say that some representations have been made since the Transport and the Environment Committee meeting. We need to stop the fuel price escalator now because it is crippling the Scottish economy, never mind the Scottish motorist. After that, we must ask what the Government does with the excise duty that it has milked from Scotland, given that it has failed to  provide the road, rail, marine and air infrastructure that I mentioned. Let us consider the Executive proposals. First we have motorway tolls. To some extent, that issue has been dealt with by the Tory spokesman. SNP members think that the proposal is nonsense. What is the logic behind bringing in motorway tolls? Is it to help the environment? We lodged a written question about the effect motorway tolls would have on the reduction of journeys. What answer did we get? "We do not really know. It is maybe aye, maybe no; it depends on what you do and how you run it."

Fire on, Andy.

If Andy bears with me, I will come to that. There is a difference between user congestion charges in cities and motorway tolls. That is certainly what David Begg seems to think, and he is an adviser to the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions. David Begg made it clear to the Transport and the Environment Committee that he thought that motorway tolls were not on, but that user congestion charging required consideration. There is no environmental argument in favour of motorway tolls. They will not put road users off; indeed, the Government cannot predict what effect they would have. We all know that they would cause mayhem. We do not need a transport consultant to tell us that, if there were tolls on the M8, Salsburgh, Whitburn, Harthill and West Calder would be rat-runs. The same number of people will travel, but they will choose a different route. The people who will pay the price will be those with young families and those who require to cross the road in those communities. That is why North Lanarkshire Council and West Lothian Council, which are Labour controlled, have made their position clear—they do not want motorway tolls.

That smacks of the same U-turn  that we had the day after the consultation document was announced, when we were told that the money raised would be hypothecated. The Government's intentions are well canvassed. The minister may try to deny it, but the public know that they are paying the highest price for petrol in Europe. Now the Executive wants to toll them, too. Tolls are simply another hidden tax—similar to air passenger duty, landfill tax and insurance tax—which will be taken from people and put into the Treasury's coffers.

Not at them moment. [MEMBERS: "Give way."] No.

We face the possibility of petrol at £4.30 per gallon by the end of this parliamentary session. On top of that, the Labour Executive proposes road tolling. If we assume a toll at the rate of 5p a mile for the M8, motorists could have to pay close to £1,000 per annum. At the end of the Labour Executive's term, the motorist will be paying £4.30 a gallon as well as £1,000 a year for travelling up and down the M8. [Interruption.] Labour members may laugh, but the people out there know that I am right

Let me deal with congestion charging—

Fire on. [Applause.]

It has already been funded by the change in the price of a barrel of oil; it has been funded by what the Government has taken in petroleum revenue tax. Does Karen Gillon not think that the chancellor gets money in his pocket when the price of a barrel of oil goes up? When that document was written, the price of a barrel of  oil was far lower. Let me deal with Andy's point about congestion charging. We believe that congestion charging is vastly different from motorway tolling. We would use it sympathetically. We would not impose it if areas did not want it. For example, Mr Lazarowicz could persuade the City of Edinburgh Council that it was a good thing and Mr Gordon could persuade Glasgow City Council that it was a bad thing. It is up to the local authorities to decide. There must be hypothecation for transport and infrastructure. Before congestion charging is implemented, it must be predicated on improvements in public transport. People in public transport, as anyone who has spoken to them will know, say that they could not cope—

No I will not. I am trying to wind up. As I was saying, the present system could not cope with the increase in passengers. Congestion charging is important and should be considered for two reasons. First, there is an economic argument. In Scotland, hauliers experience delays not at Harthill on the M8, but when they enter Edinburgh or Glasgow at Barnton or Baillieston. Scotland's economic lifeblood is slowed down by traffic congestion, and if we are to allow trade and commerce to develop, we require flexibility at those bottlenecks at peak times.

Secondly, there is an environmental argument, which the Tories did not mention. Our cities have an air-quality problem. In 2005, legislation will be in place and we know that half the sites within the city of Edinburgh that are currently being monitored will fail the standards. Unless we take action in the cities, the continual problem of asthma and bronchial complaints, experienced by youngsters and the elderly, will worsen. We have to address the problem in our inner cities and urban areas. That is why we are sympathetic to road user congestion charging, but say absolutely no way to motorway tolling. On that basis, the debate returns to where we must take Scotland. We believe that the Executive is failing to deal with the problem that it inherited after 18 years of Tory administration. We see no resonance or substance in the principal motion or the amendment. The Tories are crying crocodile tears. As for the minister, I will paraphrase Norman Tebbit: "On yer bike, Ms Boyack."

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

The minister spoke about making representations to central Government. During last week's meeting of the Transport and the Environment Committee, she was asked this question: "Has the minister made representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer regarding the increase in the fuel duty escalator in addition to the market force increase?" Her response was: "We will consider what we can do about that, but I have not been consulted by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. During the past few months, we have consulted UK Government departments, but that has not been one of the issues that we have discussed."—[ Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee, 8 September 1999; c 36.] Is she now saying that she has discussed the issue with the Chancellor of the Exchequer? If so, what representations has she made about the problems caused by price increases and, in particular, the fuel duty escalator?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to develop the electrification of Scotland's railways. (S1O-252)

Does the minister support the Larkhall rail extension to the Haughhead junction, when will she authorise its construction and how will it be funded?

This matter has been outstanding since December 1998—

I can assure John McAllion that I am not going to target the Liberal Democrats with what I will say—I will stick completely to the Labour party, which runs the Executive. Mr McAllion's problem is that he fails to address the fact that this programme proposes nothing of substance and is almost wholly spin. I believe that when an Executive presents its proposals, it has two clear duties: first, to address the immediate needs of the nation and, secondly, to implement its own ambitious programme. I regret that this new document does neither—indeed it is an abject failure on both counts. I would like to deal in particular with transport and the environment, which is the portfolio that I cover. Ten key pledges are referred to in the programme for government—which was ripped to shreds by the leader of the SNP during his tour de force speech. The only pledge on transport and the environment is that there will be a national park at Loch Lomond in 2001. We look forward to that legislation coming in. We will examine it critically and constructively. The SNP views Loch Lomond as a national treasure and making it a national park will add to that. It is not, however, one of Scotland's immediate needs in terms either of transport or of the environment. Scotland's clear and pressing transport problem is the crippling price of fuel and the excise duty that was imposed by the Labour Administration in London. Since it came to power in May 1997, it has increased the price of petrol and diesel by 25 per cent. That affects everybody. It affects not only motorists, but consumers and the whole nation in terms of our manufacturing capability and the ability to sell our goods abroad, which is necessary in a global economy. It is not something that we look at flippantly. The Government has brought the price of a gallon of petrol up to £3.30 in central Scotland and even higher elsewhere. It takes 85p in every pound as revenue for Gordon Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer. It is a pity that Sarah Boyack is not in the  chamber, because when I said that the minister was quite correct in pointing out that fuel and excise duties are reserved matters, she said that she would liaise with the Chancellor of the Exchequer. When I asked later what liaison she had had with the chancellor regarding fuel prices and the fact that we face a 6 per cent increase on top of a 20 per cent market force rise resulting from the fuel duty escalator, I was told—by the press corps—that the chancellor had not spoken to her. I see no need for this Parliament to sit and wait for the chancellor to come to speak to us. As the elected representatives of the people of Scotland it is our duty to articulate their position. We should tell the Chancellor of the Exchequer that his ripping off of the Scottish motorist is undermining our ability to cope economically as a nation.

We are calling now for what we called for before—abandonment of the fuel price escalator. It is causing and compounding problems. The price of a barrel of oil has doubled through tariffs. The Government is—as it did last year and the year before—adding 6 per cent to that. We in Scotland have seen no tangible benefit to our public transport infrastructure. The Government has taken our money and, over the years, has built the M25 and other major components of transport infrastructure south of the border. We have received very little and we await with interest the implementation of a strategic trunk road review. We will see what we receive in comparison with what the review suggests. We have asked some questions about the consultation document, "Tackling Congestion", and the minister has told us that it is up for discussion. Nothing is ruled out and nothing is ruled in. Where is the leadership? When we ask what reduction there will be in the number of road journeys as a result of tolling, we are told that the Government does not know. We are told that it will depend on the type, the manner and the location of the tolling. That is not enough. If the Government does not know whether road tolls on trunk roads will reduce congestion, what is the purpose of implementing them, if not to tax the Scottish motorist more? The Government says in its consultation document that it favours electronic marking and collection. Who will pay for the implementation? Who will pick up the tab? We are told that the Government does not know and that that is up for  consideration. That is an abandonment of the Government's duties. Regarding the environment, we are told that recycling is to be targeted and that there will be a national park. What mention is there of genetically modified foods? Are not we, as a Parliament, meant to reflect and represent the needs, wishes and desires of the people of Scotland? Is the debate on GM foods not one in common currency among the general population of Scotland? Is that not worthy of a mention by the Minister for Transport and the Environment? Why is nothing said, with no plans or proposals? Is it perhaps because, as is the case in other areas, lobby groups down in Westminster have nobbled the real leadership of the Labour party? What about landfill tax? We are told that the Executive wants recycling. This is a specific point, and it is unfortunate that the minister is not in the chamber. We are told that there will be a new recycling strategy because landfill in Scotland is an abomination and a blight on many communities. What do we know? At present, we know that the Chancellor of the Exchequer gets around £40 million per annum from landfill tax. That will increase every year. Where does the money go? Apparently, we have hypothecation within the Labour Administration in London. The money the Chancellor of the Exchequer gets for his green tax goes to reduce the national insurance contributions of employers. I ask the Executive why we should not use that tax, brought in because of a blight on areas of Scotland, to assist with recycling and to create an environment fund. What is contained in the document is cauld kail het up. It is not a recipe for a new Scotland; it is a diet of porridge and gruel for the people of Scotland.

One of the drawbacks of being called towards the end of a debate is that everyone has said what you were going to say. However, the benefit is that you can work out the terms of the debate.  I listened to the minister, to Mr McLetchie and to Mr Jackson, and there appears to be much unanimity and consensus on many areas-and on two areas in particular. First, everyone accepts that we are focusing on a narrow area of law. Secondly, we are not undertaking a fundamental review. I will not canvass how we arrived at that position, but it is accepted that a fundamental review will have to be considered by the MacLean committee and the Millan committee. At some stage-either next year or the year after-the Parliament will doubtless have to revisit and reconsider the matter, because we are debating and discussing an area of law and psychiatry that has proved to be fundamental over the past 20 to 40 years.  We need to be clear about what we are trying to achieve in the interim. I have a great deal of sympathy with Dr Dyer, who was mentioned earlier. I appreciate his point of view, because the number of people we seek to address in the legislation is relatively few. Everyone accepts that there are a significant number of people in Carstairs, but the number who will be affected by the legislation can be counted, if not on the fingers on one hand, on not many more. The number of those who will be affected will also be reduced on the recommendations of the Millan committee and MacLean committee.  I can understand why Dr Dyer says that we should seek to amend section 3; I can appreciate his position. However, I think that the public would view the Parliament as being derelict in its duty if it failed to address the possibility that the people affected, who may be counted on the fingers of one hand, might be released without conditions or without any element of treatability being addressed.  On page 3 of his briefing, Dr Dyer says that we should not do that. He says that should Parliament wish to add the term "personality disorder" to the category of mental disorder, it should do so in addition to the terms "mental illness" and "mental handicap", as that is in keeping with current psychiatric thinking, which views the concept of personality disorder as different from the concept of mental illness. That point was canvassed by other MSPs, in particular Mr Jackson.  We must recognise that the issue will be dealt with by the MacLean committee, not by a fundamental review. The failure to address section  17 of the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 is a glaring anomaly that has occurred because we are trying to deal with a narrowly focused area that affects a limited number of people over a short period. If we are to do that, we must try to achieve a balance.  As my colleague Mr Matheson commented, the difficulty is that the term "personality disorder" affects many people and is wide-ranging. Numerous people in Carstairs, the state hospital institution, might be affected by the proposal and, although they might not be the most sympathetic of those we choose to associate with, we have a duty to look after their interest and to take cognisance of their rights. That means that the definition of "personality disorder" must be tight. We are talking not about someone who is slightly eccentric, but about people who are a danger. That is what the public wish us to address and where I differ from Dr Dyer.  In considering personality disorder, we have a duty to ensure that the remit is as tight as possible, which means that we must specify those with whom we are dealing. I believe that amendment 28 deals with that. It shows that we are dealing not with personality disorder per se, but with "personality disorder manifested principally by abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct".  The public have charged us as parliamentarians with dealing with those people. We have to be quite strict and tight in our definition, so that in the general rush to introduce the emergency legislation, we do not catch the innocent among those whose position needs to be addressed seriously and which we have a duty to investigate.

The tragedy with legislation that is introduced in haste is that things are left out. I was appalled by the letter from the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland to the Deputy First Minister, dated 6 September. Twenty years of being a lawyer taught me that if you do not know the answer yourself, you know where to find the answer, or you know a man or woman who might know the answer. If someone had asked me about mental welfare, I would have said that the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland should be approached. After all, it is charged with a responsibility and a public duty.  Accordingly, when I read the letter of 6 September from Dr Jim Dyer, the director of the  Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, I was appalled by the first paragraph:  "The commission has had to consider the above Bill very quickly, since its Director was invited to a briefing by civil servants on Friday 27 August. The commission was not consulted about the proposed Bill."  That seems to me to compound the errors the Administration made over the previous months. It is now introducing legislation that it has failed to discuss properly with one of the principal organisations that should have been consulted. That may come back to haunt us.  The difficulty is dealing with various amendments at this juncture. We are dealing with matters only for a limited period of time. The number of people involved is limited. I will refer to information provided to me by other organisations. The people we are discussing are referred to in a Home Office paper on England and Wales, "Managing Dangerous People with Severe Personality Disorder", which has just been issued. It estimates that there are about 300 to 600 such men. It suggests that if the numbers are in proportion there are about 30 to 60 in Scotland.  The paper says:  "personality disorders are common. People with personality disorders fall on a continuum from near normal behaviour to extreme disruption in personal and social functioning. The overwhelming majority do not pose a risk to the public and live reasonably ordered, crime-free lives. The small proportion of such people who do pose a risk often suffer from the type of personality disorder that manifests in serious anti-social behaviour. It is a minority even of this sub group who pose a very high risk to society."  In the bill, we are dealing with some people who remain in the state system in Carstairs who are not subject to a section 74 hospital order and who are not free on the public streets or free to be released from prison in due course. That is a small number of people so we must bear in mind two key factors.  First, steps must be taken to deal with the issue of treatability. Secondly, we must deal with the issue of personality disorders. We will debate later whether the definition requires to be tighter. It seems insufficient to leave it as a matter of personality disorder. We must be tight in our definition and clear about what we are discussing, otherwise there is a danger that individuals will suffer injustice because they suffer from a personality disorder as a result of which they are no danger to other members of the public. That issue must be addressed.

As I said before, the problem has been on-going in jurisprudence and psychiatry for 40 years. The tragedy is that, through the incompetence and delay of the Executive and the previous Administration, we have to rush this legislation through. As Margaret Ewing said, piecemeal and hastily drafted legislation is a recipe for disaster. We are left with no option but to support the bill but we must flag up some problems.  We have to recognise that Europe is a governmental power. The bill addresses an aspect of Scottish law but our law has been irrevocably changed by the European convention on human rights. The bill is, to some extent, passé. We are assured that the bill recognises the convention. I hope it does but I have my doubts. I have been informed that appeals can be made under article 8 of the convention, on the basis that the hospital in Carstairs is a considerable distance from people's relatives.  The bill does not address two underlying problems. It deals with people who are in the state hospital at Carstairs. It does not deal with psychopaths or people with personality disorders. I share the reservations expressed by many members on how we define personality disorders. The bill does not amend section 17 of the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984, which outlines the criteria by which people in civil and criminal matters are admitted into institutions; it deals with section 1. It is designed to stop people with personality disorders getting out of Carstairs; it does not stop people walking out of prison at the end of their sentence, nor would it deal with Mr Ruddle, should he choose to return to Scotland. We are dealing with the detention of those who are in Carstairs, not personality problems. That is a fundamental flaw in the bill, although the MacLean committee might address it.  Michael Matheson touched on the lack of resources that are available to deal with personality disorders. As Christine Grahame remarked, treatment for alcoholism would have helped Ruddle. His personality disorder was exacerbated by alcohol and drugs, which created the paranoid schizophrenia from which he suffered. Why was the alcohol unit at Carstairs  closed down in 1996? Perhaps the Tories can answer that. I hope that whoever sums up for the Executive will say when that unit will be reopened.  The clearest critique of the bill is provided by the research note "Mentally Disordered Offenders in Scotland", which was produced by the Parliament's information centre. Page 4 details research from 1997. I understand that the research indicates that around 50 per cent of people who are patients of, or remanded in, Carstairs need not be there as they are not a danger. They should be helped in another way.  The document says:  "Health Boards have a responsibility to develop integrated and multi-disciplinary assessment, treatment and rehabilitation of mentally disordered offenders. Where possible, emphasis should be placed on the local level for provision of secure environments for the treatment (or rehabilitation) of offenders."  Note that it recommends a local level, not the state hospital at Carstairs. It continues:  "Four or five such units should be established across Scotland (including those that already exist at Perth and Aberdeen). Services could be provided on a 'supra-board' level, with occupational therapists, clinical psychologists and social work input. Health Boards should, in future, become more closely involved in monitoring the progress of patients from their areas who are accepted into the State Hospital. Overall the recommendations emphasise that the 'right kind of secure hospital facilities will reduce pressure on the State Hospital'".  Given that that information was available in 1997 and that this legislation has been rushed through in a few weeks, what extra resources has the Executive provided outwith Carstairs? What additional resources have been put into Carstairs? If no additional resources have been provided, why have they not? This bill shuts the door for some and fails to address a fundamental problem: it does not lay down how to deal with people who have dangerous personality disorders and it provides no resources to help those people.

I wish to make it quite clear to Cathy Jamieson that the debate on the law is the next debate-the Presiding Officer made that clear. This debate examines how we got into this mess, and why we need emergency legislation. It is perfectly legitimate for members to run through the Ruddle case in particular, and to analyse what happened and who is at fault.  Listening to this debate, everyone is wrang but our Jim. Who has been put in the frame, as the lawyers would say-Noel Ruddle, smart-arse lawyers and legal loopholes? Let us examine the situation.  It is quite clear that Noel Ruddle was an evil man, but he is entitled to look after his own best interests. Others were elected to look after the best interests of the public, and they failed. Smart-arse lawyers just used the law to win Mr Ruddle's case. You, Mr Wallace, were represented and you have lawyers-two are sitting next to you. Ruddle's lawyers won, your lawyers lost and the public in Scotland and elsewhere paid the price. A legal loophole? This matter has been discussed and debated for 40 years, and it was debated in 1984 when the Mental Health (Scotland) Act was debated. It is not a legal loophole-it is a huge abyss that has been staring us in the face, in terms of jurisprudential and psychiatric discussion.

I will not take any interventions. This is a winding-up speech, and Mr Robson will have to remain wound up, if that is how he is feeling.  How did we get into this mess? Let us run through some of the facts. As Lord Hardie will wind up for the Executive, I produce what I will call Opposition production No 1-the sheriff's decision from Lanark. The report clarifies that Mr Ruddle was of above-average intelligence and had no previous history of mental illness. I think that the Tories should take some cognisance of that.  In 1991 and in 1992, Mr Ruddle was allowed to be sent to the state hospital, as opposed to being prosecuted, and no stops were pulled out. That was despite the fact that, at one stage while he was on remand in Barlinnie awaiting possible trial and consideration, he was seen by a psychiatrist and presumed to have no mental illness. Indeed, all the medical evidence is that he did not have a history of mental illness-he had a history of psychopathic disorder.  As well as Conservative members saying that Labour should have tried harder in 1998 and 1999, their law officers-Mackay, Cullen or whoever their predecessors were-should have tried harder in 1991 and 1992. Perhaps it is coincidental that this evil man's parents were both psychiatric nurses. Did that not flag up a problem for the Conservative Administration? Should not the Conservatives' medical or legal teams have monitored that?  I will continue to run through what went on. The fact is that the sheriff made it clear that this man should have been monitored, yet he was not. He seems to have made an improvement while in Carstairs. He makes such an improvement that he gets himself a girlfriend and has a party during his incarceration. The psychiatrists examine him and it becomes clear that he fits the criteria for release.  Lord Hardie, I refer you to paragraph 7.16 page 10 of the sheriff's judgment.  "On 9 April 1998, the applicant was examined," and-narrates the people-  "the applicant was suffering from personality disorder".  The judgment goes on to describe what that personality disorder was. It then states that the "medical treatment in hospital was not likely to alleviate or prevent a deterioration of his condition".  A recommendation was made to discharge Ruddle. The final sentence reads:  "The applicant"-  Mr Ruddle, on 9 April 1998-  "was told of the Committee's view that he should be discharged."  In April 1998, Ruddle knew that the authorities were saying that he should get out.  The judgment also makes it clear that the respondent was also told of the committee's view.  The respondent is your department, Lord Hardie. You were told that Ruddle was being recommended for release. Ruddle knew in April 1998 that the psychiatric view was that he was to be released, and you did nothing. You did not call for the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland-Mr Robson is not here to comment on that. The MacLean committee was not initiated in April or May 1998. You sat on your hands and did very little. Lo and behold-what happens? When does the situation move on? The case did not start in August 1999, as Ruddle's appeal was lodged in the Lanark sheriff court in February 1999. What action was taken between April 1998 and February 1999? You did nothing.  Lord Hardie, from February 1999 onwards, you seem to have dealt with the situation through your legal team and to have done nothing. It was clear that Mr Ruddle met the criteria for discharge, and that is why it was granted. You gave no consideration to an attempt to alleviate the problem by offering a conditional discharge, which, I understand, would have been acceptable to Mr Ruddle and his advisers. We could, at least, have seen some restrictions placed on him. What happened? In August of this year, he was released at two minutes past 10, and you did not even have a bed available for him. He was able to go walkabout.  This situation is categorised and classified by total mismanagement, starting in 1991 and 1992, in terms of how Ruddle was prosecuted and dealt with at that time, continuing through the Labour Administration in post-election 1997, to April 1998. Lord Hardie, you were aware that he was being recommended for discharge and your predecessors did nothing. In February of this year, you were notified that Ruddle was going for his appeal and that he would appear to meet the criteria, as the psychiatrists had told you in April 1998-and you did nothing.  This has been a shameful situation. Lord Hardie, if you will not take the blame and resign yourself, you should sack your legal team because they have made a mess of it.

Mr Reid's case was first dealt with in the Scottish sheriff courts in around 1994. It then went through appeals before finally reaching the House of Lords in 1998. The MacLean committee was instructed shortly afterwards. Therefore, there were four years during which the case was considered. It took four years for the previous Administration, and now this Administration, to get their act together and instruct Lord MacLean.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to extend the commitment in respect of the Skye bridge to freeze tolls at their current level to other bridges and transport infrastructure schemes, in particular to the Forth, Tay and Erskine bridges. (S1O-79)

Does not the minister agree that the Skye bridge, which we mentioned this morning during the PFI debate, was built using private finance and seeks private returns? However, the Forth road bridge, in particular, was built with public money, was paid for by the public and has been paid off by the public. Why are we still paying tolls and how will the Government and the Executive abolish them?

As I drove care-free and toll-free down the M8 last week, I had the opportunity to listen to a folk music tape by the American folklorist Woody Guthrie, on which he sang a song about the American outlaw Pretty Boy Floyd. The lyrics say:  "As through this world you wander you see lots of funny men, some will rob you with a six gun, and some with a fountain pen."  In my previous existence as a defence agent I met many people who would rob with a six gun. I have now landed in a chamber where I am meeting the individuals who would rob us with a fountain pen.  The robbery started under the Tories. It was maintained under a Labour Administration, and it is now accelerating under this Lib-Lab partnership. Under Thatcher, public utilities were privatised. That was robbery of, and private gain from, a public asset at public expense. Privatisation went to such an extent that Harold Macmillan said it was selling off the family silver. Labour jumped up and down in raptures in support of that.

I did not know the answer, but my colleague Alex Neil has kindly told me that he was. Macmillan was referring to the privatisation of public utilities. PFI is privatisation. Labour is not selling off the family silver; it is selling off the family furniture, because we are dealing with health, education and housing-the fundamental issues for individuals.  I wish to comment on alternative funding and Mr McConnell's amendment. I will also touch on the points made by Mrs Smith. Mr McConnell talked about the choices. I do not want to go into great detail about Scottish public sector trusts-my colleague Andrew Wilson will do that-but Mr McConnell raised an issue that I was going to comment on: the Scottish transport bond. I note that Mr McConnell talked about the civil service brief "Pathfinders to the Parliament". I do not speak to many lords. Lord James is always polite to me.

I may have misheard Mr McConnell, but I thought that he referred to a civil service brief. I have a personal letter from Lord Macdonald of Tradeston-he even signed it "Yours, Gus Macdonald"-and I was pleased to receive it. The letter enclosed a copy of the report of the pathfinder groups and said:  "This report brought together the findings of the 13 Pathfinder Groups that I set up and I am very pleased to enclose a copy for your consideration."  In the penultimate paragraph, Lord Macdonald said:  "I would therefore hope that the report will be given serious consideration by Members of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive and I commend it to you."  I presume that Gus Macdonald did not send something to me that he did not also send to Mr McConnell. In that document is raised the question  of, and the options for, the Scottish transport bond, which doubtless Andrew Wilson will elucidate. We are quite happy to look at alternatives if Mr McConnell is not prepared to accept the Scottish public sector trust, but we must move away from PFI, PPP or privatisation.  That brings me to the issue of schools, as raised by Mrs Smith. As far as I can see, PPP means privatisation for parents and public. Mr McConnell talked about ownership. I have the document "Private Partnerships: Investing in Education" from the education department of Edinburgh City Council. Mr McConnell said that ownership remains with the public sector-or he alluded to it. Lo and behold, under the heading "Why PPP?", at the end of paragraph three, the document says:  "In practice, this means that the Council will lease rather than own the proposed new or refurbished PPP buildings and receive funding from the Scottish Office to meet rental costs."  That is what the City of Edinburgh Labour group said.

I will do my best.  The ERI contract makes no mention of a buy-back. However, I will skip what I intended to say about the details of PPP in Edinburgh and deal with this amendment. Mr McConnell thinks that his is a favourable proposal. I notice that Mrs Curran, who has previously commented on international affairs, is sitting at the back of the chamber. I want to know why, if this is such a good option for the Scottish Parliament, we are restricting it to this chamber and this nation. Why, when throughout the world, particularly in the third world, there are requirements for homes, schools and hospitals, are we not giving others the benefit of the wisdom that we have acquired through Mr McConnell and his colleagues?

Why do we not suggest PPP to the United Nations and the G8 as the way in which to revitalise the third world? If it is good enough for us, it is good enough for them. If it is not good enough for them and they will not accept it, why is Mr McConnell imposing it on our people?

I face two charges. The first is to make a few comments on behalf of my party. The second is Ms Curran's charge that I belong to a privileged elite. I want to address the latter charge first, as it has been taxing my mind all morning. I wondered what led to my being charged with membership of a privileged elite-perhaps it was my educational background. As I attended Linlithgow Academy-the same alma mater as that of the leader of the SNP-I thought that Ms Curran's charge could not possibly be justified, as the leader of the Labour party went to Fettes College.

I will give way in a minute.  I then thought that Ms Curran might have levelled the charge because of the education that I am providing for my children. My eldest boy set off today for his first induction day at Boroughmuir High School, an alma mater at which until only recently my friend Robin Harper taught. However, I thought that that could not be the case, as Ms  Harriet Harman used various means to send her children to specific schools.

I will now let someone from the underprivileged section intervene to tell me where Ms Harman chose to send her children.

I have not read Mr Hamilton's article.

After 20 years in law and a career in politics, I am not prepared to comment on anything that I have not seen.  My initial comment on the substance of the debate was going to be along the usual lines of "Where's the beef?", but I chose to change that given the absence of any beef-on-the-bone legislation. Like me, the First Minister is a lawyer, so I thought that it would be simpler to say that his statement was insufficient and lacking in specification.  The First Minister said:  "We will introduce a bill to allow the creation of national parks in Scotland."  Having listened to Mr Tosh and Dr Jackson, the SNP is open-minded and prepared to be persuaded on the matter. However, what does the statement tell us? We all know that Scotland's natural heritage is unique and that we must manage it. The First Minister went on to say that there would be enabling legislation, but all that he told us was that the first national park would be Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. I am not a betting man-I leave that to my leader, who is a syndicated columnist on that subject-but I would have thought that, on a wager, it was a nap that the first national park would be Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. It was hardly going to be Craigmillar or Castlemilk. However, that is all that the First Minister told us.  Before we make a proper judgment on the national park, we want to know who will fund it and what the funding will be. Who will control it and how will it be administered? To whom will the people who control the parks be accountable and what democratic input will individuals, councils and this Parliament have? The First Minister answered none of those questions. All that we were told was that the national park was to be located at Loch Lomond and the Trossachs.  We on this side of the chamber-the privileged  section-worry that the national park will be another quango crammed with Labour cronies. We have seen how some quangos have operated and know that various individuals are currently out of employment. I saw last night that ex-councillor Nolan may be losing a job. Perhaps he will be interested in moving from Craigmillar to Loch Lomond and the Trossachs.  A member of the press corps told me that transport would be the big issue and that I was fortunate to have been charged with the responsibility of being transport spokesman for my party. I picked up a copy of Mr Dewar's statement at 10 pm last night because I was so worried about the heavyweight legislation that was going to be in it and what I would have to comment on. It said:  "We will introduce a bill to address Scotland's many and diverse transport challenges."  I take that as self-evident. It went on to say:  "We need to generate the resources required to deliver a transport system that will be fit for the 21 st century."  I do not think that anybody in the privileged or underprivileged sections in this chamber will disagree with that statement. The First Minister also said:  "We need local solutions to local problems, within a coherent strategic framework."  There are local problems but we have to go beyond them.  There are many important points missing from the First Minister's statement. At lunchtime, I and others, including some Liberal Democrats, met a delegation from Skye and Kyle Against Tolls who complained about the injustice of the imposition of the Skye bridge tolls on Skye and Lochalsh and on Scotland as a whole. Despite a clear and unequivocal promise by some members in this chamber, there is nothing in the proposals about eradicating the iniquities of the Skye bridge tolls, which are the highest in Europe. The Liberal Democrats should hang their heads in shame.  In the proposed legislation there is a road-user charge and a parking tax. The SNP do not disagree with those proposals-they are fine in principle-but perhaps there is too much stick and not enough carrot. There is a lot about the taxation that may be levied and nothing about how it will be used. We want answers to two questions. Will the revenue from the taxation be ring-fenced for transport? If it is ring-fenced, will it be for sustainable transport or, like cigarette levies and excise duty, will it go into the Exchequer pot and not be used to make the improvements in public transport that Scotland requires?  The statement made no mention of money to improve the infrastructure in cities and contained  nothing about a strategy for public transport and how to deal with the anomaly of high petrol taxes in rural areas. The transport proposals do not make a clear national strategy. There is no coherent vision for Scotland as we go into the 21 st century and the next millennium. The statement was tawdry and tatty and contained nothing more than we could expect from Strathclyde region writ large. It was not a national document; it was a glorified regional transport portfolio. Labour has failed to recognise that.  We recognise that, in this Parliament, there are expenditure limitations on any party in the Executive. However, we are aware of the money that individuals in Scotland contribute through excise duty and the highest petrol and diesel prices in Europe. We are also aware of the money that is contributed to the Treasury through revenues from oil resources off our shores. We know that the transport and environmental situation is shabby and shambolic and will not be improved substantially as we go into the next millennium.  We want greater use of Exchequer money. Why is it that the M25 orbital motorway can be built using public Exchequer funding? Why is it that London Transport and the Jubilee line can be created out of public Exchequer funding? Why is it that the leader of the Labour party can talk about the importance of building the infrastructure that will allow people to travel to the millennium dome? All of that is happening when there is virtually no provision for infrastructure in Scotland at the macro or micro level. That is not a matter of taking a bird in the hand; it is a matter of being given chickenfeed.

I support motion S1M-27 more in sadness than in anger. I referred before to what the CSG report said about the principles of openness and accountability in the Executive. That is in the past and I will not rake over old coals, but I say this to the Liberal Democrats: we ain't forgotten. We will return to that.  The principles in the report are, as far as we can tell, being sold out just as they were sold out in smoke-filled rooms. They are being buried in small print. I address my remarks to the non-Executive Labour members. I heard what my colleague Mr McAllion said. I have never discussed this with my parliamentary group, but, having listened to him, I thought that I might volunteer myself as a sort of counterbalance to him, as the representative and embodiment of the new values of consensus and the new politics in Scotland. On that issue, I am undoubtedly the man. As Mr Harper is no longer here, I will move on from the discussions that I  have had with him, as I would not want to talk about them in his absence.  We are here to discuss legislation. Legislation can be dry and boring, but it can also be important. Innocuous legislation can have substantive and massive effects. After all, who would have thought that such a feeble-minded piece of legislation as the Abolition of Domestic Rates etc. (Scotland) Act 1987 would eventually have resulted in the melting-down of the so-called iron lady?  We must examine critically two matters: first, the principles; secondly, the issues. My colleagues touched on the principles. Three types of legislation are being delegated: legislation that transfers power; legislation by which powers are supposed to be concurrent; and legislation about which there is supposed to be consultation.  Like other members, I ask what concurrent means. According to Mr McLeish, we will soon be able to discuss the concordat. Well, that is very useful. I do not know how we can take literally the suggestion that things must be done simultaneously at Westminster and here-that the Secretary of State for Scotland and the First Minister must co-ordinate and dovetail. I have no doubt that the Government is on to a winner, even if we have difficulties with new technology here. I heard the secretary of state describe his front-bench team as including three PhDs and a millionaire-Scotland's strike force. Personally, I would rather stick with Billy Dodds.  What does consultation mean? It means "Ah telt ye". That is the difficulty that we have faced in Labour-run Cabinet-type local government. Is that what we can expect here when there are differences between Westminster and the Scottish Parliament?  The issues are fundamental. I see that my illustrious neighbour, the Solicitor General for Scotland, is here with his colleague the Lord Advocate. I will throw in a wee bit free legal advice. From my 20 years' experience as a solicitor, I know that the easiest way in which to examine legislation is to buy an annotated version. It is even better to get a guide. I do not know how many members picked up the guide entitled "The Draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999". It deals with the specific effects of the legislation, some of which-detailed on pages 39 and 40-seems very innocuous, as did the Abolition of Domestic Rates etc. (Scotland) Act 1987.  The guide describes the Sewerage (Scotland) Act 1968-doubtless, people who were provided with a student grant, by previous Governments, went to the wire over that back in the heady days of the radical 1960s. Section 37B of that act  relates to "The function of the Secretary of State to give directions specifying information to be excluded, on the grounds of national security, from a register maintained by a sewerage authority."  Such are the matters-this is the first one-in which there is only concurrent jurisdiction, and on which we await a concordat so that we may have some influence; apparently, we can have influence only through a concordat.  The guide also mentions the Control of Pollution Act 1974-from the heady days of a year in which there was a change of Government. Section 36(2B) of that act deals with "The function of the Secretary of State to certify that, in the interests of national security, details of a discharge consent application should not be advertised."  That is something fundamental that I would like to know about and that the people whom I represent in the Lothians would no doubt like to know about. It will, however, be subject to a concordat and will be available only if there is agreement between the secretary of state and the First Minister.  Section 42A concerns "The function of the Secretary of State to issue directions and make determinations concerning the exclusion, in the interests of national security, of information from registers maintained by SEPA."  Well, lo and behold. That is something that I would have thought was fundamentally important and that many Labour members would have wanted to have above board rather than secreted away.  On page 40, there is more such innocuous legislation-the Environmental Protection Act 1990, which was doubtless introduced in an attempt to improve our society as we move toward the next millennium. What do we find in sections 21 and 65? Again, we find legislation that is being treated as concurrent. Those sections concern "The functions of the Secretary of State to issue directions and make determinations concerning the exclusion, in the interests of national security, of information from registers maintained by SEPA."  If something is so important that it should be registered by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, surely it should be available for all of us.  I am conscious that time is moving on, but I want to comment on one more piece of legislation in this section: the Radioactive Substances Act 1993. Section 12 deals with "The function of the Secretary of State to give directions to SEPA that, on the grounds of national security, knowledge of a particular application, registration or authorisation should be restricted."  An organisation can make an application for the dumping of radioactive material and SEPA has an  obligation to register it, but the First Minister may have no control over the direction given by the Westminster Government as to what should be disclosed. That is appalling.  As time is of the essence, I move on to consultation. When we say, "Ah telt ye", what do we mean? Look at page 49 of the guide, which refers to the Food and Environment Protection Act 1985. What does that deal with? It deals with powers over which discussion is all that will be required. Ah telt ye, and that's it.  Section 5 deals with "The functions of the Secretary of State as licensing authority in relation to deposits of substances or articles in the sea or under the sea bed, the scuttling of vessels, loading with a view to such deposit and towing or propelling with a view to scuttling."  More important, section 6 deals with "The functions of the Secretary of State as a licensing authority in relation to incineration of substances or articles at sea or loading for that purpose."  Those powers are not being disclosed to us. SNP members believe that is shameful. It maintains the culture of secrecy that comes from Westminster. All the fine words and rhetoric in the consultative steering group report will be going for a Burton when this transfer of powers takes place, because all those matters will be restrained or restricted. What about consultation on this matter?  I know that many Labour members share the worries and fears of my SNP colleagues about the civil and military use of nuclear power and its effect on the environment. We are flagging up a problem that is covered by this legislation. We are asking members to think about what they are being led into by the inadequate powers that Westminster is devolving. In a nutshell, the past year is being sold, the powers are being sold out, and the Parliament and people are being sold down the Swanee.  The SNP will support this legislation- [Laughter.] -but we are justifiably anxious about the restrictions that Labour is allowing to go through. Labour members may laugh, but our only options are to support or to reject the orders, and we will accept the modicum of powers that is provided. However, if Labour members think that the matters that I have flagged up are not worthy of public disclosure, they are failing in their duty to their constituents, never mind to the people of Scotland. [Applause.]

On behalf of the Scottish National party, I support the amendment to leave out Mr Nicol Stephen. Like others, I do so on the basis not of personality, but of policies. Accountability, accessibility and transparency were principles that underpinned the consultative steering group report. The document arose out of and reflected the application of those principles. Many meetings were held, and they were open and accountable. Public views were canvassed, public views were sought and welcomed, and public views were reflected and echoed in the document.  What has happened in the past few days? First, our Parliament, adjourned for nigh on 300 years, has reconvened and been opened to public view. A great deal of public warmth and sympathy has been extended. Secondly, and sadly, a deal has been brokered behind closed doors-behind the back of the electorate and behind the back of Liberal Democrat members and voters. As Mr Canavan said earlier, the electorate spoke on 6 May, in clear public view.  I regret that the electorate in Aberdeen South did not choose my party. That is their democratic right and entitlement. They selected Mr Stephen and supported the policies and platform on which he stood. His victory was acknowledged by my party with all the dignity and decorum that went with the occasion. However, the electorate did not select or vote for the Labour party candidate, so Mr Stephen has no democratic right whatever to sell out his principles or the policies and platform on which he stood and sought election.  As my colleague Mr Hamilton said earlier, this is not a partnership but a takeover-a lock, stock and barrel takeover of the soul of liberal democracy. That is clearly shown in the document "Partnership for Scotland"-otherwise known, as far as I can see, as the unconditional surrender of liberal democracy in Scotland. Never in the recent history of Scottish politics has so much been ceded by so many for so very little.  The document refers to the settled will of the Scottish people. On 11 September 1997 and again on 6 May 1999, the people of Scotland expressed their settled will. That is fine. I believe that their settled will was that tuition fees should be dead in the water. We have found that that promise has been reneged on. It was not, as far as I can tell, election rhetoric. It was not even empty rhetoric. It was, as I remind Mr Wallace, a simple statement of fact that tuition fees would be dead if all those parties that pledged their opposition to them remained firm and true to the pledges that they gave to the electorate and upon which they sought to be returned.  I paraphrase our national bard: Mr Stephen and his party have been bought and sold for ministerial gold-such a parcel of rogues in a party.