I call question 3 and the late Liam McArthur.

Order.

I call Roseanna Cunningham to wind up. Ms Cunningham, if you could continue until 5 pm I would be obliged.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08916, in the name of John Swinney, on the draft Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2014, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2014 [draft] be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08946, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 18 February 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Final Stage Debate: The City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill followed by European and External Relations Committee Debate: Engagement and Scrutiny of the Committees of the Scottish Parliament on EU policies followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 19 February 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 7.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 20 February 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 1 Debate: Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 25 February 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 26 February 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 27 February 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08914.1, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08914, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The first item of business is time for reflection. Our leader today is Christine Duncan, the chief executive officer of Scottish Families Affected by Alcohol and Drugs.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08938, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 of the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill.

Can we have a question?

Before we move to the next item of business, I extend a welcome to the members of the public who are in the public gallery. However, I say to them that this is a meeting of the Parliament in public, not a public meeting, and I would appreciate it very much if they did not participate in the debate by applauding or making other interventions. The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list of amendments and the groupings of amendments. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds; thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate, on any group of amendments, should press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible after the group is called. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 10—Persons who may solemnise marriage

Before we start, I say to Parliament that, as a consequence of the earlier decision to extend the debate on amendments by 30 minutes, decision time will also be moved by 30 minutes. The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08915, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. I call Alex Neil to speak to and move the motion—cabinet secretary, you have 14 minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08913, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Consumer Council and Transfer of the Office of Fair Trading’s Functions in relation to Estate Agents etc) Order 2014, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Consumer Council and Transfer of the Office of Fair Trading’s Functions in relation to Estate Agents etc) Order 2014, a draft of which was laid before the UK Parliament on 5 December 2013 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.—[Fergus Ewing.]

The first question is, that motion S4M-08913, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Consumer Council and Transfer of the Office of Fair Trading’s Functions in relation to Estate Agents etc) Order 2014, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Consumer Council and Transfer of the Office of Fair Trading’s Functions in relation to Estate Agents etc) Order 2014, a draft of which was laid before the UK Parliament on 5 December 2013 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.

Question 7, in the name of Clare Adamson, has not been lodged. The member has provided an explanation.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-08879, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Commonwealth games and its legacy across Scotland. We have a wee bit of time in hand, so if members were to take interventions, we would ensure that they were compensated for the time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08879.2, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08879, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Commonwealth games and its legacy across Scotland, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a member’s oath. I invite our new member, Alex Rowley, to take the oath.

Question 2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, has not been lodged. The member has not provided an explanation.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08832, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on committee substitutes. I call Stewart Stevenson to move and speak to the motion on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08833, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on Presiding Officer and Deputy Presiding Officer elections. I call Stewart Stevenson to move the motion on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08866, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 4 February 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill followed by Public Body Consent Motion: The Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Consumer Council and Transfer of the Office of Fair Trading’s Functions in Relation to Estate Agents etc.) Order 2014 – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 5 February 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) (No.3) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 6 February 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2014-15 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Responding to the Challenges of New Psychoactive Substances in Scotland followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 18 February 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 19 February 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 7.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 20 February 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08867, on consideration of the draft Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2014, and motion S4M-08870, on committee meetings. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2014 [draft] be considered by the Parliament. That the Parliament agrees that, under Rule 12.3.3B of Standing Orders, the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing can meet, if necessary, from 1.00 pm on a Thursday for the purpose of conducting a meeting of the sub-committee and that any meeting held under this rule is concluded before the commencement of a meeting of the Parliament that afternoon.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the common agricultural policy, if the amendment in the name of Claire Baker is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Fergusson falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08857.2, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08857, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The first item of business is time for reflection. Our leader today is the Rev James Allardyce, retired hospital chaplain, Wishaw general hospital.

If anybody wishes to ask a supplementary to question 2 of topical questions, I ask them to send a wee note to me as soon as possible so that I can allocate as much time between the two questions as I can. Because so many members wish to ask a supplementary to question 1, in the name of Alison McInnes, I intend to take Alison McInnes, followed by members from the north-east, followed by members from the south, followed by members from Edinburgh and Fife. All the questions will be fairly close together. If everybody understood that—probably better than I explained it—I call Alison McInnes to ask question 1.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08840, in the name of David Stewart, on the report on tackling child sexual exploitation in Scotland. It might be helpful to the minister and members if I indicate at the outset that we have some time in hand. If members wish to take interventions or take a wee bit longer to develop their points, I am sure that that will find favour with the Presiding Officers. I call on David Stewart to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Public Petitions Committee.

I ask the member to bring her remarks to a close.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08837, in the name of Michael Matheson, on the Children and Families Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Children and Families Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 4 February 2013, relating to the retail packaging of tobacco, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Michael Matheson.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08859, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow, Wednesday 29 January. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 29 January 2014— delete 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing and insert 2.00 pm Member’s Oath/Affirmation – Alex Rowley followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08840, in the name of David Stewart, on the Public Petitions Committee’s report on tackling child sexual exploitation, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Public Petitions Committee’s 1st Report, 2014 (Session 4), Report on tackling child sexual exploitation in Scotland (SP Paper 449).

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08811, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees (a) the following programme of business— Tuesday 28 January 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Report on Tackling Child Exploitation in Scotland followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Children and Families Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 29 January 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Debate: Common Agricultural Policy followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Committee Substitutes followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Presiding Officer and Deputy Presiding Officer Elections followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 30 January 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Commonwealth Games and its Legacy across Scotland followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 4 February 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 5 February 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) (No.3) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 6 February 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time (b) that Rule 2.2.5(a) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Parliament to meet beyond 5.30 pm on *Tuesday 4 February 2014 and* Thursday 6 February 2014.—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08813, on the designation of a lead committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Proposed National Planning Framework 3.—[Joe FitzPatrick].

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08794, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The first item of business is time for reflection. Our leaders today are William Seaborne and Ruth Laird, who are pupils at Queen Anne high school, Dunfermline.

I have a number of indications that members want to ask supplementary questions. I say to members who wish to ask a supplementary question that Ken Macintosh’s question was on the pay of university principals, and I am not prepared to go wider than that. If your question is not about that and you want to withdraw it, I am sure that you will press your button.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08577, in the name of Joan McAlpine, on the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill. Overall, we have a bit of time in hand in the debate. We will make up for interventions by giving members more speaking time. I call Joan McAlpine to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill Committee.

Please do. If you could continue to five o’clock, I would be most grateful.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08812, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow, Wednesday 22 January 2014. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 22 January 2014— after followed by Stage 1 Debate: Budget (Scotland) (No.3) Bill insert followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill – UK Legislation delete 5.00 pm Decision Time and insert 5.45 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is decision time. The first question is, that motion S4M-08577, in the name of Joan McAlpine, on the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Answer briefly, if you can, Dr Allan.

Before we start, I want to acknowledge the brevity that has been shown during exchanges in First Minister’s question time over the past few weeks. That has allowed more time for back benchers to participate. I know that we are all keen for that to continue.

Mr Doris, Rhoda Grant is not giving way.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08760, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow, Thursday 16 January. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 16 January 2014— delete 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Regulatory Reform (Scotland Bill) and insert 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Town Centre Action Plan—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the national health service, if the amendment in the name of Alex Neil is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jim Hume falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08752.3, in the name of Alex Neil, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08752, in the name of Neil Findlay, on the NHS in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Trishna Singh, who is director of the Sikh Sanjog and the Punjabi Junction social enterprise project in Leith. Trishna Singh (Sikh Sanjog and Punjabi Junction Social Enterprise Project): Presiding Officer, I thank you for inviting me to address Parliament. Today I am representing the Scottish Sikh community in my capacity as founder and director of Sikh Sanjog, which is Scotland’s only organisation that works with Sikh women and their families. Since 1989, we have been empowering and inspiring women of all ages and races to rise above the internal and external discrimination that hinders their progress. We have developed and established a range of methods of connecting with women, and of encouraging them in their learning and creating practical opportunities for them to develop their skills and knowledge. Our aim is to close the equalities gap, especially in terms of disadvantage and exclusion relating to education, skills, training and employment. Our ethos is based on the teachings of Sikhism. Guru Nanak Dev Ji, the founder of Sikhism, taught us that there is, in addition to the spiritual dimension, an important social dimension to the Sikh religion that focuses on social equality, rejection of caste discrimination and centrality of community service. The most revolutionary declaration of Sikhism in the 15th century was equality asserted to women. Essentially, Guru Nanak created an equal seat for everyone at the table and an opportunity for dialogue where none had existed. Guru Nanak embraced the entire human race. He said: “Recognise the divine light of god in each individual, treat all equally without prejudice of race, caste, religion, gender or social position.” As Sikh Sanjog goes forward to celebrate its 25th anniversary this year, we continue to improve communication between professions and political parties on the needs of the Sikh and other black and minority ethnic women. The needs of Sikh women have changed over the past 25 years but, sadly, they have not gone away and, as within many disadvantaged groups, the women are further marginalised. Today, the voices of women from within BME communities are still unheard. There is still discrimination in terms of opportunity, and barriers still hold them back from making an effective contribution to Scottish society. As Guru Nanak inspires every Sikh to respect every individual, I see that reflected in the Scottish Parliament. Social justice is a natural consequence of civic responsibility and reminds us that we cannot be insular. Many Sikhs, including my parents, made this their home over 70 years ago and have added to the rich cultural heritage of this country. We are proud to be known as Scottish Sikhs. What happens in Scotland matters to all of us, irrespective of where we have come from.

It is crucial that we get a question.

Before we come to the debate on veterans, I want to say that I am deeply disappointed that a major policy announcement that was to be made as part of the debate found its way into the media before being announced to Parliament. That is particularly unfortunate, because party business managers have worked closely together to ensure that Parliament can come together on the wider issue of veterans. As the Government sought the Parliament’s consent to have a debate on veterans, it is not unreasonable to expect that any announcements that relate to that debate be made first in the chamber. Ultimately, the Government remains responsible for management of information concerning announcements that fall to be made in Parliament. My expectation is that the Government will reflect on how this particular announcement has been handled, and that it will take steps to ensure that such a situation does not recur. We now move to the debate on motion S4M-08747, in the name of Keith Brown, on veterans.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08673, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. I call on Kenny MacAskill to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 9 May 2013, relating to restrictions on the possession of firearms by persons who have received suspended sentences from courts in England and Wales, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08674, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Care Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. I call on Michael Matheson to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Care Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 9 May 2013, relating to cross border provision for healthcare and for the establishment of the Health Research Authority, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Michael Matheson.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08747, in the name of Keith Brown, on veterans, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament acknowledges the debt of gratitude that Scotland owes to those who have served in defence of freedom; notes that, since the publication of Our Commitments: Scottish Government Support for the Armed Forces Community in Scotland in September 2012, the Scottish Government has continued to provide support to the armed forces and veterans’ communities in Scotland that has been widely welcomed by the military and the ex-service community; commends the partnership working with stakeholders, which has led to improved support, including capacity-building funding for Veterans Scotland, and further notes the Scottish Government’s intention to ensure that the response to the UK Government’s Veterans’ Transition Review addresses the distinct needs of Scottish veterans and supports public services to meet their expectations; recognises the excellent work of veterans’ organisations in supporting veterans; welcomes the number of Veterans’ Champions across Scotland, and endorses the aim of ensuring that local services are better integrated to support Scotland’s veterans.

Order.

Order!

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08530, in the name of Siobhan McMahon, on the City of Edinburgh Council (Portobello Park) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the City of Edinburgh Council (Portobello Park) Bill and that the bill should proceed as a private bill.

As Mr Gibson and other members know, what is said in the chamber is not a matter for me, as I have said time and again. That was not a point of order, but what was said is on the record. Meeting closed at 17:02.

The next item of business is a statement by Paul Wheelhouse on severe winter weather impacts and Scotland’s response. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement. There should therefore be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08714, in the name of John Swinney, on Scotland’s economy. Members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now. At this juncture, I remind the open debate speakers that speeches will be limited to five minutes. I call on John Swinney to speak to and move the motion. Cabinet secretary, you have 14 minutes.

Thank you. That concludes the debate on Scotland’s economy.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08716, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 14 January 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Veterans followed by Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee Debate: Scottish Government’s Consultation on its Climate Change Adaptation Programme followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill – UK Legislation followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Care Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 15 January 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 16 January 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 21 January 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 22 January 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 23 January 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S4M-08719, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on the designation of a lead committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Disabled Persons’ Parking Badges (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. In relation to today’s debate, I remind members that if any of the amendments is agreed to, the subsequent amendments will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08714.3, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08714, in the name of John Swinney, on Scotland’s economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon and happy new year. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Joe Mills, who is the parish priest of St Mary’s Church in Duntocher.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08707, in the name of Alex Salmond, on Scotland’s future.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08672, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Offender Rehabilitation Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Offender Rehabilitation Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 9 May 2013, which enable persons convicted in England and Wales and who will be subject to the new supervision requirements contained in the Bill to continue to be subject to those requirements in the event that they are subsequently transferred to Scotland under the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08717, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for Wednesday 8 January. Any member who wishes to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak button now. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 8 January 2014— after 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Severe winter weather impacts and Scotland’s response delete 5.00 pm Decision Time and insert 5.30 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. In relation to the debate on Scotland’s future, I remind members that if the amendment in the name of Johann Lamont is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Ruth Davidson and Willie Rennie will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08707.3, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08707, in the name of Alex Salmond, on Scotland’s future, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Question 2 is in the name of Anne McTaggart, who I note is not in the chamber to ask it. I expect an explanation by the end of the day.

We need a question, Ms Lamont.

The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-08576, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on the Finance Committee’s report on the draft budget 2014-15.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-08657, on committee membership; S4M-08658, on substitution on committees; and S4M-08659, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Patricia Ferguson be appointed as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; and Cara Hilton be appointed as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Neil Bibby be appointed to replace Patricia Ferguson as a substitute member of the European and External Relations Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08576, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on the Finance Committee’s report on the draft budget 2014-15, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Finance Committee’s 10th Report, 2013 (Session 4): Draft Budget 2014-15 (SP Paper 431) and its recommendations to the Scottish Government.

I am sorry, but the member is over his time.

The minister is not giving way, Ms Marra.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08515, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution on the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill, agrees to— (a) any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act, and (b) any charge or payment in relation to which Rule 9.12.4 of the Standing Orders applies arising in consequence of the Act.—[Fergus Ewing.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08630, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 7 January 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Future followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Rehabilitation of Offenders – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 8 January 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Economy followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 9 January 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Preliminary Stage Debate: City of Edinburgh Council (Portobello Park) Bill followed by Justice Committee Debate: Report on the Operation of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 14 January 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 15 January 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 16 January 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-08632 and S4M-08633, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 (Historical Periods) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 (Modification) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08610, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Howard Hudson, the minister of Bridgeton, St Francis-in-the-East Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08627, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 17 December 2013— (a) after followed by Topical Questions (if selected) insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Publication of review into safety and quality in NHS Lanarkshire (b) delete 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and insert 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

I am not sure that that was a question. Would you like to give a further response, cabinet secretary?

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Neil on the publication of a review of the safety and quality of NHS Lanarkshire. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendment, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 28A, and the marshalled list, which is SP bill 28A-ML. Should there be a division on the amendment, the division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes. The period of voting will be 30 seconds. Section 20—Credit: bodies concerned with the environment

I need to ask you to start winding up.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08603, in the name of Liam McArthur, on the reappointment of the convener and a member of the Standards Commission for Scotland.

The member should know that that is not a point of order. As I have said many times, I am not responsible for what members say in the chamber.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08609, in the name of John Swinney, on the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08587, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 12 December 2013— delete 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill and insert 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

Question 4, in the name of Bruce Crawford, has been withdrawn. The member has provided a satisfactory explanation. Kenny Gibson has the next question. I am sorry, I meant to say Ken Macintosh.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is stage 3 proceedings on the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. Members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 23A; the marshalled list of amendments, which is SP bill 23A-ML; and the groupings list, which is SP bill 23A-G. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who want to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible after I call the group. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Before section 1

I now call on Kenny MacAskill to wind up the debate. Cabinet secretary—you have until five o’clock.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-08562, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the local government finance settlement 2014-15. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement; there should therefore be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a Conservative debate on motion S4M-08551, in the name of Gavin Brown, on finance. Mr Brown, you have 14 minutes.

Can you bring your remarks to a close, Mr McDonald?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08554, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revisions to the programme of business— Tuesday 17 December 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Violence against Women followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Debate: Reappointment of Members of the Standards Commission for Scotland followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 18 December 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Stage 1 Debate: Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 19 December 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Finance Committee Debate: Finance Committee Report, Draft Budget 2014-15 followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 7 January 2014 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 8 January 2014 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 9 January 2014 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions S4M-08557 and S4M-08558, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Charitable Incorporated Organisations (Removal from Register and Dissolution) Amendment Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Register of Young Voters (Anonymous Entries) (Scotland) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on finance, if the amendment in the name of John Swinney is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Iain Gray will fail. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08551.4, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08551, in the name of Gavin Brown, on finance, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Most Reverend Leo Cushley, the Archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08555, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out revisions to this week’s business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revisions to the programme of business— (a) Tuesday 10 December 2013 after followed by Topical Questions insert followed by Motion of Condolence: Nelson Mandela delete 6.00 pm Decision Time and insert 6.30 pm Decision Time (b) Thursday 12 December 2013 delete 2.15 pm Members’ Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill and insert 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

That ends topical questions.

The next item of business is a motion of condolence, in the name of Alex Salmond, following the death of Nelson Mandela. I inform members that I have instructed that the Parliament’s flags be flown at half-mast today. They will again fly at half-mast on the day of Nelson Mandela’s funeral. Following agreement with the South African honorary consul, we have made a book of condolence available for the public, members and staff to sign in the main hall.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08544, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on human rights.

You will need to make it quickly.

I am minded to accept a motion without notice to bring forward decision time to now. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees, under Rule 11.2.4 of Standing Orders, that Decision Time be brought forward to 6.15 pm.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08559, in the name of Alex Salmond, on a motion of condolence for Nelson Mandela, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament records its sadness at the passing on 5 December 2013 of Nelson Mandela; celebrates the inspirational life of a prisoner who became president; recognises Nelson Mandela’s role in the peaceful development of the modern South African nation and immense contribution to conflict resolution as a world statesman; celebrates his longstanding friendship with Scotland, and extends its deepest condolences and solidarity to Mr Mandela’s family and the people of South Africa at this time.

Question 1 is from Joan McAlpine, who is not in the chamber.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08489, in the name of Liam McArthur, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the appointment of the Commissioner for Ethical Standards in Public Life in Scotland. I call Liam McArthur to move the motion on behalf of the SPCB.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08480, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on decision making on whether to take children into care, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Education and Culture Committee’s 10th Report, 2013 (Session 4): Report on decision making on whether to take children into care (SP Paper 386).

Order, order—can we settle down, please?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08472, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 10 December 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Human Rights followed by Scottish Government Debate: End Year Fish Negotiations followed by Scottish Government Debate: Youth Sport Strategy followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 11 December 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Ministerial Statement: Local Government Finance Settlement 2014-15 followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 12 December 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.15 pm Members’ Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 17 December 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 18 December 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 19 December 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08479, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S4M-08474, on the designation of a lead committee. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Model Code of Conduct for Members of Devolved Public Bodies (SG/2013/250) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to today’s debate on housing, if the amendment in the name of Margaret Burgess is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Patrick Harvie falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08470.2, in the name of Margaret Burgess, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08470, in the name of Mary Fee, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Pastor Geoff Austin of the Church of the Nazarene in Ardrossan.

Before we start business this afternoon, I would like to say a few words on behalf of all members of the Scottish Parliament. The shock of the tragic events at the weekend and the situation that has unfolded in Glasgow has affected us all deeply. I have written to the Lord Provost of Glasgow on behalf of the Parliament to express our profound sympathy and to reflect the pride that Glasgow and the emergency services can take in their response. I was already scheduled to meet the Lord Provost of Glasgow tomorrow. That meeting will still take place. I will, of course, express in person all our condolences. A book of condolence is now available for members to sign this afternoon in the black and white corridor. The book will be placed in the members’ lobby for the remainder of the week to ensure an opportunity for all members and staff in the Parliament to contribute. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08473, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to this week’s business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revisions to the programme of business— (a) Tuesday 3 December 2013 after 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Helicopter Tragedy in Glasgow (b) Thursday 5 December 2013 after followed by Education and Culture Committee Debate: Report on decision making on whether to take children into care insert followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Debate: Appointment of a new Commissioner for Ethical Standards in Public Life—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the helicopter tragedy in Glasgow.

Patricia Ferguson is in her last 30 seconds.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08027, in the name of John Swinney, on the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill financial resolution. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08462.1, in the name of Kezia Dugdale, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08462, in the name of Angela Constance, on women and work, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

If I am going to make progress through the questions, we must have the questions a bit shorter and the answers considerably shorter.

Order.

As the member is aware, and as I have said again and again, as recently as yesterday, the Presiding Officer has never been, is not, and cannot be responsible for the contents of members’ speeches in the chamber.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08422.1, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08422, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the independent expert review of opioid replacement therapies in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Order.

Ms McKelvie!

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08409, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 3 December 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Women and Work followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Census followed by Financial Resolution: Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 4 December 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 5 December 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.15 pm Members’ Business followed by Education and Culture Committee Debate: Report on decision making on whether to take children into care followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 10 December 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 11 December 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 12 December 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.15 pm Members’ Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08411, on the designation of a lead committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee and that the Justice Committee be designated as secondary committee in consideration of the Assisted Suicide (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08407.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08407, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the independence white paper, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

I say to Mr Dornan, as I have said on numerous occasions, that the Presiding Officer has never been, is not and cannot be responsible for the veracity of what is said in the chamber—that is entirely the responsibility of members in their speeches.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Moira McDonald, minister of Corstorphine Old Parish Church.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon. The Deputy First Minister will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08389, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. I advise members that time for the debate is extremely tight. I ask members to keep to their time limits, which will allow us to call all the members who are to speak.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-08389, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill.

Order. Let us hear Ms Davidson.

Question 3, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, has not been lodged. The member has provided a satisfactory explanation.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08259, in the name of Joan McAlpine, on the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08192, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08259, in the name of Joan McAlpine, on the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill and agrees that it should proceed as a private bill.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Peter Kelly, the director of the Poverty Alliance.

The next item of business is a debate that I know that we would prefer not to be holding. It is a motion of condolence, in the name of Johann Lamont, on the death of Helen Eadie. This is another sad day for our Parliament as we pay our tribute to Helen Eadie, our friend and our colleague. In doing so, I welcome to the Parliament Helen’s husband Bob, her daughters Fiona and Jemma, and their family and friends. Helen had already announced that she would not stand at the next election. She wanted to spend more time with her family—more particularly with her grandsons, who brought her such joy. Sadly, that was not to be, as she was taken from them, and from us, much too soon. I knew Helen for at least 25 years, from the time when she was a Fife councillor. We were both delighted to be elected as MSPs in 1999. Helen was quite unique. She was kind, caring and compassionate, not just to her constituents but to her colleagues. Many of us can tell of her personal kindness to us in times of illness or difficulty. During her time as a parliamentarian, Helen served on many committees of the Parliament, including the Public Petitions Committee, the Equal Opportunities Committee and, latterly, the European and External Relations Committee and the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, where she served as deputy convener. She worked tirelessly for her constituents and the communities that she served. Helen was never afraid to be different or to be true to her own beliefs, even if that meant disagreeing with the prevailing view. She always argued her case with passion and conviction. We will all miss her.

Order.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08327, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill.

Ms Murray, can you bring your remarks to a close please?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08355, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a stage 2 timetable for the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill at stage 2 be completed by 28 November 2013.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is decision time. There are five questions to be put. The first question is, that motion S4M-08347, in the name of Johann Lamont, on a motion of condolence for Helen Eadie, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament expresses its deep regret and sadness at the death of Helen Eadie MSP; offers its sympathy and condolences to Helen’s family; recognises her proud record in Scottish politics as a parliamentarian, a campaigner and a constituency MSP, and acknowledges her as a true champion for the Fife communities that she represented for 14 years.

Order.

You are also in your last 20 seconds.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08299, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 19 November 2013— delete Tuesday 19 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-08239, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill be passed. Meeting closed at 17:01.

Good afternoon, the first item of business is portfolio questions. Question 1 is from Baroness Goldie. We are glad to see you back in your rightful place.

The next item of business is a statement by Fergus Ewing. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08270, in the name of Keith Brown, on modernising Scotland’s transport infrastructure: meeting the challenges of the 21st century.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08288, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08281, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2013 Amendment Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to today’s debate, if the amendment in the name of Mark Griffin is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08270.1, in the name of Mark Griffin, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08270, in the name of Keith Brown, on modernising Scotland’s transport infrastructure, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, for which our leader today is the Rev Bruce Sinclair, minister of Overtown parish church in Overtown, Wishaw.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08279, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out revisions to the business programme for this week. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revisions to the programme of business— (a) Tuesday 12 November 2013 after followed by Topical Questions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Common Agricultural Policy Budget Allocation (b) Wednesday 13 November 2013 after followed by Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Electricity Market Reform—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

I remind members that, when they ask questions in future, they must ask the question exactly as it is in the order paper and not add outrageous words.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on the common agricultural policy budget allocation. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions or interruptions. Cabinet secretary, you have 10 minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08240, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. I call Paul Wheelhouse to speak to and move the motion.

Can we have a question, please?

Before we come to the next item of business, members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia, the Hon Linda Reid MLA, and the ambassador of Belarus, His Excellency Mr Sergei Aleinik. [Applause.]

Order.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08145, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill.

That ends general question time. Before we come to the next item of business, I am sure that members will join me in welcoming to the gallery the ambassador of Croatia, His Excellency Ivan Grdešic. [Applause.]

Mr McNeil, enough.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08099, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on the play strategy action plan.

Minister, you should be winding up.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08118, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Cara Hilton be appointed to replace Jayne Baxter as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

As we have completed this afternoon’s business ahead of schedule, I am minded to accept a motion without notice from Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, that decision time be brought forward to now. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees, under Rule 11.2.4 of Standing Orders that Decision Time be brought forward to 4.41 pm.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08099.1, in the name of Liz Smith, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08099, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on the play strategy action plan, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a solemn affirmation by our new member. I invite Cara Hilton to make a solemn affirmation.

I call Adam Ingram to wind up the debate. Mr Ingram, if you could continue to about 4.59 or thereabouts, that would be helpful.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08093, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 5 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Person Centred Healthcare followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 6 November 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 7 November 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 1 Debate: Tribunals (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 12 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 13 November 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 14 November 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Independence Referendum Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08091, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Protected Trust Deeds (Scotland) Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08079, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s “7th Report, 2013 (Session 4): Report on Community transport“, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s 7th Report, 2013 (Session 4): Report on Community transport (SP Paper 377).

Good afternoon and welcome back. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Ian Stewart, a leader within Destiny Church, Edinburgh, and a solicitor in Edinburgh, and former leader of Destiny Church, Inverness.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08089, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today, Tuesday 29 October, and tomorrow, Wednesday 30 October. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revisions to the programme of business— (a) Tuesday 29 October 2013 after 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Update on Grangemouth after followed by Financial Resolution: Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Financial Resolution: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill (b) Wednesday 30 October 2013 delete 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions and insert 2.00 pm Member’s Oath/Affirmation – Cara Hilton followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney giving an update on Grangemouth. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions. I call John Swinney, who has 10 minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08040, in the name of John Swinney, on the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill. I will give the cabinet secretary a couple of seconds to catch his breath. I call John Swinney to speak to and move the motion. Mr Swinney, you have 14 minutes.

Question 2 from Helen Eadie has been withdrawn and the member has provided a satisfactory explanation. Question 3 from Bob Doris has been withdrawn for understandable reasons.

Order. [Interruption.] Order!

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07974, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on carbon capture and storage.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07974.2, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07974, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on carbon capture and storage, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, for which our leader is the Rev John K Collard, interim minister at Brucefield church in Whitburn.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07953, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to today’s business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 8 October 2013— after followed by Topical Questions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Glasgow Prestwick Airport—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on Glasgow Prestwick airport. The Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

I am sorry, but the cabinet secretary is in his final minute.

The next item of business is consideration of legislative consent motion S4M-07847, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 9 May 2013, relating to the abolition of the Police Negotiating Board, dangerous dogs law and witness protection law, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the functions of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07939.1, in the name of Jenny Marra, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07939, in the name of Angela Constance, on the commission for developing Scotland’s young workforce interim report, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Question 2, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, has not been lodged because the member is abroad on parliamentary business.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07892, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy.

You need to wind up.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, if the amendment in the name of Claire Baker is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Alex Fergusson and Tavish Scott will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07892.3, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07892, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Before I call the first item of business, I would like to advise members that I have selected an emergency question from Neil Findlay on the information technology problems at NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. This question will be taken after portfolio question time.

The next item of business is an emergency question from Neil Findlay on the information technology problems at NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07872, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the cost of living.

Order.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07875, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 8 October 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Commission for Developing Scotland’s Young Workforce: Interim Report followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 9 October 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Access to New Medicines followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 October 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Carbon Capture and Storage followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 29 October 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 30 October 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 31 October 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-07877, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Rosyth International Container Terminal (Harbour Revision) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07872.3, in the name of Alex Neil, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07872, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the cost of living, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07808, in the name of Shona Robison, on one year to go until the Ryder cup. I ask members who wish to take part in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. Before I call the minister to speak, I say to members that we will be extremely generous in terms of your speaking times today. We will also be quite generous in terms of scope, so if you want to talk about your favourite golf courses, feel free to do so. I call Shona Robison. Minister—you have a generous 14 minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-07799, on the variation of standing orders.

We now move to decision time. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07808.1, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07808, in the name of Shona Robison, on one year to go until the Ryder cup, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Thank you. Your timing was perfect. I call Anne McTaggart. I can give you only two minutes. Sorry.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07798, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill at stage 2 be completed by 11 October 2013.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on corroboration, if the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Graeme Pearson falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07791.3, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07791, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on corroboration, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Brigadier Ian Dobbie OBE, former chairman of the Soldiers’ and Airmen’s Scripture Readers Association.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07787, in the name of Michael Matheson, on the new learning disabilities strategy, “The keys to life”. I point out to members that we have a fair bit of time in hand, so the Presiding Officers will be generous.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07787.2, in the name of Neil Bibby, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07787, in the name of Michael Matheson, on the new learning disabilities strategy, “The keys to life”, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Before I call Stewart Maxwell for question 3, I must tell members that I really want to make progress through the questions and would therefore very much appreciate brief questions and answers.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07734, in the name of John Swinney, on Scotland’s economy.

Order.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. In relation to this afternoon’s debate, I remind members that, if the amendment in the name of Iain Gray is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Gavin Brown will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07734.1, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07734, in the name of John Swinney, on Scotland’s economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07721, in the name of Alex Salmond, on Scotland’s future.

Mr Carlaw, I ask you to come to a conclusion.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07725, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 24 September 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: New Learning Disabilities Strategy, The keys to life followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 25 September 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 26 September 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: One Year to Go until the Ryder Cup followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 1 October 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 2 October 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 3 October 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-07726, on the establishment of a committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament shall establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill Committee. Remit: To consider matters relating to the City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill. Duration: Until the Bill is passed, falls or is withdrawn. Number of members: 4. Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Membership: Sandra White, Bruce Crawford, Anne McTaggart, John Lamont.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07721.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07721, in the name of Alex Salmond, on Scotland’s future, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Pastor Mark Osa Igiehon, Jesus House, City of God, Aberdeen.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07712, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on opencast mining in Scotland, coaling and restoring. Members will be aware that there is a live court case before the Court of Session, on restoration. You should take care to avoid mention of the details of that case. I call Fergus Ewing to speak to and move the motion. Minister, you have 14 minutes, but we have a bit of time in hand, so the Presiding Officers will be flexible.

I know that that was a lengthy intervention, but if you can finish by 5 o’clock, minister, that would be appreciated.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07712.2, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07712, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on opencast mining in Scotland, coaling and restoring, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is general questions. I would like members to try to keep their questions as short as possible and I am sure that ministers will reciprocate by keeping their answers as succinct as possible.

Order.

As I have said on many occasions, members are responsible for what they say in the chamber.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-07569, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[Nicola Sturgeon.]

There are two questions as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-07610, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the draft budget 2014-15. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions or interruptions. Cabinet secretary, you have 20 minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07643, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on enterprise networks. I call Fergus Ewing to speak to and move the motion. You have 13 minutes, minister.

The member needs to bring her remarks to a close.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07649, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 12 September 2013. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 12 September 2013— after 2.30 pm Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Independence Referendum Bill insert followed by Financial Resolution: Scottish Independence Referendum Bill—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-07633, on committee membership, and motion S4M-07650, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that Cameron Buchanan be appointed to replace Margaret Mitchell as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 (Designation of Persons as Scottish Public Authorities) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

The first question is, that amendment S4M-07643.1, in the name of Jenny Marra, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07643, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on enterprise networks, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-07629, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on an amendment to the Scottish Parliament salaries scheme. I call Linda Fabiani to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. Ms Fabiani, you have about seven minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-07634, on committee membership, and motion S4M-07635, on substitution on committees. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Cameron Buchanan be appointed to replace John Lamont as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; and Margaret Mitchell be appointed to replace David McLetchie as a member of the Justice Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— John Lamont be appointed to replace Liz Smith as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Public Audit Committee; and Cameron Buchanan be appointed to replace John Lamont as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-07622.1, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-07622, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on Scotland’s historic environment—the way forward, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07588, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 5 September 2013— after followed by Legislative Consent Motion: High Speed Rail (Preparation) Bill – UK Legislation insert followed by Proposal for European Union Legislation: Motion of the Justice Committee—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Order!

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-07209, in the name of Dave Thompson, on the draft code of practice for ministerial appointments to public bodies, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, 6th Report, 2013 (Session 4), The Draft Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland (SP Paper 371), together with the Official Report of the Parliament’s debate on the report, should form the Parliament’s response to the Public Appointments Commissioner for Scotland’s consultation on the draft Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a member’s oath. I invite our new member, Cameron Buchanan, to take the oath.

In order to get in as many people as possible, I would prefer short and succinct questions, and answers to match.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the helicopter incident. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement. There should, therefore, be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is the continuation of the debate on the Scottish Government’s programme for government for 2013-14.

Very briefly, Mr Brown.

We now move to decision time. Members will be pleased to know that there are no questions to be put as a result of today’s business.

Welcome back. It is good to be back with you once more. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader this afternoon is Matt Oliver, the chief executive of More Than Gold 2014.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07570, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 3 September 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Motion of Condolence followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by First Minister’s Statement on the Scottish Government’s Programme for Government 2013-14 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government’s Programme for Government 2013-14 followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.45 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 4 September 2013 2.00 pm Member’s Oath/Affirmation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Ministerial Statement: Helicopter Incident followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government’s Programme for Government 2013-14 (continuation of debate) followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 5 September 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Equal Opportunities Committee Debate: Where Gypsy/Travellers Live followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Report on 6th Report 2013, Draft Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland followed by Legislative Consent Motion: High Speed Rail (Preparation) Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 10 September 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Historic Environment – The Way Forward followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 11 September 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment Justice and the Law Officers followed by Ministerial Statement: Draft Budget 2014-15 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Enterprise Networks followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 12 September 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Independence Referendum Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 17 September 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 18 September 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 19 September 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is one that we would prefer not to be holding: a motion of condolence in the name of Ruth Davidson, following the death of David McLetchie MSP. I remind members that a book of condolence will be available for them to sign in the black and white corridor for the rest of the week. I would like to welcome Sheila and James and all of the McLetchie family to the gallery as Parliament pays its own tributes to David McLetchie. Thank you for being with us today. On behalf of all of us who were at the funeral, I say to James that the eulogy he gave was the finest eulogy from a son to a father that I have ever heard. David and I started together as part of the first intake of MSPs in 1999. In those early days, I would come into the chamber when I knew that David was due to speak. He was always witty, clever and a great debater, and I wished that I could be like him. I had a great personal relationship with David. We were often on opposite sides of an issue, and we both served on the first Scotland Bill Committee. It is fair to say that that committee was more than occasionally fraught and regularly robust, and David and I were often at the heart of that. However, through that long process, we used to pass notes to each other commenting on the day’s business, and we always maintained good humour and total respect for each other’s point of view. Despite failing health, David played a full part in parliamentary business way beyond the time that some of us thought he should. Those contributions were as robust and erudite as any of his previous contributions over the years. That was the mark of the man, and it demonstrates his commitment to the Parliament. David always shone brightly in the chamber in particular, which I know he loved. We will all miss his contributions. This place will be that bit dimmer without David McLetchie.

I apologise to Margo MacDonald, who wanted to ask a supplementary question, but we need to move on to the next item of business.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the Scottish Government’s programme for government for 2013-14. The First Minister’s statement will be followed by a debate, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on the Scottish Government’s programme for government.

The debate on the Scottish Government’s programme for government 2013-14 will continue tomorrow afternoon.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07528, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 1 timetable for the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill at stage 1 be completed by 6 December 2013.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-07530, on committee membership; motion S4M-07568, on substitution on committees; and motion S4M-07531, on the office of the clerk. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Hanzala Malik be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Jayne Baxter be appointed to replace Neil Findlay as a member of the Education and Culture Committee; Margaret McCulloch be appointed to replace Mary Fee as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Drew Smith as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Mark Griffin be appointed to replace Margaret McCulloch as a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; Mary Fee be appointed to replace Elaine Murray as a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; Elaine Murray be appointed to replace Jenny Marra as a member of the Justice Committee; John Pentland be appointed to replace Graeme Pearson as a member of the Justice Committee; Richard Baker be appointed to replace John Pentland as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Hugh Henry be appointed to replace Iain Gray as a member of the Public Audit Committee; Ken Macintosh be appointed to replace Mark Griffin as a member of the Public Audit Committee; Lewis Macdonald be appointed to replace Patricia Ferguson as a member of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee; Drew Smith be appointed to replace James Kelly as a member of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee; Margaret McDougall be appointed to replace Margaret McCulloch as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Margaret McCulloch be appointed to replace Hanzala Malik as a member of the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee; Richard Baker be appointed to replace John Pentland as a member of the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee; and Ken Macintosh be appointed to replace Iain Gray as a member of the Welfare Reform Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Kezia Dugdale be appointed to replace Mark Griffin as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Education and Culture Committee; Patricia Ferguson be appointed to replace Neil Findlay as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Iain Gray be appointed to replace Mary Fee as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Jayne Baxter as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee; James Kelly be appointed to replace Graeme Pearson as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; Graeme Pearson be appointed to replace Margaret McDougall as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Justice Committee; Sarah Boyack be appointed to replace Richard Simpson as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; John Pentland be appointed to replace Neil Bibby as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Public Audit Committee; Mark Griffin be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; and Mary Fee be appointed to replace Margaret McCulloch as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee. That the Parliament agrees that, between 5 January 2014 and 31 January 2015, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 18 and 21 April 2014, 5 May 2014, 23 May and 26 May 2014, St Andrew’s Day (28 November 2014), 24 December (pm), 25 and 26 December 2014 and 1 and 2 January 2015.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-07499, in the name of Ruth Davidson, a motion of condolence, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament expresses its deep regret and sadness at the death of David McLetchie CBE MSP; offers its sympathy and condolences to David’s family and friends; recognises the high regard in which he was held by so many colleagues; appreciates his significant contribution to civic life through his legal career, and acknowledges his distinguished record of service, both in this Parliament and to his constituents in the Lothians.

If we can have shorter questions and answers, we will proceed to the end of the questions available to be called.

Order.

Excuse me, Mr McArthur. Minister, could you sit down, please?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06672, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 23 May. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 23 May 2013— delete 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Forth Road Bridge Bill followed by Final Stage Proceedings: The National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc.) Bill and insert 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Forth Road Bridge Bill followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Coal Industry Sector Taskforce followed by Final Stage Proceedings: The National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc.) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Energy Bill - UK Legislation—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. I call Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-06674, S4M-06675 and S4M-06676. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 (Rules of Procedure in Children’s Hearings) Rules 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 (Review of Contact Directions and Definition of Relevant Person) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 Modification Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, if the amendment in the name of Keith Brown on ferry services is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Liam McArthur falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06657.1, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06657, in the name of Richard Baker, on immediate action at the Haudagain roundabout, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is general question time.

Order. [Interruption.] Order.

Good afternoon. Members will recall that Liam McArthur submitted a question but was not here to ask it. Mr McArthur has provided a very full apology and explanation. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06582, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on electricity market reform.

I call Fergus Ewing to wind up the debate. Minister, I would be obliged if you could continue until 4.59.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-06600, on committee membership, and motion S4M-06599, on substitution on committees. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Richard Lyle be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Christian Allard be appointed to replace Dennis Robertson as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Christian Allard be appointed to replace Jim Eadie as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; and George Adam be appointed to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Dennis Robertson be appointed to replace Richard Lyle as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee; Christian Allard be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Colin Keir be appointed to replace George Adam as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; and Jim Eadie be appointed to replace Maureen Watt as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06582.1, in the name of Rhoda Grant, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06582, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on electricity market reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a member’s affirmation. I invite our new member, Christian Allard, to make a solemn affirmation.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06583, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 45 minutes Groups 3 to 6: 1 hour 20 minutes Groups 7 to 10: 1 hour 45 minutes.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Question 3, in the name of Drew Smith, has been withdrawn. The member has provided an explanation.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06544, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill. Before I invite Paul Wheelhouse to open the debate, I call the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment to signify Crown consent to the bill.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06571, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 21 May 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Supporting a Science Nation, Celebrating Scotland’s Public Science Engagement Initiatives followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Children and Families Bill – UK Legislation followed by Public Body Consent Motion: The Public Bodies (Abolition of Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council) Order 2013 followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 22 May 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 23 May 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Forth Road Bridge Bill followed by Final Stage Proceedings: The National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc.) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 28 May 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 29 May 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 30 May 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S4M-06572, on the designation of a lead committee at stage 1 of the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06544, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Question 8, in the name of David Stewart, has not been lodged. The member has provided an explanation, and I think that we are all well satisfied with it.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06475, in the name of Hugh Henry, on childcare. I remind all members that this debate and the next debate are quite heavily subscribed. Therefore, time is tight and we will keep members strictly to their time. I call Hugh Henry to speak to and move the motion.

That concludes the debate on motion S4M-06474, on Scotland’s health service.

Before we come to decision time, I have something that I wish to say. During portfolio questions today, a member—while putting a question to the Government—carried out a stunt by holding up a newspaper. The newspaper clearly had advance notice of the member’s intention as it had a photographer in the gallery to capture the moment. That was discourteous to the Parliament and to the cabinet secretary who was answering the question. It appeared that parliamentary proceedings were secondary to the potential for good coverage in a local newspaper. This is not the first time that a similar stunt has been staged. I acknowledge that the member concerned subsequently apologised to me and gave an assurance that there would be no repeat, but let me make it clear to all members that such blatant stunts are a matter of discourtesy and disrespect to other members and to the Parliament as a whole.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06478, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 14 May 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 15 May 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 16 May 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Electricity Market Reform followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 21 May 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 22 May 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 23 May 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Forth Road Bridge Bill followed by Final Stage Proceedings: The National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc.) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06475.1, in the name of Aileen Campbell, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06475, in the name of Hugh Henry, on childcare, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Dave Slater, the minister for Gartcosh linked with Glenboig parish churches.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06455, in the name of Chic Brodie, on behalf of the Public Petitions Committee, on petition PE1441, which relates to flood insurance problems. It might be helpful to members—and Presiding Officers—if at the outset I indicate that we have a lot of time for this debate. If members want to take interventions or expand on any points that they might wish to make, they will find that the Presiding Officers will give them sufficient latitude to do so. I call Chic Brodie. Mr Brodie, you have 14 minutes.

Question 7, in the name of Bob Doris, has been withdrawn. The member has provided an explanation.

Order.

Our first item of business is one that we would all prefer not to be holding—a motion of condolence, in the name of Alex Salmond, following the death of Brian Adam. I would like to welcome Brian Adam’s wife, Dorothy, and his family to the gallery as Parliament pays our own tribute to him. Thank you very much for being with us today. Like many others in the chamber, I treasured Brian Adam both as a friend and as a colleague. Brian was admired across this Parliament because of what lay at his core: he was simply a good and decent man. The private courage and stoicism that Brian showed during his long illness added to the enormous respect that we had for him. As a member of our original intake into this Parliament in 1999, Brian enjoyed an impressively successful parliamentary career. Always a dedicated MSP to his constituents, Brian also served as a committee convener and deputy convener, chief whip for his party and the Minister for Parliamentary Business. In all those roles, Brian’s greatest contribution was not in the jobs that he did but in the way that he did them—all with honesty, even-handedness and humour. Since the sad news broke last week, fellow MSPs and staff from across our Parliament have all gone out of their way to tell me their own stories about Brian. He was admired, he was respected, and he was loved. We will all miss him and our Parliament will be the poorer without him.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06450, a motion of condolence, in the name of Alex Salmond, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament expresses its deep regret and sadness at the death of Brian Adam MSP; offers its sympathy and condolences to Brian’s family and friends, and recognises the significant contribution that he made to Scotland’s public and political life through his years of dedicated service in the Scottish Parliament and as a champion of Aberdeen and the north east of Scotland.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06421, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for today. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 1 May 2013— after followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business insert followed by Financial Resolution: Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Question 2, from James Kelly, has been withdrawn, for understandable reasons.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06405, in the name of Gavin Brown, on funding of the voluntary sector. This debate and the debate that follows are very heavily subscribed, so the Presiding Officers will keep members very firmly to time.

The member is now in her last minute, Mr Stevenson.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05608, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill, agrees to— (a) any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act, and (b) any charge or payment in relation to which Rule 9.12.4 of the Standing Orders applies arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06423, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 2 May 2013— delete 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Redesigning the Community Justice System and insert 2.30 pm Motion of Condolence followed by Scottish Government Debate: Redesigning the Community Justice System—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on energy policy, if the amendment in the name of Fergus Ewing is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Ken Macintosh will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06405.2, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06405, in the name of Gavin Brown, on funding of the voluntary sector, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Jim Ritchie, the senior pastor of Trinity church of the Nazarene in Perth.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06388, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the implications for Scotland of the royal charter on the self-regulation of the press. [Interruption.] I am sorry. It is topical questions, isn’t it? [Laughter.] Okay. I say to those who are waiting with bated breath to ask their topical questions that we will move on to them.

We come again to the debate on motion S4M-06388, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the implications for Scotland of the royal charter on the self-regulation of the press. We have time in hand and the Presiding Officers will be extremely generous in terms of both time and interventions. I call Fiona Hyslop to speak to and move the motion. Cabinet secretary, you have about 14 minutes.

Can we get the question, Mr Dornan?

I am very sad to have to inform members of the passing of our dear friend and colleague Brian Adam this morning. Our flags are already being flown at half-mast. Parliament will debate a motion of condolence next week, when members will have an opportunity to pay full tribute to Brian. There will also be a book of condolence available after First Minister’s questions today in the black-and-white corridor, and I know that members will wish to add their contribution to it. Today, however, our thoughts are with Brian’s wife, Dodie, and his family.

Minister.

Order.

The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06125, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to today’s business programme.

Question 1, in the name of Helen Eadie, has been withdrawn. I am satisfied with Mrs Eadie’s explanation.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a statement by Paul Wheelhouse on decrofting by owner-occupier crofters. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

We now move early to the next item of business, which is stage 3 proceedings on the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 16A; the marshalled list, which is SP bill 16A-ML; and the list of groupings, which is SP bill 16A-G. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after the debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible after I call the group. Section 1—Meaning of “high hedge”

Mr Hepburn, we heard what Ms Baillie said yesterday. Can you get to your point of order?

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-06038, in the name of Mark McDonald, on the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed, That the Parliament agrees that the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Mr Adam, you could not help yourself.

Under rule 13.8 of standing orders, I have selected an emergency question from Jackie Baillie. The text of the question is in the revised Business Bulletin.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06059, in the name of Michael Russell, on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. I remind all members that time was already extremely tight and that we have now lost 10 minutes of the debate. That means that later speakers will get their time cut. I implore everybody to keep to the time limit that they are given. The cabinet secretary has 14 minutes.

One moment, cabinet secretary. Mr Findlay, I will not have you shouting across the chamber. You have chuntered along and some of the remarks that you have been making are completely unacceptable.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-06018, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[Michael Russell].

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06077, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 16 April 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Universal Services followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 17 April 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Green Party and Independent Group Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 18 April 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee Debate: Public Sector Procurement followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 23 April 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 24 April 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 25 April 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions, S4M-06078, S4M-06080, S4M-06081, S4M-06083 and S4M-06085, on approval of various Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the National Bus Travel Concession Scheme for Older and Disabled Persons (Scotland) Amendment Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (Consequential Modifications and Savings) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Police Investigations and Review Commissioner (Investigations Procedure, Serious Incidents and Specified Weapons) Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (Supplementary, Transitional, Transitory and Saving Provisions) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

Members know very well—because I said the same thing as recently as yesterday—that the Presiding Officers are not responsible for what members say in the formal proceedings of the Parliament. However, as Mr Hepburn and others are aware, if any member believes that they have misled the chamber, there are opportunities, which are set out in our procedures, for correcting the Official Report.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06059, in the name of Michael Russell, on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Nila Joshi, who is from Edinburgh women’s interfaith group and a former director of the Edinburgh Mela.

The minister has advised that his first answer will be a bit long, but that his subsequent answers will be short.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06057, in the name of Keith Brown, on the Forth Road Bridge Bill.

We have a couple of minutes in hand. I call Claudia Beamish. You have seven minutes, although I will be a wee bit generous.

Order.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06057, in the name of Keith Brown, on the Forth Road Bridge Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Forth Road Bridge Bill.

Order.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on Scotland’s independence referendum. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement; therefore, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

I am sorry to interrupt, Ms Grant. I would like members who are coming into the chamber to keep the noise level down a wee bit.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on Scotland’s financial strength, if the amendment in the name of Ken Macintosh is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Gavin Brown and Willie Rennie fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06016.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06016, in the name of John Swinney, on Scotland’s financial strength, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Question 5, which was lodged by Dave Thompson, has been withdrawn for understandable reasons.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05988, in the name of Keith Brown, on Trident.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-5994, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 26 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 1 Debate: Forth Road Bridge Bill followed by Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee Debate: Reports on Low Carbon Scotland: Meeting our Emissions Reduction Targets 2013-2027: The Draft Second Report on Proposals and Policies followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 27 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Stage 1 Debate: Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 28 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: High Hedges (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 16 April 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 17 April 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 18 April 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05995, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 21 March 2013. Any member who wishes to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak button. I call Joe FitzPatrick to move the motion.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to today’s debate on Trident, if the amendment in the name of Ruth Davidson is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jean Urquhart will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05988.2, in the name of Ruth Davidson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05988, in the name of Keith Brown, on Trident, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Maud Robinson, who is a minister to the Unitarians in Edinburgh at St Mark’s Church.

Can we have a question, Mr McMahon?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05981, in the name of Alex Salmond, on 10 years on from the invasion of Iraq.

The member is in his last minute.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on 10 years on from the invasion in Iraq, if the amendment in the name of John Lamont is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Willie Rennie falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05981.2, in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05981, in the name of Alex Salmond, on 10 years on from the invasion in Iraq, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Question 1 is in the name of Hanzala Malik, but I note that Mr Malik is not in the chamber to ask it.

Order.

I call Claudia Beamish, who has a very tight four minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05913, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 19 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: 10 Years on from the Invasion of Iraq followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 20 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Debate: Trident followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 21 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Financial Strength followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 26 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 27 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 28 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: High Hedges (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

The next item of business is consideration of six Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-05914 to S4M-05918, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 (Transfer of Children to Scotland – Effect of Orders made in England and Wales or Northern Ireland) Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland (Requirements for Care Services) Amendment Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Act 2010 (Incidental Provision and Commencement No.4) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Town and Country Planning (Fees for Applications and Deemed Applications) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on police centralisation, if the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Lewis Macdonald and Margaret Mitchell will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05899.3, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05899, in the name of Alison McInnes, on police centralisation, be agree to. Are we all agreed? Members: No.

I think that we have got the question, Ms McDougall.

Order. Let us hear Johann Lamont, please.

And your point of order is?

Thank you. I remind all members that they should refer to other members by their full names. I call Jackie Baillie.

I thank Richard Simpson for the advance notice of his point of order. As he said, I have referred to the good practice guide on announcements by the Scottish Government on previous occasions. All members will be aware that the guidance states that major policy announcements should in the first instance always be made to the Parliament. However, the guidance also acknowledges that decisions on whether and how to make announcements to Parliament on Government business are a matter for the Scottish Government. It is of course for the Scottish Government to reflect on yesterday’s debate in Parliament and for members to use the channels available to them on any of the issues raised in that debate. On the issue of additional powers, it is not for me to assume powers for the Presiding Officer; it is a matter for the Parliament and its committees.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05852, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the United Kingdom Government amendment to the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Bill, which is UK legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the amendment to the UK Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Bill, tabled in the House of Lords on 25 February 2013, relating to the power to add to supplies protected under the Insolvency Act 1986, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05731, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Public Bodies (The Office of Fair Trading Transfer of Consumer Advice Scheme Function and Modification of Enforcement Functions) Order 2013, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Public Bodies (The Office of Fair Trading Transfer of Consumer Advice Scheme Function and Modification of Enforcement Functions) Order 2013, a draft of which was laid before the United Kingdom Parliament on 12 December 2012 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that John Lamont be appointed to replace Margaret Mitchell as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Justice Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05838.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05838, in the name of Alex Neil, on integration of adult health and social care, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-5839, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 6 March 2013— delete followed by Scottish Labour Party Debate: NHS Waiting Times followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Basing Review followed by Scottish Labour Party Debate: NHS Waiting Times followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Yes, but can we have a question, Mr Brodie?

That is a matter for Renfrewshire Council, not for the cabinet secretary. Can you come to a focused point, please?

The next item of business is a statement by Keith Brown on the basing review. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05813, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on national health service waiting times. I remind members to speak through the chair and to refer to other members by their full name and not as “you”. I invite members who wish to take part in the debate to press their request-to-speak button now.

I do not think that that word was appropriate, Mr Simpson.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05820, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 12 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government Food Policy followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 13 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 14 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland – the Best Place to Grow Up followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2013 [draft] followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 19 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 20 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 21 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S4M-05846, on referral of a Scottish statutory instrument to the Parliament. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2013 [draft] be considered by the Parliament.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that in relation to the debate on national health service waiting times, if the amendment in the name of Alex Neil is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Nanette Milne will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05813.2, in the name of Alex Neil, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05813, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on NHS waiting times, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Professor Mona Siddiqui OBE, professor of Islamic and interreligious studies, University of Edinburgh.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05765, in the name of Kenneth Gibson on behalf of the Finance Committee, on the committee’s report on “Demographic change and an ageing population”. As we have some time in hand, I will be generous with interventions. I call Kenneth Gibson to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Finance Committee. Mr Gibson, you have 10 minutes.

Order.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-05765, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on demographic change and an ageing population, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Finance Committee’s 2nd Report, 2013 (Session 4): Demographic change and an ageing population (SP Paper 265).

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05346, in the name of Liam McArthur, on a postcode lottery for people with multiple sclerosis. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament understands that Orkney has the highest recorded rate of multiple sclerosis (MS) per capita in the UK and one of the highest rates in the world; understands that approximately 10,500 people in Scotland have MS; believes that MS can have an affect not only on people with the condition but also their families, friends and colleagues, meaning that it impacts on over 63,000 lives in Scotland; understands with disappointment that, in Scotland, there remains a so-called postcode lottery for accessing treatments and neurological services to deal with MS, and understands that the MS Society believes that the Scottish Government should address what it sees as this inequality and ensure that levels of treatment and support for people with MS are the same regardless of where they live.

Can we have the cabinet secretary’s microphone on, please?

Order.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a statement by Michael Matheson on Scotland’s new food safety body. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05712, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill. I remind members to speak through the chair by referring to other members by their full names and not as “you”.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05736, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Crime and Courts Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Crime and Courts Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 10 May 2012, relating to amendments to the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-05712, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill.

You do not have to be that brief, Mr Chisholm.

I thank Patricia Ferguson for her point of order. You will be aware that that is not a matter for me, under standing orders; it is a matter for the Scottish Government. However, I expect that the Scottish Government will take note of what you have just said.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05732, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 5 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Finance Committee Debate: Demographic Change and an Ageing Population followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 6 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 7 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Questions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Integration of Adult Health and Social Care followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 12 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 13 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 14 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-05711, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, for which our leader is Pastor David Fraser from Alva baptist church.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05699, in the name of Hanzala Malik, on the European and External Relations Committee’s report on the European Union priorities of the committees of the Scottish Parliament. I remind members that time is extremely tight because I let the previous item of business run over a wee bit. I call on Christina McKelvie to speak to and move the motion in the name of Hanzala Malik, on behalf of the European and External Relations Committee.

But your time is up.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-05699, in the name of Hanzala Malik, on the European and External Relations Committee’s report on the European Union priorities of the committees of the Scottish Parliament, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the European and External Relations Committee’s 1st Report, 2013 (Session 4): The EU priorities of the Committees of the Scottish Parliament (SP Paper 271).

I think that we have got the question, Ms McInnes.

Ruth Davidson—I mean Johann Lamont.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, on the Audit Scotland report “Management of patients on NHS waiting lists”. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions. Members who wish to ask a question can press their request-to-speak button now. I call the cabinet secretary. Mr Neil, you have 10 minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05596, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets. I remind members that time is a bit tight.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05672, in the name of Liam McArthur, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the nomination of a pension fund trustee for the Scottish parliamentary contributory pension fund. Motion moved, That the Parliament appoints Duncan McNeil MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation.—[Liam McArthur.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-05596, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s 7th Report, 2012 (Session 4): Report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets (SP Paper 220).

Question 6, in the name of Tavish Scott, has not been lodged. The member has provided an explanation—[Interruption.] I am sorry, I am ahead of myself again. I call Colin Keir to ask question 5.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05653, in the name of Gavin Brown, on capital projects. I remind members that this and the subsequent debate are extremely tight for time. We will keep you closely to your allocated time limit.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05679, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 26 February 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by European and External Relations Committee Debate: The European and External Relations Committee’s Report on the EU Priorities of the Committees of the Scottish Parliament followed by Local Government and Regeneration Committee Debate: Public Services Reform: Developing New Ways of Delivering Services followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 27 February 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Water Resources (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 28 February 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 1 Debate: Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 5 March 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 6 March 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 7 March 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-05666, on the designation of a lead committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee, and that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as a secondary committee, in consideration of the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05653.2, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05653, in the name of Gavin Brown, on capital projects, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Right Rev Albert Bogle, the moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05665, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today. I ask any member who wishes to speak against the motion to press their request-to-speak button now and I invite Joe FitzPatrick to move the motion.

That ends topical questions.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead, on horsemeat substitution in Europe. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05660, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the United Kingdom Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 23 May 2012, relating to midata, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Fergus Ewing.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05664, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday, 21 February. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 21 February 2013— delete 2.30 pm Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Debate: Report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets and insert 2.30 pm Ministerial Statement: Audit Scotland Report – Management of Patients on NHS Waiting Lists followed by Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Debate: Report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body motion: Nomination of a Pension Fund trustee for the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund (SPCPF)—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05652.2, in the name of Hugh Henry, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05652, in the name of Michael Russell, on tuition fees, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Minister—your tuppence-worth, please.

Order.

Can I just stop everyone saying how nice it is to see me back? I am delighted to be here, but everyone said yesterday that it was nice to see me back, so let us just take that as read. [Applause.]

The moral is: do not pause for breath. Nanette Milne.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05550, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. Time is very tight, so I will keep members to their time. I am unable to offer any additional time for interventions.

It would be courteous to members if other members ceased to turn their backs on the chair.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05570, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 19 February 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Tuition Fees followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 20 February 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 21 February 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Debate: Report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 26 February 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 27 February 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Water Resources (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 28 February 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-05550, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. It is good to be back. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Graeme Atkinson, the minister of Sandyhills parish church in Glasgow.

I thank Willie Rennie for the advance notice of his point of order, which has enabled me to consider the important issues that he raises. All members should be aware that the good practice guidance on announcements by the Scottish Government states that major policy announcements should in the first instance always be made to the Parliament and that the judgment on that rests with ministers. The guidance also acknowledges that decisions on whether and how to make announcements to Parliament on Government business are a matter for the Scottish Government. Any question on the Parliament’s future business programme or a request for a statement should be raised by a party’s business manager. I note that Alison McInnes made points about this issue and capital infrastructure at today’s meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau. Members will notice that I have selected a topical question on the capital infrastructure programme and I intend to allow as many supplementary requests from members on that issue as time allows.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05535, in the name of Mark McDonald, on the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill. I call Mark McDonald, who is the member in charge of the bill, to speak to and move the motion.

Good morning, and yes, Mr Swinney, I am being festive today. [Laughter.]

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by Alex Neil on the waiting times audit report. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05203, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on the Finance Committee’s report on the draft budget 2013-14.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-05203, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on the Finance Committee’s report on the draft budget 2013-14, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Finance Committee’s 9th Report, 2012 (Session 4), Report on Draft Budget 2013-14 (SP Paper 231) and its recommendations to the Scottish Government.

The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05255, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today and tomorrow. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business— Wednesday 19 December 2012 after 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Autumn Budget Statement after followed by Financial Resolution: Water Resources (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Marine Navigation (No.2) Bill – UK Legislation Thursday 20 December 2012 delete 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Finance Committee Debate: Draft Budget 2013-14 and insert 2.15 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.15 pm Ministerial Statement: Waiting Times Audit Report followed by Finance Committee Debate: Draft Budget 2013-14—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Order.

We move to a statement by John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, on the autumn budget statement. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions. Mr Swinney, you have 10 minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-04853, in the name of John Swinney, on the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill financial resolution. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[Nicola Sturgeon.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05259, in the name of Keith Brown, on the legislative consent motion for the Marine Navigation (No 2) Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Marine Navigation (No. 2) Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 20 June 2012, relating to the Harbours Act 1964 and the Pilotage Act 1987, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Nicola Sturgeon.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05239, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 8 January 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Finance Committee Debate: Employability followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 9 January 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Government Debate: Oil and Gas, The Success and Opportunities followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 January 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Action to Support Youth Employment followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 15 January 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 16 January 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 17 January 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-05240, on approval of a statutory instrument, and motions S4M-05241 and S4M-05242, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) (No.2) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Judicial Pensions and Retirement Act 1993 (Scottish Land Court) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Pollution Prevention and Control (Scotland) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-05229, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Neil Gardner, who is the minister of our local church, the Canongate kirk in Edinburgh.

We will now have a ministerial statement by Fergus Ewing on Remploy. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05225, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Commonwealth games 2014.

You need to bring your remarks to a close.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05228, in the name of John Swinney, on the Growth and Infrastructure Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the provisions of the Growth and Infrastructure Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 18 October 2012, relating to the conferral of new powers on the Scottish Ministers to vary consents granted under section 36 of the Electricity Act 1989 for the construction, extension or operation of electricity generating stations and to the amendment of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 in relation to the granting and variation of deemed planning permissions, either in relation to such generating stations and ancillary development or in relation to overhead electric lines and ancillary development, should, insofar as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or confer new functions on the Scottish Ministers, be considered by the UK Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05225.3, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05225, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Commonwealth games 2014, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good morning. We have a point of order.

I am not sure that that is entirely relevant. We move to question 3, from John Wilson.

Order.

The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on Scotland and the European Union. The Deputy First Minister will take questions at the end of her statement. There should, therefore, be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a statement by Keith Brown on NorthLink Ferries. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05186, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the United Nations climate change negotiations. Members who wish to take part in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons. At this point, I warn members that we are a bit tight for time and that the Presiding Officers will keep members very much to their time limits. As a result, if members can save a few seconds, we would be extremely grateful.

Excuse me, minister. Could members please stop having conversations at the back of the chamber?

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05200, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Tuesday 18 December.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05186.2, in the name of Claudia Beamish, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05186, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the United Nations climate change negotiations, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. Before we start, I will make a very short statement. Last night, I responded to a point of order from Lewis Macdonald in relation to the Scottish Government’s handling of parliamentary questions. I commented that, as a matter of general courtesy and respect for the Parliament, the content of any point of order should not be circulated to the press in advance of its first being raised in the chamber. Earlier today, I met Mr Macdonald, who assured me that neither he nor anyone acting on his behalf had circulated any such information in relation to the specific point of order that he raised yesterday. There was absolutely no intention on my part to imply that Mr Macdonald had released such information, so I have no hesitation in accepting Mr Macdonald’s assurance. On the wider issue, I attach great importance to the use of parliamentary questions as a means of holding the Government to account, and I remind ministers that I expect questions from members to be dealt with in a fair and transparent way.

Question 1 has been withdrawn. I have received an explanation from Mark Griffin that I am satisfied with.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05172, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual European Union fisheries negotiations.

I call Claudia Beamish, who has a generous eight minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05174, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-05177 and S4M-05195, on committee membership. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Jayne Baxter be appointed to replace Margaret McDougall as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee; Elaine Murray be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Elaine Murray as a member of the Finance Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Margaret McDougall be appointed to replace John Park on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

The first question is, that amendment S4M-05172.2, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05172, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual European Union fisheries negotiations, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Right Rev Gordon Mursell, author and former Bishop of Stafford.

I invite our new member, Jayne Baxter, to make a solemn affirmation.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05145, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business— Tuesday 11 December 2012 delete followed by Scottish Government Debate: Commonwealth Games 2014 and insert followed by Scottish Government Debate: Role of Scientific Evidence and Advice in Public Policy Wednesday 12 December 2012 delete followed by Scottish Government Debate: Role of Scientific Evidence and Advice in Public Policy and insert followed by Scottish Government Debate: Annual EU Fisheries Negotiations—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Can we have another question, Ms Baker?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05154, in the name of Alasdair Allan, on the role of scientific evidence in advice on public policy. Michael Russell will open the debate, as Dr Allan has been somewhat delayed. Cabinet secretary, you have 14 minutes.

I thank the member for his point of order. When I spoke last week about courtesy and respect for the Parliament, I expected that to apply to all members and not just to Government members. I am therefore disappointed to learn that Mr Macdonald’s point of order was circulated to the press in advance of it being raised first in the chamber. I made my position clear last week in response to Mark Griffin’s point of order. I understand that the Minister for Parliamentary Business, who was initially made aware of Mr Macdonald’s point of order from the press, wishes to respond.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05154.2, in the name of Neil Findlay, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05154, in the name of Alasdair Allan, on the role of scientific evidence and advice in public policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

I am not sure that that question is entirely relevant, but the cabinet secretary can answer it if he wants to.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a statement by Keith Brown on rail. As the minister will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05109, in the name of Angela Constance, on the modernisation of Scotland’s careers services.

Mr Smith—

Ministers have not so far indicated to me that they wish to make such a statement. However, the Parliamentary Bureau meets on Tuesday. I am sure that your business manager has paid attention to what you have said and that ministers, too, have heard your remarks. I am quite sure that we will have a discussion on just that issue on Tuesday.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05109.2, in the name of Neil Findlay, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05109, in the name of Angela Constance, on the modernisation of Scotland’s careers services, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-5093, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today.

Before we move on to question 9, let me say that I need questions and answers to be succinct if we are to make progress through the list of questions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05087, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on policing in Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee’s first report in 2012 on the Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) Order 2013 [draft]. Members who wish to take part in the debate should press their request to speak buttons now. Bruce Crawford will open the debate on behalf of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05092, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 11 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Member’s Oath/Affirmation – Jayne Baxter followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Commonwealth Games 2014 followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 12 December 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Debate: Role of Scientific Evidence and Advice in Public Policy followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 13 December 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 1.45 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: United Nations Climate Change Negotiations followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 18 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 19 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 20 December 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-05094, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument on local government elections, motion S4M-05098, on the approval of an SSI on the Budget (Scotland) Act 2012, motion S4M-05099, on the approval of a United Kingdom statutory instrument, and motion S4M-05100, on the designation of a lead committee. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Local Government Elections Amendment (No.2) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2012 Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Finance Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on policing in Scotland, if the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill is agreed to, the amendment in the name of John Lamont falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05087.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05087, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on policing in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 39, Abstentions 15. Motion, as amended, agreed to, That the Parliament recognises the remarkable work of NHS Scotland staff in caring for the nation; welcomes the recognition from Audit Scotland that the NHS’s finances have been carefully managed and that, for the fourth year running, all NHS boards have met their financial targets on revenue and capital; further welcomes that the Scottish Government has instructed the most comprehensive audit ever to be conducted into waiting times to ensure openness and transparency, and commends the decision of the Scottish Government to provide above real-terms resource funding to the territorial NHS boards to protect frontline services.

The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Ms Morag White, the leader of the girl guides in Coatbridge.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on the annual European Union fisheries negotiations. I note that Claire Baker and Jamie McGrigor, the two major Opposition party spokespeople, are not in the chamber; notwithstanding, I call Richard Lochhead. Mr Lochhead, you have 13 minutes.

That is not a point of order. The Parliamentary Bureau had such a discussion today. I suggest that you have a word with your business manager.

The next item of business is a debate on the Leveson report. I ask members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak button now. I note that Ruth Davidson is not in the chamber.

I thank the member for the advance notice of this important point of order, which has enabled me to investigate the matter myself. As Mr Griffin said, on 5 October 2012 he lodged three written questions asking the Scottish Government for details relating to the attendees and the costs of the delegation that attended the 2012 Ryder cup. Those questions received a holding reply on 2 November. On 14 November, Clare Adamson lodged an inspired parliamentary question on the outcomes of the First Minister’s visit to Chicago in September 2012. That inspired question was answered at some length by Fiona Hyslop on 27 November. Also on that date, Mark Griffin received written answers from Shona Robison that simply referred him to the answer that was given to Clare Adamson. For a member to have to wait nearly eight weeks for an answer to a parliamentary question and then simply to be referred to an answer that has been given to a question that was lodged six weeks after his original question is, in my view, not acceptable. [Applause.] Please do not applaud. I note that the Scottish Government’s guidance on using inspired questions to give information to the Parliament, which is published on its website, states: “Where a question on the same subject already exists, consideration should be given to using that question to make the announcement, whether or not it is an Opposition question, instead of arranging an inspired question.” It appears that that guidance has not been followed in the case of Mark Griffin’s three written questions, which predate by six weeks Clare Adamson’s inspired PQ. I expect the Scottish Government to treat all members equally when responding to written and oral questions, irrespective of which party they are from. I consider that the Government has treated Mr Griffin with discourtesy. I invite ministers to reflect on how the answer was put into the public domain and to consider what steps they need to take to ensure that members are not treated with such discourtesy in the future. [Applause.] There is no need to applaud.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Dr Robin Hill, Longniddry and Gladsmuir parish churches, and convener of the Church of Scotland HIV programme.

I thank the member for advance notice of his point of order. I am sure that members will never tire of me saying this, but I will repeat it once again. All the Presiding Officers and Deputy Presiding Officers since 1999 have said that we are not responsible for the content or veracity of a member’s speech. The member is also well aware that it is not within the Presiding Officer’s power to order any minister to make a statement. However, I am sure that the minister will reflect on what Mr McArthur has said.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the local government finance settlement 2013-14. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04970, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on St Andrew’s day: a celebration of Scotland.

Excuse me, cabinet secretary. There is too much chattering.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-04947, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Statute Law (Repeals) Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Statute Law (Repeals) Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 10 October 2012, relating to statute law repeals, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05020, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04970.2, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04970, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on St Andrew’s day: a celebration of Scotland, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good morning. I would like to make a statement before we start. The standing orders of this Parliament explicitly state that members shall respect the authority of the Presiding Officer. It is inevitable that decisions of the chair will not meet the approval of all members at all times. That has always been the case. Nevertheless, it is imperative that the authority of the chair is respected at all times. If that were not the case, the Parliament would be unable to carry out the functions that the people of Scotland have asked us to undertake. Yesterday, Michael McMahon showed gross discourtesy and disrespect to the chair. However, as I did not clearly hear what the member said at the time, I decided to speak to him privately and to take time to study the Official Report of proceedings once it was available. I acknowledge that Mr McMahon apologised. Had Mr McMahon not done so, I would have referred the matter to the Parliamentary Bureau, so serious did I consider the discourtesy to the chair. Taking all of the circumstances into account, I have decided to exclude Mr McMahon from the chamber for the duration of today’s chamber business. This is not a decision that I have taken lightly. Members will recall that, on 30 October, I referred to Donald Dewar’s words on the opening of the Scottish Parliament when he explained to us: “This is about more than our politics and our laws. This is about who we are, how we carry ourselves.” I told members then that I expected them to consider very carefully their choice of words and the tone in which they are delivered. It is a matter of regret that, a few short weeks later, we have witnessed the type of behaviour that Mr McMahon displayed yesterday. We have important business in front of us. Those who elect us to this place look to us, as parliamentarians, to show leadership and to debate the issues before us with respect and dignity for the institution of Parliament. As Presiding Officer, I will support to the limits of my power the conduct of parliamentary business in this chamber. I will, however, not tolerate behaviour that falls short of the standards that the people whom we are privileged to represent expect of us.

Mr Henry, please.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04914, in the name of Michael Russell, on further education. Cabinet secretary, you have 14 minutes.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04914.1, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04914, in the name of Michael Russell, on further education, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

We now move to winding-up speeches. A number of members who took part in the debate are not here for the winding-up speeches: Mike MacKenzie, Duncan McNeil, Tavish Scott and Christine Grahame. I find that behaviour unacceptable and I am confident that the whips will do something about it—and do something about it quickly.

I thank the member for her advance notice of the point of order. I was first made aware of the issue earlier this afternoon and I have since made inquiries. I understand that the original request from the First Minister’s office for a correction to the Official Report was made on the morning of 15 November. I can confirm that the correction to the Official Report was made this afternoon. The process for agreeing corrections to the Official Report was agreed in a report by the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee in 2010. That report also sets out the criteria used by the official report and the processes to be followed. The member will be well aware that the guidance includes steps that a member should take to publicise the correction when it has been made. I confirm that the correction to the Official Report was made this afternoon. All this information is set out on the official report’s web page on the Parliament’s website. [Interruption.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04896, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business for tomorrow. [Interruption.] Order!

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-04903, S4M-04904 and S4M-04905, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Rent (Scotland) Act 1984 (Premiums) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Homelessness (Abolition of Priority Need Test) (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Housing Support Services (Homelessness) (Scotland) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04886.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04886, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on business tourism, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev David Gordon, who is the minister of Kirkintilloch Baptist church.

The member knows that we are considering flood prevention. I expect questions to be a bit more focused on the rain that has fallen during the past few days. I am sure that the transport minister will answer his question in due course; there is no need for the Minister for Environment and Climate Change to do so.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04874, in the name of Keith Brown, on air passenger duty. Members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now. I call on Fergus Ewing to speak to and move the motion. Mr Ewing, you have 14 minutes. I remind all members that time is extremely tight. I allowed an extra five minutes for topical questions, which impinges on the time for this debate.

The next item of business is consideration of two motions in the name of Dave Thompson: S4M-04830, on the Public Bodies Act 2011 orders, standing order rule changes; and S4M-04832, on the consultation on the code of practice for ministerial appointments to public bodies. Mr Thompson, I would appreciate it if you would speak to and move both motions. I can give you until 5 o’clock to do so.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-04879, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on Convention of Scottish Local Authorities membership of the Committee of the Regions. Motion moved, That the Parliament notes that, following the 2012 Scottish local government elections, the representation from local government to the Committee of the Regions will be Councillors Corrie McChord and Tony Buchanan as full members and Councillors Graham Garvie and Barbara Grant as alternate members for the remainder of the current Committee of the Regions mandate to the end of 2014.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04784.3, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04874, in the name of Keith Brown, on air passenger duty, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Question 1, from Paul Martin, has not been lodged, but I have received an explanation.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04787, in the name of Liz Smith, on education. Members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now. I advise all members at the outset that time is extremely tight today, so we will hold you to your time. Regrettably, some members who wish to take part in the debate will be unable to do so. I ask for the co-operation of all members. I call Liz Smith to speak to and move the motion. Ms Smith, you have 14 minutes.

The member does not have time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04797, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 20 November 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Air Passenger Duty followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Public Bodies Act Orders – Standing Order Rule Changes followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Consultation on the Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland followed by Scottish Government Motion: COSLA Membership for the Committee of the Regions followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 21 November 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Scottish Government Debate: Business Tourism followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 22 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Modernisation of Scotland’s Career Services followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 27 November 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 28 November 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 29 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-04798 and S4M-04799 on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Act 2008 (Ticket Touting Offence) (Exceptions for Use of Internet etc.) (Scotland) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 (Relevant Premises) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04787.2, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04787, in the name of Liz Smith, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, for which our leader is Ms Ravinder Kaur Nijjar, who is from the Scottish Sikh Council and is chair of Religions for Peace—European Women of Faith Network.

I call Keith Brown.

Dr Simpson, sit down.

There are three questions to be put as result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04778.4, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04778, in the name of Alex Neil, on universal benefits, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

I remind members that phones and other electronic devices should be switched off.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-04719, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the road to recovery drugs strategy. I remind all members that time is extremely tight and that I will have to hold them to their allocated time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-04737, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which is a legislative consent motion on the Prisons (Interference with Wireless Telegraphy) Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Prisons (Interference with Wireless Telegraphy) Bill introduced in the House of Commons on 20 June 2012, relating to the interference with wireless telegraphy in order to prevent the use of electronic communications devices (including mobile telephones) in, or detect or investigate the use of such devices within, prisons and young offenders institutions, so far as these matters fall within the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04719.3, in the name of Jenny Marra, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04719, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the road to recovery drugs strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection, which will be led by the Rev Dr Dane Sherrard, who is the minister of Luss parish church.

I am saying nothing, minister.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04682, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on permanence and adoption. I call Aileen Campbell to speak to and move the motion.

There is far too much chatting going on in the chamber.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04682.1, in the name of Neil Bibby, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04682, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on permanence and adoption, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Before we come to First Minister’s question time, members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Speaker of the National Assembly of Guyana, the Hon Raphael Trotman MP. [Applause.]

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-04627, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on drink-driving.

We now move to the open debate. I remind members that speeches are four minutes. If everybody keeps to their four minutes, it will ensure that everyone who has requested to speak will be called.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04613, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 6 November 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Permanence and Adoption followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 7 November 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Relationship with Malawi followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 8 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Road to Recovery, Drugs Strategy followed by Legislative Consent Motion: UK Prisons (Interference with Wireless Telegraphy) Bill – UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 13 November 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 14 November 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 15 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Questions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-04614, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 (Incidental Provisions) Order 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-04598, in the name of Derek Mackay, on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Pastor John Leitch of the Glenboig Christian Fellowship. Pastor John Leitch (Glenboig Christian Fellowship): Presiding Officer and members of the Scottish Parliament, Luke chapter 4, verse 4 says: “Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God.” You are all no doubt familiar with the statement, “Let’s do this by the book.” It generally comes up in situations in which people want to ensure that everything is perfect or there is no comeback, but I would like to reflect this afternoon on doing it by the Book. As a Christian, I refer of course to the Bible, which I believe to be the word of God. Even if you do not share my convictions, though, there is no reason why you cannot benefit from the wisdom, guidance and direction that it offers. Our land was once known as the “land of the Book” or “Bible-loving Scotland”. We have a tremendous heritage and history, built on the principles of scripture. Much of our judicial system was based on the premises of scripture, such as the necessity of two witnesses to confirm a matter. Many of our public buildings have scripture inscribed in stone. On the lintel of our libraries we read: “The entrance to his word gives light”. The original motto of my home city, Glasgow, was: “Let Glasgow flourish by the preaching of the word and the praising of his name.” Likewise, Edinburgh had the motto: “Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman wakes in vain.” Even Westminster bowed to the wisdom, with the motto: “Guard the city O Lord.” If we turn to our halls of learning, the same respect and deference is given to the word. The University of Aberdeen’s motto is, “Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom”, and the University of Glasgow’s is: “The way, the truth, the life.” So we have good precedent for “going by the Book.” It still contains excellent policies for any society, covering social behaviour, justice, welfare, commerce and the uplifting of the poor. Its wisdom is classless, non-racial and is available to whosoever will. It has value for the individual: “Your word is a light to my feet and a lamp to my path.” It has value for the nation: “Sin is a reproach but righteousness exalts a nation”. It has value for the world: “God so loved the world he gave us Jesus who came not to condemn but to save.” We could well benefit the nation if we would simply “do it by the Book.” Thank you for allowing me to share these reflections with you. May God bless your deliberations this afternoon.

Before we start today’s business, I would like to make a few remarks. In recent days, we have passed a number of important hurdles in the debate on Scotland’s constitutional future. The two Governments have reached an agreement, the section 30 order has been laid before both Parliaments and this Parliament has established a new committee—which has now had its first meeting—to look into those matters. There is a great deal of interest in the work of the Parliament, from both within and outwith Scotland. It is therefore important that we set the correct tone in our debates and in our other parliamentary engagement. Members will recall the words of our first First Minister, the late Donald Dewar, in his opening speech to the Parliament. He said: “This is about more than our politics and our laws. This is about who we are, how we carry ourselves.” I agree. This is Scotland’s national Parliament and, as such, the Presiding Officers are determined to ensure that the public are proud of the manner in which we conduct ourselves and engage with the challenging issues ahead. I am confident that we will have the support of all parliamentarians in that. Finally, let me say a few words about the use of language and the conduct that I expect of all members in the chamber. Although context is critical, there are certain words that I consider to be unparliamentary by their very nature. I recognise that some members will seek to be creative, and we will therefore make our judgments according to the circumstances at the time. We will not seek to inhibit debate and the legitimate holding of the Government to account, but I remind all members to consider very carefully their choice of words and the tone in which they are delivered.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04594, in the name of Johann Lamont, on the future of Scotland.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to today’s debate on the future of Scotland, if amendment S4M-04594.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, is agreed to, amendment S4M-04594.1, in the name of Ruth Davidson, falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04594.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04594, in the name of Johann Lamont, on the future of Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Before we move to First Minister’s question time, members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the ambassador of El Salvador, His Excellency Mr Werner Romero. [Applause.]

Order.

Good afternoon. The business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-04534, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-04577, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bruce Crawford as a member of the Finance Committee; Adam Ingram be appointed to replace Richard Lyle as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Nigel Don be appointed to replace Annabelle Ewing as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee; Richard Lyle be appointed to replace John Mason as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; John Mason be appointed to replace Jean Urquhart as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Jim Eadie be appointed to replace Stuart McMillan as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-04534, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill.

Chic Murray. [Laughter.] I am sorry. Chic Brodie.

That supplementary question was a bit wide of the conversation about artificial full-size sports pitches. I do not know whether the minister wishes to respond.

I call Elaine Murray—I had to be careful there—to ask question 6. 6.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04518, in the name of Keith Brown, on winter resilience.

That was perfect timing, minister. That concludes the debate on winter resilience.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04542, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 30 October 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 31 October 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc.) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 1 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Drink Driving followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 6 November 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 7 November 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 8 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move S4M-04531, on the designation of a lead committee, and S4M-04532, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Commencement No 3, Transitory, Transitional and Savings Provisions) Order 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick].

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04518.1, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04518, in the name of Keith Brown, on winter resilience, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader this afternoon is Bushra Iqbal MBE, the founder and chair of North Lanarkshire Muslim Women and Family Alliance.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04530, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to today’s business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 23 October 2012— after followed by Topical Questions (if selected) insert followed by Ministerial Statement: The Edinburgh Agreement delete 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and insert 5.15 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

Many members want to ask supplementaries, so I urge them to be as brief as possible.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the Edinburgh agreement. The Deputy First Minister will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions.

The next item of business is a statement by Paul Wheelhouse, the Minister for Environment and Climate Change, on the Scottish greenhouse gas emissions annual target report. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions. [Interruption.] Members who are leaving the chamber should do so as quietly as possible and let us get on with this item of business. Mr Wheelhouse—you have about 10 minutes for your statement.

The member must close now.

The next item of business is consideration of a parliamentary bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-04545, on the establishment of a committee.

Before we move to decision time, I return to Willie Rennie’s earlier point of order. I repeat what the Deputy Presiding Officer said: the veracity of answers either inside or outside the chamber is not the responsibility of the Presiding Officers. However, the First Minister has requested the opportunity to respond to the points that Willie Rennie raised.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is that motion S4M-04505, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the role of the media in criminal trials, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes that the Justice Committee is examining the role of the media in criminal trials and that, in order to inform any future work in this area, the Committee would welcome members’ views on the issues arising in both SPICe Briefing 12-50, Role of the Media in Criminal Trials, and in the summary of evidence gathered to date.

Question 6, from John Wilson, has not been lodged. The member has provided an explanation.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by Keith Brown on the west coast main line. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement; there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04365, in the name of Angela Constance, on employability. It may be helpful if I remind members that most of our debates are follow-on debates, so if a statement or debate finishes early, we get to the next item of business earlier.

I thank Jenny Marra for notice that she was going to raise that matter. As I have said many times before, I am not responsible for the content of the First Minister’s answers or anybody else’s answers. However, her comment is now on the record.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-04380, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Defamation Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Defamation Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 10 May 2012, relating to the privilege that may apply in respect of peer-reviewed material in scientific or academic journals and reports of proceedings of scientific or academic conferences, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04365.3, in the name of Kezia Dugdale, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04365, in the name of Angela Constance, on employability, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Question 1, from Neil Findlay, was not lodged, but I have received an explanation for that.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04340, in the name of Johann Lamont, on Scotland’s future. I remind members that the debate is heavily oversubscribed. Your time limits will be extremely strict. I hope that we can accommodate all members who want to speak.

We have a point of order, Mr Henry. Will you resume your seat?

We now move to the next item of business, which is consideration of business motion S4M-04379, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Population (Statistics) Act 1938 Modifications (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to this afternoon’s debate on Scotland’s future, if the amendment in the name of John Swinney is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Gavin Brown will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04340.4, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04340, in the name of Johann Lamont, on Scotland’s future, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader this afternoon is the Rev Roderick Macdonald, minister of Beith parish church.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-04298, in the name of Dave Thompson, on Scotland Act 2012 standing orders rule changes on legislative competence statements.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04314, in the name of Angela Constance, on the women’s employment summit.

Before we move to the next item of business, I remind members of this evening’s members’ business debate on motion S4M-04204, in the name of Liam McArthur, on no to nuisance calls. I am sure that as many members as possible would like to stay for that debate and have an input to it.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-04298, in the name of Dave Thompson, on the Scotland Act 2012 standing order rule changes legislative competence statements, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 5th Report 2012 (Session 4): Scotland Act 2012 Standing Order rule changes—Legislative Competence Statements (SP Paper 190) and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A of the report be made with effect from 15 October 2012.

Question 2 has not been lodged. Richard Baker has provided no explanation to the Presiding Officers.

Order.

The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-04263, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy. Members who wish to take part in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now. I call Richard Lochhead to speak to and move the motion. Cabinet secretary, you have about 14 minutes.

Excuse me, cabinet secretary. There is far too much noise and laughter. Members should please settle down and let the cabinet secretary finish.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04263.1, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04263, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Alex Johnstone has a minimum of seven minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04258, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 2 October 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Standing Order Rule Changes followed by Scottish Government Debate: Women’s Employment Summit followed by Scottish Government Debate: National Gaelic Plan 2012-2015 followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 3 October 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 4 October 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Employability followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 23 October 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 24 October 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 25 October 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Property Factors (Scotland) Act 2011 (Modification) Order 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

The first question is, that amendment S4M-04247.2, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04247, in the name of Keith Brown, on the green bus fund, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader this afternoon is Father Eamonn Sweeney, the parish priest at St Patrick’s church, Coatbridge.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04234, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the public consultation on the Carloway report, “Reforming Scots Criminal Law and Practice”. We can be generous if members take interventions.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04234.1, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04234, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on public consultation on the Carloway report, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Can the member just get to the question, please?

Order.

The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by John Swinney on the draft budget for 2013-14. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

Bob Doris will wind up on behalf of the committee. Mr Doris, I would be obliged if you would continue until 5 pm.

I thank Mr Findlay for advance notice of his point of order. I am well aware of the on-going problems with the e-petition system that he raises. The matter is under constant review by the corporate body. It has been raised, in particular, by the convener of the Public Petitions Committee, David Stewart, who is also a member of the corporate body. I am therefore extremely sorry to hear of additional difficulties today. The member asks whether the specific issue can be raised with the corporate body in an emergency question. There is no such mechanism. However, if he wishes to write to me as the Presiding Officer and chair of the corporate body, I will ensure that he gets a speedy reply in the next few days.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-04179, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry into support for community sport, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes that the Health and Sport Committee is undertaking an inquiry into support for community sport, focusing on the contribution of people, particularly the role of volunteers, the contribution of local sports clubs, both to the preventative health agenda and their communities, the role that community sports hubs should play in encouraging sport in local communities and the importance of places for sport in terms of availability, accessibility, affordability and the quality of facilities, and that, in order to inform its final report, the committee would welcome the views of all members on these key themes and what has emerged so far in evidence. Meeting closed at 17:02.

You need to bring your remarks to a close.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04189, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 25 September 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Public Consultation on the Carloway Report (Reforming Scots Criminal Law and Practice) followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 26 September 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Debate: Green Bus Fund followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 27 September 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Common Agricultural Policy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 2 October 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 3 October 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 4 October 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions: motion S4M-04190, on committee membership; and motion S4M-04191, on substitution on committees. The question on the motions will be put at decision time. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that Iain Gray be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie as a member of the Welfare Reform Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Jackie Baillie be appointed as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Welfare Reform Committee; Claire Baker be appointed as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee; Mark Griffin be appointed to replace Hanzala Malik as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Education and Culture Committee; Jenny Marra be appointed to replace Claire Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; and Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Jenny Marra as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04165.2, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04165, in the name of Elaine Murray, on rail, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader this afternoon is the Rev Gus Macaulay, the minister at Knightswood Baptist church.

The next item of business is a statement by Derek Mackay on the national planning framework 3. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04086, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill.

We move to the wind-up speeches.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-03851, in the name of John Swinney, on the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill financial resolution. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[Michael Matheson.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-04091, in the name of John Swinney, on the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 23 May 2012, relating to the “green purpose” of the UK Green Investment Bank, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-04149, on committee membership.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-04086, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill.

Question 1, from Margaret Burgess, has been withdrawn, as Ms Burgess now has ministerial responsibilities.

Order. We will hear the First Minister.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-03046, in the name of Claire Baker, on welcoming Fife diet’s new food manifesto 2012. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes Fife Diet’s new food manifesto for Scotland, which it considers an important contribution to the debate on food sustainability; highlights the manifesto’s aims of connecting the way that Scotland grows, produces, distributes and consumes food with its climate change targets, connecting the environmental policy framework to its health and wellbeing initiatives and looking afresh at the values that underpin how it organises its food economy; considers that Scotland’s food and drink policy is not only about export growth, but also about nutrition and health indications in communities across Scotland, and values the work of Fife Diet in engaging with communities and raising the debate about how Scotland achieves collaborative gains between community, food and health, affordability and sustainability.

The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by Fergus Ewing on the renewables obligation Scotland review. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04082, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on electricity market reform.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04082.1, in the name of Rhoda Grant, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04082, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on electricity market reform, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

The member needs to start winding up.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04071, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 13 September.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04061.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04061, in the name of Derek Mackay, on the consultation on the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Professor Donald MacDonald, chair of the Scottish churches’ disability agenda group.

Before we start topical questions, many members will know that we received some very topical news overnight. I am sure that everyone in the chamber will wish me to record our congratulations to our own Andy Murray on his historic success in the final of the US open championships last night. [Applause.] I had been expecting to receive a topical question this morning from Bruce Crawford, the constituency MSP for Dunblane, but, unfortunately, I did not receive one. [Interruption.] I am sorry—the constituency MSP is Keith Brown. I apologise. I got the name wrong. However, he still did not put in a question.

The next item of business is a debate on motion number S4M-04045, in the name of John Swinney, on actions to deliver sustainable economic growth. Members who wish to take part in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now. We have a bit of time in hand, so I encourage interventions where possible.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, if the amendment in the name of Mary Scanlon is agreed, the amendment in the name of Willie Rennie falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04045.1, in the name of Kenneth Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04045, in the name of John Swinney, on actions to deliver sustainable economic growth, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Minister, could you answer that speech, please?

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-03534, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill. I call Derek Mackay to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc.) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to— (a) any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act; and (b) any charge or payment in relation to which Rule 9.12.4 of the Standing Orders applies arising in consequence of the Act.—[Derek Mackay.]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04011, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the appointment of junior Scottish ministers. Members should note that the question on the motion will be put immediately after the debate, and not at decision time.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-03924, in the name of Derek Mackay, on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. I welcome everyone back after the recess and to our first ever Tuesday afternoon sitting. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Scott McKenna, minister at Mayfield Salisbury parish church, Edinburgh.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03925, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the Scottish Government’s programme. The First Minister’s statement will be followed by a debate. There should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03522, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for this afternoon.

The next item of business is a statement by Stewart Stevenson on the Rio+20 earth summit. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on progress on the reform of post-16 learning. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so no interventions or interruptions should be made.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 7A, and the marshalled list, which is SP bill 7A-ML. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes, should there be a division. The period of voting for the division will be 30 seconds. Members who wish to speak in the debate on the amendment should press their request-to-speak button. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. It would be helpful if members would take their seats so that we can have a bit of order in the chamber. Section 1—Meaning of “qualifying lease”

Order.

Question 5 from James Dornan. James Dornan (Glasgow Cathcart) (SNP) rose—

Question 2, in the name of Jenny Marra, has not been lodged, but she has provided an explanation for that.

I thank the member for the point of order. I have made inquiries. The original letter was received by the committee clerk at 9.17. The committee clerk was in a meeting until 9.30. It was spotted that the original letter contained an error, in that it said that the embargo was until 28 July, not 28 June. The cabinet secretary’s office was aware of that. It set about sending a corrected letter to the committee clerk. The corrected letter was received in the committee mailbox at 9.51. The assistant clerk to the committee requested that the original letter be sent out to the committee, and that letter—containing the error—was sent to members at 9.47. I understand that Mr Findlay was notified of that timeline at 11.39 this morning.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-03491, in the name of Brian Adam, on the membership of the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe. Motion moved, That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Government’s proposal to nominate, as representatives of the Parliament, Christina McKelvie MSP as a full member and Helen Eadie MSP as an alternate member on the UK delegation to the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe for the remainder of the current parliamentary session to 2016.—[Brian Adam.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-03514, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Crime and Courts Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Crime and Courts Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 10 May 2012, relating to the establishment of the National Crime Agency, for a new drug-driving offence and to allow those detained in Scotland by immigration officers to be able to access legal advice on the same terms as those detained by police officers, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S4M-03523 and S4M-03524, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments, and motion S4M-03525, on approval of guidance. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Fundable Bodies (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011 (Consequential Modifications) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Code of Practice on Non-Native Species (SG2012/87) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-03408, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Good morning. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Gordon Craig, the United Kingdom oil and gas industry chaplain.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03499, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for this week.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the budget outturn 2011-12. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement and there should, therefore, be no interventions or interruptions.

The first item of business this afternoon is the continuation of stage 3 proceedings on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. I remind members, in dealing with the amendments, that they should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 8A, the marshalled list, which is SP bill 8A-ML, and the groupings, which is SP bill 8A-G. I also remind members that, as with this morning, the division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes prior to the first division. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible after I call the group. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 95—Transfer of constables, staff, property etc

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03309, in the name of Dave Thompson, on the report “Scotland Act: Standing Order rule changes”. I call Dave Thompson to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-03481, in the name of John Swinney, on the Electoral Registration and Administration Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Electoral Registration and Administration Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 10 May 2012, relating to individual electoral registration and absent voting and rejected postal votes, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-03480, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Local Government Finance Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 December 2011, which relates to the establishment of a data sharing gateway for purposes relating to council tax liability, in so far as these matters fall within the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S4M-03500 and S4M-03501, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments; motion S4M-03502, on committee membership; and motion S4M-03503, on substitution on committees. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Legal Services (Scotland) Act 2010 (Ancillary Provision) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Licensed Legal Services (Specification of Regulated Professions) (Scotland) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that— Jackson Carlaw be appointed to replace Nanette Milne as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Hanzala Malik be appointed to replace Michael McMahon as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Drew Smith as a member of the Welfare Reform Committee; Fiona McLeod be appointed to replace Bob Doris as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; and Sandra White be appointed to replace Fiona McLeod as a member of the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Jackson Carlaw be appointed to replace Nanette Milne as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-03407, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03394, in the name of Nanette Milne, on families. I remind all members that time is extremely tight for the two debates this morning, so I will hold you very firmly to the time that has been allocated to you. Nanette Milne has no more than 10 minutes.

I got worried there.

Question 4, in the name of Neil Findlay, was not lodged. He has provided me with an explanation.

Order.

Question 6 in the name of Linda Fabiani has been withdrawn for understandable reasons.

The next item of business is a statement from Keith Brown on rail. The minister will take questions after his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03400, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on growing the visitor economy.

He is in his last minute.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-03394.1, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, which seeks to amend motion S4M-03394, in the name of Nanette Milne, on families, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Clifford Hughes, former teacher, singer and Church of Scotland minister.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03395, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3:   30 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is an Equal Opportunities Committee debate on the subject of women and work.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03390, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions: S4M-03391, on approval of an Scottish statutory instrument; and S4M-03392, on the suspension and variation of standing orders. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Mental Health (Safety and Security) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that Rule 6.11.1(a)(i) be suspended for the purpose of consideration between 30 June 2012 and 21 December 2012 of any orders requiring the consent of the Parliament under section 9 of the Public Bodies Act 2011 and that the following alternative provision be substituted for that purpose— “(i) subordinate legislation laid before the Parliament or requiring the consent of the Parliament under section 9 of the Public Bodies Act 2011;”—[Bruce Crawford.]

The first question is, that motion S4M-03369, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03289, in the name of Jenny Marra, on women’s representation.

Question 2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, has been withdrawn. The member has provided me with an explanation and I am satisfied with it.

Order!

Order!

I thank Mr Rennie for the advance notice of his point. He will recognise that that was not a point of order. The accuracy of statements that are made in the chamber is not a matter for the Presiding Officers. However, Mr Rennie’s point is now a matter of record.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-03289.1, in the name of Shona Robison, which seeks to amend motion S4M-03289, in the name of Jenny Marra, on women’s representation, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Baroness Caroline Cox of Queensbury, founder and chief executive officer of the Humanitarian Aid Relief Trust and guest speaker at the national prayer breakfast for Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03278, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on improving services for victims and witnesses.

Mr Macdonald’s microphone is not on.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03311, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow, Thursday 14 June.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-03278.2, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S4M-03278, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on improving services for victims and witnesses, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the legionella outbreak. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

I let the statement run on for a few minutes to allow all the constituency and regional members with an interest to ask a question. That means, however, that this debate is extremely tight for time. The Presiding Officers will keep members’ speeches very tight, and we may have to cut members’ time at the end. I call on the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, to speak on the reform of the common fisheries policy. He has 13 minutes.

The member has raised a point of order. Let me respond. The same rules apply to all members.

Members will wish to join me in welcoming to the chamber the Prime Minister of Lower Saxony, Mr David McAllister. [Applause.]

Order.

Question 1, from Ken Macintosh, has not been lodged. The member has provided me with an explanation.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the Scottish Government’s approach to taxation. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement. There should therefore be no interventions or interruptions. I call John Swinney. Cabinet secretary, you have up to 15 minutes.

Before we come to decision time, I remind members that we have the business in the Parliament event tonight. I look forward to welcoming as many MSPs as possible to the event tonight, which promises to be a fantastic dinner. I have just seen the garden lobby and it is looking absolutely spectacular. We then have the business in the Parliament conference tomorrow, and I look forward to welcoming as many members to that as wish to take part. That concludes our consideration of the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

I note the member’s point. It is, of course, not a point of order, but he has made sure that it has been entered into the record.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-03163.2, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-3163, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the reform of the common fisheries policy, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03141, in the name of Dave Thompson, on parliamentary reform and changes to the standing orders.

We now move to the wind-up speeches. I regret that Ms MacDonald was not called.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03181, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 7 June.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I call Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-03185, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motions S4M-03186 and S4M-03187, both on the suspension and variation of the standing orders. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Treatment of Office or Body as Specified Authority) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that Rule 12.3.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Welfare Reform Committee to meet, if necessary, on the afternoon of Wednesday 13 June 2012 to consider the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill at stage 2. That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill to be referred to the Finance Committee as lead committee, Rule 6.6.1(c) be suspended and replaced with: “(c) Budget Bills and the Bill introduced as the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill (SP Bill 14, Session 4)” until the Bill is passed, falls or is withdrawn.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-03141, in the name of David Thompson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on parliamentary reform and standing orders rule changes, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: Yes.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03112, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 4: 1 hour.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03052, in the name of Dave Thompson, on the European strategy and other minor rule changes. I call Dave Thompson to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 6A, the marshalled list, which is SP bill 6A-ML, and the groupings, which is SP bill 6A-G. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the morning. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak button as soon as possible after I call the group. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 31A—References to certain entries in the Register of Inhibitions

You have 20 seconds, Mr Ewing.

Can we have Mr MacDonald’s microphone on, please? [Interruption.] Do you have your card in?

Order. Let us hear the First Minister.

Richard Baker has five minutes.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-03052, in the name of Dave Thompson, on the European strategy and minor rule changes, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 1st Report 2011 (Session 4), Minor Standing Orders Rule Changes (SP Paper 25) and 1st Report 2012 (Session 4), European Strategy (SP Paper 59), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A of the 1st Report 2011, other than those agreed to by motion S4M-01347, and in the annexe to this motion be made with effect from 20 August 2012.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02399, in the name of Elaine Murray, on improvements to the A75. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with great concern the spate of recent accidents on the A75 Stranraer to Gretna trunk road, including two fatalities, and believes that urgent action is required to improve the safety of this road.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, which is led today by Father Michael Briody of St Michael’s Church, Moodiesburn.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03102, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03077, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the diamond jubilee. I call the First Minister to speak to and move the motion.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03078, in the name of John Swinney, on the implications for the Scottish economy of the current euro zone situation.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-03068, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Finance (No 4) Bill 2012, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Finance (No.4) Bill 2012, introduced in the House of Commons on 26 March 2012, relating to tax incentives for philanthropic gifts (Cultural Gifts Scheme), so far as these matters alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Fiona Hyslop.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03101, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 6 June 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Fuel Poverty followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Parliamentary Reform, Standing Orders Rule Changes followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 7 June 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Reform of the Common Fisheries Policy 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Scottish Government’s Approach to Taxation followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 13 June 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 14 June 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment Justice and the Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S4M-03103 and S4M-03104, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. I ask any member who wishes to speak against the motions to press their request-to-speak button now. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Property Factors (Code of Conduct) (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions) (Dalgety Bay) (Scotland) Order 2012 be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-03077, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the diamond jubilee, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03013, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 proceedings on the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3:  1 hour 20 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03004, in the name of Alasdair Allan, on why languages matter—improving young people’s opportunities.

Order.

The member has no time. He has precisely 10 seconds left.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-03004.1, in the name of Neil Findlay, which seeks to amend motion S4M-03004, in the name of Alasdair Allan, on why languages matter, improving young people’s opportunities, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, which is led today by Rashpal Nottay of the Scottish Inter Faith Council.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02994, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to today’s business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 23 May 2012— after followed by Stage 1 Debate: Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Financial Resolution: Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02966, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02778, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution on the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[Nicola Sturgeon.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02993, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 30 May 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Motion on the Diamond Jubilee followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Implications for the Scottish Economy of the Current Eurozone Situation followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: 1st Report, 2012, European Strategy and other minor rule changes followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Finance (No. 4) Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 31 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Future followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 6 June 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 7 June 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Paul Martin to move motion S4M-02997, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on a committee, and motion S4M-02998, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that Jamie McGrigor be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the Official Statistics (Scotland) Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Paul Martin.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02966, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02906, in name of Lewis Macdonald, on justice. Members who wish to take part in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now. I will wait until Mr Macdonald puts his card in the slot.

Would Mark McDonald please stop shouting across the chamber?

Before we come to First Minister’s question time, I am sure that members wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the President of the Austrian state Parliament of Voralberg, Dr Bernadette Mennel. [Applause.] I am sure that members will also join me in welcoming Margo MacDonald back to the chamber. Welcome home. [Applause.]

I am afraid that that was very wide of the mark.

Can we get the minister’s microphone on, please?

The member needs to wind up.

Before we move to decision time, Joan McAlpine wishes to make a short statement to members.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on justice, if the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alison McInnes falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02906.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02906, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection for which our leader is the Reverend Brian Oxburgh, who is the minister of Tayport parish church.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02903, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the National Library of Scotland Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the National Library of Scotland Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 4: 30 minutes.—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02888, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on the national parenting strategy for Scotland.

There is far too much noise in the chamber. I ask members to settle down.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02901, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 May 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 24 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Why Languages Matter, Improving Young People’s Opportunities 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.00 pm Themed Question Time Infrastructure and Capital Investment; Culture and External Affairs 2.40 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 30 May 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 31 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S4M-02902, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Equality Act 2010 (Specific Duties) (Scotland) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Paul Martin.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02888.3, in the name of Neil Bibby, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02888, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on the national parenting strategy for Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02800, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill.

I think that you have asked your question, Mr McNeil.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02591, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

We now come to First Minister’s question time. Question 1 is from Johann Lamont. [Applause.]

Good afternoon. Question 1 is from Stewart Maxwell. [Interruption.] We will wait until he gets his card in.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02808, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Government’s growth strategy.

Mr Park, I would have given you another minute. I call Kenneth Gibson. Mr Gibson, you can have an extra minute.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02800, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02780, in the name of Alex Neil, on the British Waterways Board (Transfer of Functions) Order 2012. Motion moved, That the Parliament consents to the making of the British Waterways Board (Transfer of Functions) Order 2012, a draft of which was laid before the UK Parliament on 29 February 2012 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.—[Keith Brown.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02781, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Inland Waterways Advisory Council (Abolition) Order 2012. Motion moved, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Inland Waterways Advisory Council (Abolition) Order 2012, a draft of which was laid before the UK Parliament on 29 February 2012 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.—[Keith Brown.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02803, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 May 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: National Parenting Strategy for Scotland followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: National Library of Scotland Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 17 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Preventing Obesity, Meeting the Challenge followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 23 May 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 24 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.00 pm Themed Question Time Infrastructure and Capital Investment Culture and External Affairs 2.40 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02804, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Waste (Scotland) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02777, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on fiscal sustainability, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the summary of evidence of the Finance Committee’s series of roundtable discussions on fiscal sustainability.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02573, in the name of Elaine Smith, on the beyond the frame Cuban art exhibition. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the Cuban art exhibition, Beyond the Frame, which is scheduled to be held at The Lighthouse in Glasgow from 7 to 13 May 2012; understands that this will be the first time that such a large exhibition of contemporary Cuban art will be shown in Scotland and that some of the exhibits are also expected to be displayed in the Parliament; understands that all of the exhibition’s proceeds will go to the campaign for justice for the so-called Miami Five, a group of Cuban citizens that have been imprisoned in the United States since 1998 and for whom Amnesty International has raised serious doubts about the fairness of the proceedings that led to their convictions; recognises that the city of Glasgow is twinned with Havana and notes that a number of bars in Coatbridge have achieved “Cuban-friendly” status by offering their customers the opportunity to buy Havana Club rum, which, it understands, helps boost Cuba’s economy; believes that, given the 50-year economic blockade of Cuba by the United States, this is particularly important; understands that there is almost universal opposition to the blockade by the international community and that it is considered to have a severe impact on the living standards of the people of Cuba; wishes the organisers of the exhibition every success, and hopes that it will lead to more cultural, economic and political cooperation between Scotland and Cuba.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Pastor Stephen Hibbard of Sheddocksley Baptist church, Aberdeen.

Question 4, in the name of David McLetchie, has been withdrawn. The member has provided an explanation.

Order.

Annabelle Ewing.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02734, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Advisory Committee on Hazardous Substances (Abolition) Order 2012. Motion moved, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Advisory Committee on Hazardous Substances (Abolition) Order 2012, a draft of which was laid before the UK Parliament on 27 February 2012 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.—[Stewart Stevenson.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02754, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 9 May 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: The Future of European Structural Funds from 2014 followed by Finance Committee Debate: Fiscal Sustainability followed by Public Body Consent Motion: British Waterways Board (Transfer of Functions) Order 2012 followed by Public Body Consent Motion: Inland Waterways Advisory Council (Abolition) Order 2012 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and the Law Officers Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government Growth Strategy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 16 May 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: National Library of Scotland Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 17 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.]

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-02757, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Nanette Milne be appointed to replace Jackson Carlaw as a member of the Health and Sport Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02738.1, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02738, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on national performing companies, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02534, in the name of George Adam, on national multiple sclerosis week. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the importance of National MS Week, which takes place this year from 30 April to 6 May; recognises the particular significance of MS to Scotland, which has the highest prevalence of MS anywhere in the world; congratulates the MS Society Scotland, along with local branches of the society such as the Paisley and District branch, for what it considers its excellent work supporting those affected by MS, and considers that this good work, conducted across many local authority areas, is being undermined by savage cuts to disability benefits including Employment and Support Allowance and Disability Living Allowance, with people with MS being among those hardest hit because of the complex, fluctuating and often hidden nature of the condition and its symptoms.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02687, in the name of Jackson Carlaw, on localism. Mr Carlaw, you have 14 minutes.

I note that Joan McAlpine is not in the chamber to ask question 4, and I have not received any indication that she was withdrawing it.

Order. We will hear the First Minister.

Before we move to the winding-up speeches, I note that the following members took part in the debate but have chosen not to be present for the wind-up speeches, which I consider to be a gross discourtesy: Christina McKelvie; Maureen Watt; and Roderick Campbell. I hope that their whips will take note.

There are up to three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. In relation to the debate on localism, I remind members that, if the amendment in the name of Derek Mackay is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Sarah Boyack will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02687.1, in the name of Derek Mackay, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02687, in the name of Jackson Carlaw, on localism, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Michele Morrison, church elder of Banchory West church.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02675, in the name of Maureen Watt, on homelessness in Scotland: the 2012 commitment.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02691, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 May 2012 1.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 1.35 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.15 pm General Question Time 2.35 pm First Minister’s Question Time 3.05 pm Scottish Government Debate: National Performing Companies followed by Public Body Consent Motion: Public Bodies (Abolition of the Advisory Committee on Hazardous Substances) Order 2012 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 9 May 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 May 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and the Law Officers Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business (b) that the period for members to lodge questions for First Minister’s Question Time on 10 May 2012 ends at 12 noon on Thursday 3 May; and (c) that the period for members to lodge questions for First Minister’s Question Time on 7 June 2012 ends at 2.00 pm on Thursday 31 May.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S4M-02693, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on a committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Jenny Marra be appointed to replace Anne McTaggart as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02675, in the name of Maureen Watt, on homelessness in Scotland: the 2012 commitment, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s 2nd Report, 2012 (Session 4): Homelessness in Scotland: the 2012 Commitment (SP Paper 97).

The member is indeed in her last minute.

It is a wee bit early to move on to general questions, but I see that everybody is in their places, so we will just start.

Order.

As a fellow Robert Burns World Federation prize winner, I call Alex Johnstone.

I am sorry, but that does not relate to Scottish Water.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02617, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill. I will give members a few moments to change their seats. [Interruption.]

That concludes the debate on the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill. I see that Mr MacAskill recognises that he has made a mistake.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on transport, if the amendment in the name of Keith Brown is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Jim Hume and Patrick Harvie fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02639.3, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02639, in the name of Elaine Murray, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon and welcome back. Our first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Andy Bathgate, who is the chief executive officer of Scripture Union Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02623, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on project transmit. Members who wish to take part in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now.

I call Alex Neil to wind up the debate. Mr Neil, you would be doing us all a great service if you could continue until 5.59.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02635, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 25 April 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee Debate: Homelessness in Scotland: The 2012 Commitment followed by Stage 1 Debate: Long Leases (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 26 April 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government Recommendations from the Commission on Women Offenders followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 2 May 2012 1.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 1.35 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.15 pm General Question Time 2.35 pm First Minister’s Question Time 3.05 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-02638 on substitution on committees. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Jackie Baillie be appointed as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Welfare Reform Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02623.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02623, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on project transmit, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02522, in the name of Alison Johnstone, on cycling.

I remind members not to refer to each other by their first names.

I call the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Michael Russell, who is on his iPad.

Order. We will hear the member.

That is perfectly acceptable, Mr Kelly. I know that you have really important points to make and that the members in the chamber would love to hear them.

I call Roseanna Cunningham to wind up the debate. It would be helpful if you could continue until 4.55, minister.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02533, in the name of Iain Gray, on the appointment of the Auditor General for Scotland. Members who want to take part in this very short debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now. I call Iain Gray to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the selection panel.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02522.3, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02522, in the name of Alison Johnstone, on cycling, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leaders are Angela Shapiro and Claire Singerman from the gathering the voices project, a partnership including the Glasgow Jewish community, Glasgow Caledonian University and sense over sectarianism.

The next item of business is a statement by Derek Mackay on planning reform: next steps. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement. There should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02495, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I call Richard Lochhead, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, to speak to and move the motion. You have 10 minutes, Mr Lochhead.

Yes.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02496, in the name of John Swinney, on the Financial Services Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Financial Services Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 26 January 2012, relating to the enhancement of understanding and knowledge of the public of financial matters and the ability of members of the public to manage their own financial affairs, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02509, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow and a future business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 29 March 2012— after 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Consultation on the New Tribunal System in Scotland insert followed by Appointment of the Auditor General for Scotland (b) the following programme of business— Wednesday 18 April 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Project TransmiT followed by Scottish Government Debate: Legislative Consent Motion: Scotland Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 19 April 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Culture and External Affairs Infrastructure and Capital Investment 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 25 April 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 26 April 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of eight Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move en bloc motions S4M-02510 to S4M-02515, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Evidence in Civil Partnership and Divorce Actions (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Patient Rights (Treatment Time Guarantee) (Scotland) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Secure Tenancies (Proceedings for Possession) (Pre-Action Requirements) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Secure Tenancies (Repossession Orders) (Maximum Period) Order 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02495, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02421, in the name of Elaine Murray, on ferries.

Excuse me. Mr Henry, please refer to the member as “Mr Hepburn” or “Jamie Hepburn”.

Order.

You really do need to close.

The next item of business is decision time. There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02421.1—

As I have noted many times before, members are responsible for what they say during proceedings. An allegation that a minister or the First Minister has misled Parliament is a matter for the Scottish ministerial code. Therefore, I refer Paul Martin to that code and suggest that he take up the matter directly with the First Minister.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate, on motion S4M-02277, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on the green investment bank. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the announcement that the first ever UK Green Investment Bank (GIB) will have its headquarters based in Edinburgh; considers that the city of Edinburgh is ideally suited to deliver the key objectives of the GIB, which aims to encourage and stimulate investment in low-carbon technologies; further considers that the green, financial and research sectors of the capital are already well established and that the decision will strengthen the links between the financial centres of Edinburgh and London; believes that the GIB provides an ideal opportunity to put great momentum behind the green revolution and to build strong relationships with industries across Scotland, the UK and beyond; further believes that the announcement clearly showcases the strengths of Edinburgh and also the potential for the green industry to grow significantly and bring a great boost for jobs, and congratulates what it considers the sheer hard work and determination of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, which it sees as a successful driving force behind the bid.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Caroline Taylor, minister of Leuchars: St Athernase Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02423, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to today’s business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business— Wednesday 21 March 2012 delete 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by European and External Relations Committee Debate: EU priorities for 2012 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Housing Benefit Reform followed by Public Body Consent Motion: National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and insert 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Waiting Times, NHS Lothian followed by European and External Relations Committee Debate: EU priorities for 2012 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Housing Benefit Reform followed by Public Body Consent Motion: National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on NHS Lothian waiting times. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02388, in the name of Christina McKelvie, on European Union priorities for 2012. I call Christina McKelvie to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the European and External Relations Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02400, in the name of Michael Russell, on the draft Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts) Order 2012, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Public Bodies (Abolition of the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts) Order 2012, a draft of which was laid before the UK Parliament on 19 January 2012 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament if it were contained in an Act of that Parliament.—[Michael Russell.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02424, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 28 March 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Planning Reform, Next Steps followed by Stage 1 Debate: Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: UK Government Budget followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Financial Services Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 29 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Green Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Consultation on the New Tribunal System in Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 18 April 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 19 April 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Culture and External Affairs Infrastructure and Capital Investment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business (b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on Thursday 19 April 2012 ends at 12 noon on Wednesday 28 March 2012.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-02428, which is on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S4M-02429, which is on substitution on committees. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2011 Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that George Adam be appointed as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Scotland Bill Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02388, in the name of Christina McKelvie, on European Union priorities for 2012, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the European and External Relations Committee’s 1st Report, 2012 (Session 4): The Scottish Parliament’s EU priorities for 2012 (SP Paper 93).

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02338, in the name of Liam McArthur, on childcare.

Question number 3 by Annabel Goldie has been withdrawn, but she has provided a satisfactory explanation. Question 4 was not lodged by Mary Fee.

Order. We will hear the First Minister, please.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02336, in the name of Derek Mackay, on the draft Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2012.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02362, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 22 March.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02338.2, in the name of Aileen Campbell, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02338, in the name of Liam McArthur, on childcare, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Ms Esther Wanjohi of the women’s HIV project in Ngong, Nairobi, in partnership with Murrayfield churches together.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02304, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill.

Ms Baillie.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-02163, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution on the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[Nicola Sturgeon.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02324, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 March 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by European and External Relations Committee Debate: EU priorities for 2012 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Housing Benefit Reform followed by Public Body Consent Motion: National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 22 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: The UK Government response on the future of Remploy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 28 March 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 29 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-02341, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S4M-02343, on approval of guidance. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Recovery of Expenses in respect of Inspection of Independent Further Education Colleges and English Language Schools) (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Social Housing Charter be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02304, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02242, in the name of Hugh Henry, on curriculum for excellence.

David Torrance has withdrawn question 2, but he has provided me with a satisfactory explanation for doing so.

Order. We will hear the member, please.

Question 4 has not been lodged by Richard Baker.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02245, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the future of tourism in Scotland. I call Fergus Ewing to speak to and move the motion.

Excuse me, minister. There is just far too much chatting by members.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the vote on curriculum for excellence, if the amendment in the name of Michael Russell is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Liz Smith falls. The first question is that, amendment S4M-02242.3, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02242, in the name of Hugh Henry, on curriculum for excellence, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Sheila McKay, chair of Grampian Family Support Forum.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02175, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Health and Sport Committee’s report “Report on Inquiry into the Regulation of Care for Older People”.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02234, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 14 March 2012 1.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 1 Debate: Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 15 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: National Library of Scotland Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2012 [draft] followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 21 March 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 22 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-02239, on the referral of a Scottish statutory instrument to the Parliament, and motion S4M-02240, on committee membership and substitutions. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be considered by the Parliament. That the Parliament agrees that— James Dornan be appointed to replace Bill Walker as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Angus MacDonald be appointed to replace Bill Walker as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; and Dave Thompson be appointed to replace James Dornan as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Finance Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02175, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Health and Sport Committee’s report on its inquiry into the regulation of care for older people, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee’s 3rd Report, 2011 (Session 4): Report on Inquiry into the Regulation of Care for Older People (SP Paper 40).

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02156, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on climate justice.

That concludes the historic first debate on climate justice.

Before we come to First Minister’s question time, members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Hungarian ambassador, His Excellency János Csák. [Applause.]

Order.

The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Dr Ian Wills, a senior pastor in the Church of the Nazarene in Glasgow.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02149, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 29 February 2012— delete 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Post-16 Reform followed by Scottish Government Debate: Human Trafficking followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and insert 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Lockerbie followed by Ministerial Statement: Post-16 Reform followed by Scottish Government Debate: Human Trafficking followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill on Lockerbie. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on post-16 reform. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will take questions at the end of his statement. There should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02133, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on human trafficking.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02176, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. It replaces motion S4M-02150, and includes a Public Petitions Committee debate next Wednesday afternoon. Section A of the Business Bulletin has been revised and is available at the back of the chamber.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-02151, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance (Assistance By Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02133.1, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02133, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on human trafficking, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S4M-2086, in the name of Richard Baker, on concerns about rail proposals. I call Richard Baker to speak to and move the motion. Mr Baker, you have 10 minutes.

The member is not going to take an intervention. Sit down, Mr McDonald.

Question 3—Mike MacKenzie.

The member must start to wind up.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-02103, on committee membership, and motion S4M-02104, on substitution on committees. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Clare Adamson be appointed to replace Annabelle Ewing as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Jean Urquhart be appointed to replace Clare Adamson as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Aileen McLeod be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; and Dennis Robertson be appointed to replace Aileen McLeod as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Adam Ingram be appointed to replace Dennis Robertson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Margaret Burgess as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Nigel Don be appointed to replace Jean Urquhart as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee; Stewart Maxwell be appointed to replace Colin Keir as the Scottish National Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Joe FitzPatrick be appointed to replace Kevin Stewart as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; and Linda Fabiani be appointed as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Welfare Reform Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today’s business. [Interruption.] If members will keep quiet, I will remind them that, in relation to the debate on the withdrawal of the road equivalent tariff from commercial vehicles, if the amendment in the name of Keith Brown is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Tavish Scott will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02086.1, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02086, in the name of Richard Baker, on concerns about rail proposals, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. I am glad to see that you are all nice and relaxed, and refreshed. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Right Rev David Arnott, who is the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

I call Murdo Fraser. You have eight minutes, Mr Fraser.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-02077, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 29 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Post-16 Reform followed by Scottish Government Debate: Human Trafficking followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 1 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Climate Justice 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Infrastructure and Capital Investment; Culture and External Affairs 2.55 pm Local Government and Regeneration Committee Debate: Living Wage in Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 7 March 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 8 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move en bloc motions S4M-02078 to S4M-02081, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Forestry Commissioners (Climate Change Functions) (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Representation of the People (Post-Local Government Elections Supply and Inspection of Documents) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Local Government Elections Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002 Amendment (No 2) Order 2012 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-02066, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the green investment bank, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament endorses the bid submitted to the UK Government to have the green investment bank (GIB) located in Edinburgh; believes that the Edinburgh bid fully satisfies the criteria set out by the UK Government and that Edinburgh is the ideal location for the new institution through its unique business ecosystem and highly advanced network of financiers, developers, investors, asset managers, researchers, academics, think tanks and government agencies; recognises the breadth of support for the Edinburgh bid across Scottish civic society, the academic sector and commerce, and acknowledges that Scotland’s ambitious low-carbon economic agenda will facilitate a GIB based in Edinburgh becoming an enduring financial institution with visibility and a distinct identity with which to mobilise significant investment into green projects across the UK.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on the review of teacher employment. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01979, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2012. As the three front-bench speakers are in their places, we will begin. Mr Swinney, you have up to 13 minutes.

Question 7, in the name of Dennis Robertson, has been withdrawn, for understandable reasons.

Order. Ms Baillie, could you please keep quiet?

The member needs to start winding up.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-01980, in the name of Brian Adam, on membership of the regional chamber of the congress of local and regional authorities of the Council of Europe and the Committee of the Regions. Motion moved, That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Government’s proposal to nominate, as representatives of the Parliament, Bill Kidd MSP as a full member and Helen Eadie MSP as an alternate member on the UK delegation to the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, and Stewart Maxwell MSP and Patricia Ferguson MSP as full members and Jim Hume MSP and Jamie McGrigor MSP as alternate members on the UK delegation to the Committee of the Regions for the remainder of the current parliamentary session to 2016.—[Brian Adam.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01979.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01979, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2012, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Paul McKeown, who is a Tibetan Buddhist from Inverness.

I am looking forward to a peaceful day. I call John Swinney to speak to and move motion S4M-01960.

Excuse me, Ms Grant. There is far too much noise in the chamber.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01976, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to business for tomorrow, Thursday 9 February, and a future business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 9 February 2012— after 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Youth Employment Strategy insert followed by Scottish Government Debate: Membership of the Regional Chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe and Committee of the Regions (b) the following programme of business— Wednesday 22 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.35 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time 2.50 pm Scottish Government Debate: Green Investment Bank followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 23 February 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Economy and Recovery followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 29 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 1 March 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Infrastructure and Capital Investment; Culture and External Affairs 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-01960, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01876, in the name of Liz Smith, on college funding. I invite members who wish to take part in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. I remind all members that time is very tight, so they will get their allocated time and not a second more.

Order. Please settle down.

Question 3 from Helen Eadie has been withdrawn for understandable reasons.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01893, in the name of Alex Neil, on Scotland’s next-generation broadband infrastructure plan.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01900, on the suspension and variation of standing orders. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Rule 6.11(a)(i) be suspended for the purpose of consideration between 2 February 2012 and 29 June 2012 of any orders requiring the consent of the Parliament under section 9 of the Public Bodies Act 2011 and that the following alternative provision be substituted for that purpose— “(i) subordinate legislation laid before the Parliament or requiring the consent of the Parliament under section 9 of the Public Bodies Act 2011;”—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01876.1, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to motion S4M-01876, in the name of Liz Smith, on college funding, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Shaykh Amer Jamil, who is co-director of the Solas Foundation and a family support consultant at Unity Family Services.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on higher and further education governance reports. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01870 on the year of creative Scotland 2012. Members who wish to take part in the debate should please press their request-to-speak button now.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01883, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Mr Crawford has obviously been detained, so I call on Paul Martin to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 8 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 9 February 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Review of Teacher Employment followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Youth Employment Strategy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 22 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.35 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time 2.50 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 23 February 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of eight Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move, in normal time, motion S4M-01880, on the referral to the Parliament of the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2012; motion S4M-01882, on the suspension of standing orders; motions S4M-01887 to S4M-01889, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments; motions S4M-01890 and S4M-01891, on substitution on committees; and motion S4M-01892, on parliamentary recess dates. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be considered by the Parliament. That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 1 hour and 40 minutes to debate motion S4M-01880, Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft], on Thursday 9 February 2012, the final sentence of Rule 10.7.1 of Standing Orders be suspended. That the Parliament agrees that the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Act 2011 (Consequential Amendments) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Marine Licensing (Exempted Activities) (Scottish Inshore and Offshore Regions) Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Prohibited Procedures on Protected Animals (Exemptions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that— Mary Scanlon be appointed to replace Ruth Davidson as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Education and Culture Committee; Gavin Brown be appointed to replace Alex Fergusson as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Jackson Carlaw be appointed to replace David McLetchie as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Alex Fergusson be appointed to replace Jamie McGrigor as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee; and John Lamont be appointed to replace Murdo Fraser as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Scotland Bill Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Annabel Goldie be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Alex Johnstone be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; John Scott be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; Jamie McGrigor be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Alex Johnstone be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; David McLetchie be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; and John Lamont be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 6 to 21 October 2012 (inclusive), 22 December 2012 to 6 January 2013 (inclusive).—[Bruce Crawford.]

I thank Mr Martin for giving notice of his point of order and refer him to the good practice guide on announcements by the Scottish Government. I examined the article that he mentioned and the cabinet secretary’s statement. As far as I could see, a number of important issues in the statement were not covered in the article and I was content to allow the cabinet secretary to make his statement to the Parliament.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01870.1, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01870, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the year of creative Scotland 2012, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01824, in the name of Richard Baker, on public transport.

Before we come to question 8, I note that Mr Harvie has only just come into the chamber. It is a matter of courtesy to the Parliament and its members that members asking questions be here from the beginning of question time.

Ms McMahon, please be quiet.

I remind members that time is really tight.

There is a point of order from Michael McMahon.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on public transport, if the amendment in the name of Keith Brown is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01824.4, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01824, in the name of Richard Baker, on public transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Dr Stewart Gillan, minister of St Michael’s parish church, Linlithgow.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the referendum consultation. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01773, in the name of John Swinney, on stage 1 of the Budget (Scotland) Bill. Will members who wish to take part in the debate please press their request-to-speak buttons? I will allow a few seconds to allow members to change their seats.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01810, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 1 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Higher Education and Further Education Governance Reports followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Year of Creative Scotland 2012 followed by Appointment of the Scottish Information Commissioner followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 2 February 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Next Generation Broadband Infrastructure Plan followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 8 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 9 February 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions. Before I ask Paul Martin to move the motions, I point out that the motion on variation to standing orders has been withdrawn because of a technical issue. A revised section A has been issued. I ask Paul Martin to move motions S4M-01811 and S4M-01812, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, motion S4M-01813, on the establishment of a committee, motion S4M-01814, on the designation of a lead committee and, finally, motion S4M-01815, on the office of the clerk. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Social Services Inspections) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland (Excepted Services) Regulations 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament shall establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Welfare Reform Committee Remit: To keep under review the passage of the UK Welfare Reform Bill and monitor its implementation as it affects welfare provision in Scotland and to consider relevant Scottish legislation and other consequential arrangements. Duration: For the remainder of the current session of the Parliament. Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Membership: Jamie Hepburn, Margaret Burgess, Annabelle Ewing, Kevin Stewart, Michael McMahon, Drew Smith, Alex Johnstone. That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee and that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee be designated as a secondary committee in consideration of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that between 1 February 2012 and 31 January 2013, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 6 and 9 April, 7 May, 1, 4 and 5 June, 30 November, 24 (pm), 25 and 26 December, and 1 and 2 January.—[Paul Martin.]

There are six questions to be put as the result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-01773, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we all agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01741, in the name of Derek Mackay, on the local government elections in 2012. I indicate at the outset that we will be extremely generous with members’ time.

Minister: seabirds.

Can we have a bit of quiet, please?

You really need to wind up.

That ends the debate. I say to the cabinet secretary that, despite the invitation to Jackson Carlaw to join her in singing, there will be no singing in the chamber.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. [Interruption.] Will members settle down, please? I remind members that, in relation to the debate on local government elections in 2012, if the amendment in the name of Sarah Boyack is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Margaret Mitchell will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01741.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01741, in the name of Derek Mackay, on local government elections in 2012, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leaders today are Katie McKenna and Dominic Bradley, former pupils of St Ninian’s high school, East Dunbartonshire.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on Scottish Ambulance Service rest breaks. The Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy will take questions at the end of her statement and, therefore, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01679, in the name of Rob Gibson, on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s scrutiny of common agricultural policy reform. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak button. The debate is very heavily oversubscribed, so I ask members to keep to their time limits.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01730, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, Wednesday 25 January 2012 1.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Referendum Consultation followed by Stage 1 Debate: Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 26 January 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Claim of Right followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 1 February 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 2 February 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S4M-01731 and S4M-01732 on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments and motion S4M-01733 on the designation of a lead committee. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Equality Act 2010 (Specification of Public Authorities) (Scotland) Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002 Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-01679, in the name of Rob Gibson, on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s scrutiny of common agricultural policy reform, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s ongoing scrutiny of the European Commission’s proposed reform of the Common Agricultural Policy.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01678, in the name of Johann Lamont, on Scotland’s future. Time is very tight. To allow me to get in everybody who wants to speak, I ask members please to keep to their time limits. I call Johann Lamont to speak to and move the motion. Ms Lamont, you have 15 minutes—sorry, 14 minutes.

I call John Pentland.

We now move to First Minister’s question time. I call Johann Lamont.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01677, in the name of Michael Russell, on improving learning outcomes for all young people in 2012.

You have one minute left, minister. I ask members to settle down a bit, as there is a bit too much noise.

I remind members that, if they wish to take part in the votes, they must put their cards in the consoles. There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01678.2, in the name of Alex Salmond, which seeks to amendment motion S4M-01678, in the name of Johann Lamont, on Scotland’s future, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Paul O’Kane, who is development officer at the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire.

In response to Willie Rennie’s point of order, I have had no request from the Government for time to make a statement to Parliament today.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01667, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on the Education and Culture Committee’s inquiry into the educational attainment of looked-after children. I invite members who wish to take part in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01676, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. I call Bruce Crawford to move the motion.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-1667, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on the Education and Culture Committee inquiry into the educational attainment of looked-after children, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes that the Education and Culture Committee is undertaking an inquiry into the educational attainment of looked-after children and that, in order to inform its final report, the committee would welcome the views of all members on the key themes that have emerged in evidence.

Good morning—and I am delighted to see that so many of you have made it on time. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01638, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the legislative consent motion for the Welfare Reform Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.

Question 2 has been withdrawn by Roderick Campbell. He has provided me with an explanation and I am perfectly satisfied with the reasons for the withdrawal.

Can we have a question, Mr Rennie?

Before we start themed question time, I say that Bill Kidd has sent me an apology for failing to be here for his question today. I have accepted the apology in the spirit in which it was given.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01561, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on behalf of the Finance Committee, on its report on the Scottish spending review 2011 and the draft budget 2012-13.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01646, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that— John Park be appointed to replace Anne McTaggart as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Neil Bibby be appointed to replace Claire Baker and Neil Findlay be appointed to replace Jenny Marra as members of the Education and Culture Committee; Mary Fee be appointed to replace Claudia Beamish as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Elaine Murray be appointed to replace Margaret McCulloch and Michael McMahon be appointed to replace John Pentland as members of the Finance Committee; Drew Smith be appointed to replace Mary Fee as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Margaret McCulloch be appointed to replace Neil Findlay as a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; Jenny Marra be appointed to replace James Kelly as a member of the Justice Committee; Anne McTaggart be appointed to replace Kezia Dugdale and John Pentland be appointed to replace Mark Griffin as members of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; Iain Gray be appointed to replace Hugh Henry and Mark Griffin be appointed to replace Drew Smith as members of the Public Audit Committee; Anne McTaggart be appointed to replace Neil Bibby as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Claudia Beamish be appointed to replace Jenny Marra and Margaret McDougall be appointed to replace Elaine Murray as members of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee; Margaret McCulloch be appointed to replace Margaret McDougall as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; and Michael McMahon be appointed to replace Kezia Dugdale and John Pentland be appointed to replace Drew Smith as members of the Subordinate Legislation Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that in relation to the debate on the Welfare Reform Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, if the amendment in the name of Jackson Carlaw is agreed, the amendment in the name of Liam McArthur will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01638.3, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01638, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Welfare Reform Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev David Denniston, who is parish minister of St Cuthbert’s parish church in Edinburgh.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01626, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today. I call Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01626.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01620, in the name of Shona Robison, on the delivery and legacy of the Commonwealth games.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-01610, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on the draft national Gaelic language plan 2012-2017.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01627, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 11 January 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Education and Culture Committee Debate: Inquiry into the educational attainment of looked after children followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 12 January 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Improving Learning Outcomes for All Young People in 2012 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 18 January 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 19 January 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure and Capital Investment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move en bloc motions S4M-01629 to S4M-01631, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Crofting Commission (Elections) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games (Advertising and Trading) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Storage of Carbon Dioxide (Licensing etc.) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01620.1, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01620, in the name of Shona Robison, on the delivery and legacy of the Commonwealth games, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01585, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the integration of health and social care.

I ask members to settle down a bit, because there is a bit too much noise.

Quiet!

Mr Findlay, I do not think that the member is taking your intervention.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S4M-01581, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Mark McDonald be appointed to replace Derek Mackay as a member of the Finance Committee; and Colin Keir be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as a member of the Public Audit Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the infrastructure investment plan, if the amendment in the name of Lewis Macdonald is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01585.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01585, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the integration of health and social care, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader today is Peter Ross, who is a volunteer with the Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum and the Scottish Parliament community partnerships project, a road to health.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01578, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for today.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01575, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the appointment of a junior Scottish minister. Members should note that the question on the motion will be put immediately after the debate and not at decision time.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, that is SP bill 1A; the marshalled list, that is SP bill 1A-ML; and the groupings, which I have agreed to. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 1—Offensive behaviour at regulated football matches

I call on Roseanna Cunningham to wind up the debate. Ms Cunningham, you have until 4.59.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01579, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 December 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Delivery and Legacy of the Commonwealth Games followed by Education and Culture Committee Debate: National Gaelic Language Plan followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 22 December 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Welfare Reform Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers 2.55 pm Finance Committee Debate: Report on the Scottish Spending Review 2011 and Draft Budget 2012-13 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Wednesday 11 January 2012 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 12 January 2012 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01582, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, the Student Fees (Specification) (Scotland) Order 2011. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Student Fees (Specification) (Scotland) Order 2011 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-01524, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01526, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the regulatory framework. Any members who wish to speak in the debate should press their request-to-speak buttons now.

The minister needs to wind up now please.

Question 1, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, has not been lodged and question 2, in the name of Nanette Milne, has not been lodged.

We will hear from the Deputy First Minister, if members do not mind.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01526.2, in the name of Rhoda Grant, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01526, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the regulatory framework, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01107, in the name of Rhoda Grant, on multiple sclerosis and better care. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the campaign for better health care across Scotland by the MS Society which highlights the need for effective implementation of the Clinical Standards for Neurological Health Services; considers that the standards for neurological conditions published in 2009 mark an important step forward for patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) by setting out key standards for all NHS boards, including access to specialist multidisciplinary teams; recognises that these standards are vital to ensuring that MS patients have access to high quality care wherever they live; welcomes the appointment of a dedicated MS nurse in the Western Isles which it understands follows significant work by the MS Society; recognises the role of individuals and communities in the Western Isles who campaigned successfully for the appointment; notes that Scotland has one of the highest incidences of MS per head of population in the world, and believes that greater investment and government support is needed to further research and provide services.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev David Walton, minister of Greenock East and Port Glasgow United Reformed church.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01517, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for today.

The next item of business is a statement by Fergus Ewing on the decision on the Stirling visual impact mitigation scheme for the Beauly to Denny power line. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on the cod recovery plan and fishing opportunities for 2012. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The member is in his concluding minute.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-01510, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 21 June 2011, relating to Council Framework Decision 2008/909/JHA on prisoner transfer, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

The next item of business is consideration of four Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body motions, S4M-01417 to S4M-01420 inclusive, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on the nomination of pension fund trustees for the Scottish parliamentary contributory pension fund. Motions moved, That the Parliament appoints Alex Johnstone MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation. That the Parliament appoints Gil Paterson MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation. That the Parliament appoints Tavish Scott MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation. That the Parliament appoints Alasdair Morgan as a pensioner Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation.—[Mary Scanlon.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01518, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 14 December 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Ministerial Appointment followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 15 December 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Integration of Health and Social Care 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Infrastructure and Investment Plan followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 21 December 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 22 December 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I call Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01519, on the designation of a lead committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Land Registration etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to this afternoon’s debate on the United Kingdom Government’s autumn budget statement and the Scottish economy, if the amendment in the name of Gavin Brown is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Willie Rennie falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01501.3, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01501, in the name of John Swinney, on the UK Government’s autumn budget statement and the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01449, in the name of Iain Gray, on Scotland’s future.

Order.

Question 1 has been withdrawn by John Wilson for understandable reasons.

I call Jamie McGrigor to ask a constituency question.

Question 6 has not been lodged. Ms McDougall is on parliamentary business elsewhere.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01450, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on Lord Carloway’s review of criminal procedure.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on Scotland’s future, if amendment S4M-01449.3, in the name of Alex Salmond, is agreed to, amendment S4M-01449.1, in the name of Liz Smith, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01449.3, in the name of Alex Salmond, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01449, in the name of Iain Gray, on Scotland’s future, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev John A H Murdoch, moderator of the St Andrew’s Presbytery and minister of Largo and Newburn Parish Church.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01440, in the name of John Swinney, on public sector pensions.

Order. Can we hear the member, please?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01445, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 7 December 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Cod Recovery Plan followed by Scottish Government Debate: The UK Government’s Autumn Budget Statement and the Scottish Economy followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 8 December 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Regulatory Framework 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Local Government Finance Settlement 2012-13 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Violence against Women, Focusing on Prevention as a Means to an End followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 14 December 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Offensive Behaviour and Threatening Communications at Football (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 15 December 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S4M-01446 and S4M-01447, on approval of two Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Aquatic Animal Health (Miscellaneous Modifications) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2011 Amendment Order 2011 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01440.1, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01440, in the name of John Swinney, on public sector pensions, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01408, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on maritime safety and coastguards.

Minister, you have until 11.40 am.

Order.

The member is in his last minute.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on maritime safety and coastguards, if amendment S4M-01408.1, in the name of Alex Fergusson, is agreed to, amendment S4M-01408.2, in the name of Tavish Scott, falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01408.3, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01408, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on maritime safety and coastguards, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Lord Sacks, Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of Great Britain and the Commonwealth.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01399, in the name of Michael Matheson, on implementation of the carers and young carers strategy.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01403, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 30 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Public Sector Pensions followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 1 December 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Infrastructure and Capital Investment; Culture and External Affairs 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Lord Carloway’s Review of Criminal Procedure followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 7 December 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 8 December 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01399.3, in the name of Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01399, in the name of Michael Matheson, on the implementation of the carers and young carers strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01346, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on housing. I remind ministers and members that time is tight and that I would like them to stick to their allotted time.

I thank the member for his point of order. I point out that the members who were called in the debate had all requested to speak in the debate before Mr Harvie did. There was simply not enough time, in what was a very short debate, to call Mr Harvie. On the Parliamentary Bureau, it is open to the member to come and discuss that issue with me at any time. If he wishes to ensure that his views are represented to the bureau, I suggest that he write a letter to the members of the bureau so that they are made well aware of his concerns.

We will have a brief supplementary from Mr Stewart, and a brief answer, please.

Order.

The member needs to start winding up.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-01361, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 23 May 2011, as amended, relating to powers of seizure of evidence and the use of forensic data and the order making powers that would enable the imposition of enhanced measures in exceptional circumstances, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Kenny MacAskill.]

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on housing, if amendment S4M-01346.2, in the name of Keith Brown, is agreed to, amendment S4M-01346.3, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, falls. In relation to the debate on the role of the public sector, if amendment S4M-01348.2, in the name of John Swinney, is agreed to, amendment S4M-01348.3, in the name of Richard Baker, falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01346.2, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01346, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection, for which our leader today is Suselle Boffey from the Scottish Churches Disability Agenda Group.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01341, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out revisions to the business programme for this week.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01336, in the name of Alex Neil, on the regeneration strategy. I call on Alex Neil to speak to and move the motion. Mr Neil, you have 14 minutes—it is an extremely generous 14 minutes.

Very briefly, Mr McNeil.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-01347, in the name of Dave Thompson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on minor standing orders rule changes. I call on Dave Thompson to move the motion.

I think that you have made your point of order, Mr Harvie. I will respond to it.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01343, on the suspension of standing orders, motion S4M-01344, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S4M-01345, on committee membership. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that Rule 9B.2.3 of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Parliament to consider the legislative consent motion on the Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Bill on Thursday 17 November 2011. That the Parliament agrees that the Planning (Listed Buildings) (Amount of Fixed Penalty) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that— Alex Fergusson be appointed to replace Nanette Milne as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Gavin Brown be appointed to replace Alex Johnstone as a member of the Finance Committee; Mary Scanlon be appointed to replace Murdo Fraser as a member of the Public Audit Committee; Annabel Goldie be appointed to replace Margaret Mitchell as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; David McLetchie be appointed to replace John Lamont as a member of the Justice Committee; Murdo Fraser be appointed to replace Gavin Brown as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace Jackson Carlaw as a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee; Jackson Carlaw be appointed to replace Mary Scanlon as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Margaret Mitchell be appointed to replace Ruth Davidson as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee; and John Lamont be appointed to replace Alex Fergusson as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and the Environment Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01336.1, in the name of Michael McMahon, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01336, in the name of Alex Neil, on the regeneration strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01275, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on protecting Scotland’s national health service.

Mr Kelly, you have less than one minute in which to wind up.

That ends general question time. I apologise to two members for the fact that we did not reach questions 9 and 10.

Let the member finish his question, please.

The member is just winding up.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on keeping communities safe, if amendment S4M-01285.3, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, is agreed to, amendment S4M-01285.2, in the name of John Lamont, falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01275.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01275, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on protecting Scotland’s national health service, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. I remind members to leave their voting cards firmly in place. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev John Chalmers, principal clerk of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01262, in the name of Michael Matheson, on rehabilitation and enablement in Scotland. Mr Matheson, you have a generous 14 minutes to speak to and move the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01276, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Regeneration Strategy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 17 November 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Oil and Gas Framework followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 23 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 24 November 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01280, on the designation of a lead committee, and motion S4M-01281 and motion S4M-01282, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential, Savings and Transitional Provisions) Order 2011 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Local Government Elections Order 2011 [draft] be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

We come to decision time. There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01262.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01262, in the name of Michael Matheson, on rehabilitation and enablement in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Before we start the debate, I remind members to leave in place the cards in their consoles. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01218, in the name of Keith Brown, on veterans.

Can we have a question, please, Ms Murray?

Order.

Question two, Neil Findlay.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01170, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the Justice Committee’s report on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill at stage 2. I call Christine Grahame to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Justice Committee. Ms Grahame, you have a tight 14 minutes.

Can we please hear the minister?

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01235, on the designation of a lead committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee, and that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee be designated as secondary committees, in consideration of the legislative consent memorandum on the Welfare Reform Bill 2010-11.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01218.1, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01218, in the name of Keith Brown, on veterans, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Monsignor John McIntyre of St Bridget’s parish, Baillieston.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01197, in the name of Angela Constance, on reducing the time needed to find a permanent home for looked-after children. Ms Constance, you have 14 minutes, but if you take interventions, I will be generous.

I remind members that they must not remove the cards in the consoles and that they should return to their designated seats for decision time. I give everybody a minute or so to do that.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01211, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 9 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Rehabilitation and Enablement in Scotland followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 November 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Importance of Architecture and Placemaking to the Economy of Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 16 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 17 November 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business (b) that the deadline for lodging questions for First Minister’s Question Time on Thursday 12 January 2012 shall be 2.00 pm on Monday 9 January 2012; (c) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on Thursday 12 January 2012 ends at 12 noon on Wednesday 14 December 2011; (d) that the deadline for lodging questions for Question Times on Thursday 12 January 2012 shall be 12 noon on Wednesday 21 December 2011; (e) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on Thursday 19 January 2012 ends at 12 noon on Wednesday 21 December 2011.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

As I said earlier, we will first take all the votes from Thursday, 27 October; we will then take the votes from today’s business. As a result, there are nine questions to be put. With regard to business on Thursday, 27 October, I remind members that, in relation to the debate on ensuring the integrity of Scots criminal law, if the amendment in the name of Johann Lamont is agreed to, the amendments in the names of John Lamont and Alison McInnes will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01134.3, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01134, in the name of Angela Constance, on raising attainment and ambition for all Scotland’s young people, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. I remind members to switch off all mobile phones and electronic devices. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01134, in the name of Angela Constance, on raising attainment and ambition for all Scotland’s young people.

The minister must start winding up.

Question 5 has not been lodged by George Adam, and question 6 has not been lodged by Clare Adamson.

Ms Goldie, because I am all heart, you can ask the First Minister a final supplementary question. [Laughter.]

No words are proscribed in the Scottish Parliament. I notice that Mr McLetchie referred to the comments, not the member himself, as “pig-ignorant”.

I thank Iain Gray for his point of order. Members are responsible for what they say in proceedings. As the previous session’s Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee noted, it would be inappropriate for me to have any role in ruling on questions of accuracy. I am not responsible for establishing the veracity of what is said, which is not covered by standing orders or the “Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament”. However, I hope that all members will reflect on what they say in the chamber and that they will, if they think they have misspoken, take steps to correct that.

Resumed debate. I call Johann Lamont. Ms Lamont, you have a very generous seven minutes.

Resumed debate. We resume the debate. Ms Cunningham has about 6 minutes.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on ensuring the integrity of Scots criminal law, if the amendment in the name of Johann Lamont is agreed to, the amendments in the name of John Lamont and Alison McInnes fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01134.3, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01134, in the name of Angela Constance, on raising attainment and ambition for all Scotland’s young people, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader today is Dr Ravindra Mehta, who represents the University of Glasgow Hindu society and is a foundation doctor at Ninewells hospital in Dundee.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01123, in the name of Keith Brown, on winter resilience.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01128, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Reducing the Time Needed to Find a Permanent Home for Looked-after Children followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 3 November 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Veterans 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.00 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.40 pm Justice Committee Debate: Report on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 9 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 November 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S4M-01129 and S4M-01130, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments; motion S4M-01131, on the suspension of standing orders in regard to the Scotland Bill Committee; and motion S4M-01132, on the Office of the Clerk. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Construction Contracts (Scotland) Exclusion Order 2011 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scheme for Construction Contracts (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that Rule 12.3.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Scotland Bill Committee to meet on Thursday 17 November 2011 to take evidence from Scottish and UK ministers. That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk be closed on 28, 29 and 30 December 2011.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01123.1, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01123, in the name of Keith Brown, on winter resilience, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01022, in the name of Keith Brown, on housing.

I am sorry; the cabinet secretary has no time.

Question 6 has not been lodged by Joan McAlpine.

Mr Henry, please do not shout in the chamber.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on Scottish Ambulance Service rest breaks. Before we turn to it, I put on record my disappointment that important matters relating to the statement appear to have made their way into this morning’s press. I have reviewed the coverage and I have sought and received assurances that the Scottish Government was not the source of the information. However, I stress that it is incumbent on the Government to do everything in its power to ensure that statements made to this Parliament are received in the Parliament first and not trailed in the media in advance. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, therefore there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01023, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the digital future of Scotland’s heritage.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01022.3, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01022, in the name of Keith Brown, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Helen Cook, from Kingussie parish church. The Rev Helen Cook (Kingussie Parish Church): Presiding Officer, thank you for the invitation. It is a privilege to share thought for the day. Good afternoon. In my work as a chaplain at the local hospital, I have come across a rather astonishing book. It is called “Reflections of Life: Words of Comfort and Encouragement”. It is beautifully illustrated by a Lewis girl—a beautiful artist—and was produced by NHS Education for Scotland. It is the result of a collaboration between 13 different belief groups, some who have faith in God and others whose belief is in humanity or nature. Why do I call this an astonishing book and consider it worthy of your attention? There are two reasons. First, it is based on the belief that we are all spiritual and that when we face times of stress and difficulty for reasons of illness, loss and bereavement, we need spiritual care. The book will be held in hospitals and other places to comfort and encourage people who are in difficult times—not replacing but adding to the work of their own belief communities. The book is based on the premise that we are all spiritual beings. Secondly, the book is the result of a unique collaboration between 13 belief groups, which was facilitated by a former surgeon from the Belford hospital. Everything that is written in the book was agreed to by all 13 belief groups before it went in, which is an amazing achievement. Like those for whom the book was written, we all have times of stress and anxiety when we are very vulnerable and need words of comfort and encouragement. So I will share with you three brief excerpts from the book. Maybe one of them will speak to you. I will not tell you which group donated the words. On anxiety: “We become very weak and unsettled when something unexpected happens, but we must be strong and accept God’s way.” On peace: “May quietness descend upon my limbs, my speech, my breath, my eyes, my ears; may all my senses wax clear and strong as I hear your voice within that void of your loving presence and peace.” Finally, on hope: “What is true of the individual will be tomorrow true of the whole nation if individuals will but refuse to lose heart and hope.” May we all find comfort and encouragement for our spirits. [Applause.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01018, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to this week’s business programme.

The next item of business is a statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, Alex Neil, on fuel poverty. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement and there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01008, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on welfare reform. I will allow a few seconds for members to change places. I call Nicola Sturgeon to speak to and move the motion. You have 13 minutes, Ms Sturgeon.

Cabinet secretary, your peroration has got one more minute.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-01017, in the name of Shona Robison, on the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games (Amendment) Bill, which is UK legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games (Amendment) Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 16 March 2011, relating to the advertising, street trading and ticket touting provisions, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Shona Robison.]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-01019, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 26 October 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Winter Resilience followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 27 October 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Raising Attainment and Ambition for all Scotland’s Young People 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure and Capital Investment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Ensuring the Integrity of Scots Criminal Law followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 2 November 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 3 November 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-01020, on the approval of the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2011, and motion S4M-01021, on the approval of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Modifications) (No 2) Order 2011. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Modifications) (No.2) Order 2011 be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. In relation to the debate on welfare reform, I remind members that if the amendment in the name of Mary Scanlon is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Liam McArthur will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-01008.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S4M-01008, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on welfare reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00956, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on cancer drugs and their availability in Scotland. I call on Murdo Fraser to move the motion and speak; he has 10 minutes.

Question 2 has not been lodged by Colin Keir.

Order.

Question 1 has not been lodged.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00959, in the name of Alasdair Allan, on Scottish studies.

Will members please settle down a bit?

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on cancer drugs and their availability in Scotland, if the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alison McInnes will fall. In relation to the debate on Scotland’s colleges, if the amendment in the name of Michael Russell is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Ken Macintosh will fall. In relation to the debate on Scottish studies, if the amendment in the name of Claire Baker is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Liz Smith will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00956.2, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00956, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on cancer drugs and their availability in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

You probably have about another minute and a half.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00957, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business- Wednesday 5 October 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Fuel Poverty followed by Scottish Government Debate: Welfare Reform followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 6 October 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Housing 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Digital Future of Scotland’s Heritage followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 26 October 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 27 October 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure and Capital Investment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00949.2, in the name of Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00949, in the name of Michael Matheson, on mental health, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00904, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common fisheries policy. We will be extremely generous with time, and I encourage members to take interventions. Mr Lochhead has a generous 14 minutes.

Roderick Campbell has a supplementary question. May we have a brief question and a brief answer? [Interruption.] May we have Mr Campbell’s microphone on?

Do you have a question, Ms Grahame? [Interruption.] Members: Question!

Do you have a question, Mr Harvie?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00902, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the low-carbon economy.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00904.1, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00904, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common fisheries policy, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Jennifer Macrae from St Mary’s church in Haddington.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the strategic spending review. The statement will be followed by a debate, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on the strategic spending review.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00896, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business- Wednesday 28 September 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.35 pm SPCB Question Time 2.50 pm Scottish Government Debate: Mental Health followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 29 September 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Studies followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 5 October 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 6 October 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today’s business.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00853, in the name of Michael McMahon, on waste management. In the light of the possibility of sub judice matters being mentioned, I advise members that although I am content to allow references to be made to general concerns about the planning process in relation to incinerators. There are active legal proceedings in the Dovesdale and Carnbroe cases, so they should avoid straying into matters that could be considered sub judice. I call Michael McMahon to speak to and move the motion.

Dr Simpson, can I remind you to speak through the chair and not to use “you”?

That is a matter for the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. Mr Findlay may wish to meet me and others on the matter, but I do not think that it comes within the locus of the cabinet secretary.

Christine Grahame has a constituency supplementary.

I call Mark McDonald.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on care homes. The Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy will take questions at the end of her statement and there should be no interruptions.

I remind the minister that time is short.

I thank Drew Smith for that point of order. The standing orders allow for the withdrawal of questions that have been lodged by members. This is an issue that concerns me and my deputies. On 6 September, I issued an e-mail to all members in relation to withdrawing or not lodging questions. I share the member’s frustration that the question was withdrawn, because it is certainly true that the member wished to ask a supplementary question. I drew attention to that in the chamber today and, indeed, noted that the member was present. Should any member require further clarification or advice on this matter, I direct them to the clerks and the chamber desk office.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the Scotland Bill and corporation tax, if the amendment in the name of Richard Baker is agreed to, the amendments in the name of David McLetchie and Willie Rennie fall, and that, if the amendment in the name of David McLetchie is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Willie Rennie falls—Mr Baker, I think that you should pay attention. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00853.1, in the name of Richard Lochhead, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00853, in the name of Michael McMahon, on waste management, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00279, in the name of Hugh Henry, on Upper Clyde Shipbuilders. Motion debated, That the Parliament acknowledges the 40th anniversary of the Upper Clyde Shipbuilders’ (UCS) work-in in 1971-72; notes that the UCS was formed in 1968 with the amalgamation of five major upper Clyde shipbuilders, Fairfields, Stephens, Connells, Yarrows and John Browns; recalls that the general election in June 1970 returned a Conservative government that cut back financial support for industry and allowed unemployment to rise above one million for the first time since 1945; notes that, after the government refused to save UCS from bankruptcy, Bob Fleming, Provost of Clydebank, protested that “the Government were trying to do to Clydebank what the Germans had failed to do in the Second World War”; pays tribute to the UCS shop stewards, led by Jimmy Reid, Jimmy Airlie and Sammy Barr assisted by Bob Dickie, Bob Cook, Sammy Gilmore, Willie McInnes and the entire work force at all levels, who instituted a work-in to take control of the yards and continue work on existing orders; considers that in doing so they asserted the right to work as a principle to be defended by workers across Britain; recognises the solidarity shown by 1,200 shop stewards who came from all over the United Kingdom to pledge support; acknowledges the role of the 80,000, including many from Renfrewshire, who marched on 18 August 1971 and the 200,000 who stopped work; honours the memory of the first Scottish Assembly on Unemployment of February 1972, convened to support the demands of the UCS workers and which called for the devolution of powers to defend jobs and employment; reaffirms the contemporary relevance of Jimmy Reid’s words in his 1972 rectorial address at the University of Glasgow, “A rat race is for rats. We’re not rats. We’re human beings. ... Profit is the sole criterion used by the establishment to evaluate economic activity. ... The power structures that have inevitably emerged from this approach threaten and undermine our hard-won democratic rights. ... Government by the people for the people becomes meaningless unless it includes major economic decision making by the people for the people.”, and commends the Glow intranet for making this speech available to all schools in Scotland.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Michel Syrett, mental health champion from Action in Mind.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on post-16 reform. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00844, in the name of John Swinney, on “The Government Economic Strategy”.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00855, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 September 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Strategic Spending Review followed by Scottish Government Debate: Strategic Spending Review followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 22 September 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Common Fisheries Policy 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Low Carbon Economy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 28 September 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 29 September 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. In relation to this afternoon’s debate, I remind members that if the amendment in the name of Richard Baker is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Gavin Brown will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00844.4, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00844, in the name of John Swinney, on the Government economic strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Resumed debate. Good morning. The first item of business is a continuation of the debate on the Scottish Government’s legislative programme.

Will you get to the question, Mr Pearson?

Mr Swinney.

Good afternoon. I welcome members back after the summer recess. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Dr Salah Beltagui of the Muslim Council of Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00795, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the Scottish Government’s legislative programme. The First Minister’s statement will be followed by a debate, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during the statement.

The next item of business is a debate on the Scottish Government’s legislative programme. Members should be aware that, in order to participate, they must enter their card into the console on the desk in front of them and press “Enter”. I call Iain Gray to open the debate.

Members will wish to note that we will continue the debate on the programme for government at 9.15 tomorrow morning.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move the motions.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-00762, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the suspension of standing orders in regard to the Scotland Bill Committee, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that Rule 12.3.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Scotland Bill Committee to meet from 10.00 am until 11.50 am on Thursday 8 September 2011 to take evidence from UK Ministers.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Fergus Ewing on the 2020 route map for renewable energy in Scotland. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00447, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Scotland Bill—the role of the Supreme Court in Scots criminal law.

Can we have a question, Mr Hume?

We will now have constituency questions.

Can we get to the question?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00448, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on rural connectivity. I will give members a few moments to swap places. As the debate is undersubscribed, the Presiding Officers will be slightly more generous in allocating time. If members want to take interventions, we will do our best to ensure that they are not disadvantaged by that.

I ask the minister to begin to wind up now.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-00444, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Finance (No 3) Bill. I call on Richard Lochhead to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that provisions of the Finance (No.3) Bill 2011, introduced in the House of Commons on 31 March 2011, in relation to Scottish agricultural levies and local taxes and relating to the transposition of Directive 2010/24/EU on mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Richard Lochhead.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00447.2, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00447, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the role of the Supreme Court in Scots criminal law, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Canon George Bradburn, Parish of St Gildas, Rosneath.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00442, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for this week. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 29 June 2011— delete followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Higher Education followed by Ministerial Statement: Financial Outturn followed by Scottish Government Debate: Taking Scotland Forward – Infrastructure and Capital Investment followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 30 June 2011— delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business: Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time and insert 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: 2020 Routemap for Renewable Energy in Scotland followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland Bill – The Role of the Supreme Court in Scots Criminal Law 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Rural Connectivity followed by Scottish Government Debate: Legislative Consent Motion – Finance (No.3) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on higher education. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on financial outturn. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will take questions at the end of his statement. There should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00443, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 7 September 2011 1.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 8 September 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Infrastructure and Capital Investment; Culture and External Affairs 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 14 September 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 15 September 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Paul Martin to move motion S4M-00449, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the timetable for the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, for the purposes of Stages 2 and 3, the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill be no longer treated as an Emergency Bill, and that— (a) for the purposes of Rule 9.7.1, the Justice Committee be designated as lead committee; and (b) consideration at Stage 2 be completed by 11 November 2011.—[Paul Martin.]

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. Before that, however, I ask members to welcome Nicola Clase, the ambassador for Sweden to the United Kingdom, who has joined us in the gallery. [Applause.] The question is, that motion S4M-00449, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the timetable for the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that, for the purposes of Stages 2 and 3, the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill be no longer treated as an Emergency Bill, and that— (a) for the purposes of Rule 9.7.1, the Justice Committee be designated as lead committee; and (b) consideration at Stage 2 be completed by 11 November 2011.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of motion S4M-00377, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, to treat the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill as an emergency bill.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-00371, setting out the timetable for the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that stages 1, 2 and 3 of the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill be taken on the following days— Stage 1: 23 June 2011; and Stages 2 and 3: 29 June 2011.—[Bruce Crawford.]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00357, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on stage 1 of the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill.

That concludes the stage 1 debate on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill. The question on the motion will be put after First Minister’s question time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-00383, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the act.—[Roseanna Cunningham.]

Questions 1 and 2 were not lodged. We move to question 3. I remind members that supplementary questions are just that. I do not expect a preamble before the question, and I expect you to get to your question very quickly indeed.

If you would, and go for a question, Ms Murray.

I will now put the question on the motion for the stage 1 debate for the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill. The question is, that motion S4M-00357, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

I will now put the question on the financial resolution for the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill. The question is, that motion S4M-00383, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the act.

Good afternoon. We move to themed question time. I would appreciate it—yet again—if people made their supplementary questions brief and asked them without preamble. Question 1 was not lodged.

The next item of business is a debate on taking Scotland forward: culture and external affairs.

You have one minute, Ms Hyslop.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00393, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-00394, on substitution on committees.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-00394, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Scottish National Party Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee: Jim Eadie Education and Culture Committee: George Adam Equal Opportunities Committee: David Torrance European and External Relations Committee: Colin Keir Finance Committee: James Dornan Health and Sport Committee: Dennis Robertson Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee: Sandra White Justice Committee: Gordon MacDonald Local Government and Regeneration Committee: Margaret Burgess Public Audit Committee: Gil Paterson Public Petitions Committee: Kevin Stewart Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee: Jean Urquhart Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee: Roderick Campbell Subordinate Legislation Committee: Marco Biagi Scotland Bill Committee: Derek Mackay Scottish Liberal Democrats Education and Culture Committee: Tavish Scott Justice Committee: Jim Hume Public Audit Committee: Liam McArthur Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee: Alison McInnes Scottish Green Party Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee: Alison Johnstone Scotland Bill Committee: Patrick Harvie Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Education and Culture Committee: Ruth Davidson European and External Relations Committee: Alex Fergusson Finance Committee: David McLetchie Health and Sport Committee: Nanette Milne Justice Committee: Margaret Mitchell Public Audit Committee: Liz Smith Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee: Jamie McGrigor Scotland Bill Committee: Murdo Fraser Scottish Labour Party Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee: Claire Baker Education and Culture Committee: Hanzala Malik Equal Opportunities Committee: Anne McTaggart European and External Relations Committee: Neil Findlay Finance Committee: Mary Fee Health and Sport Committee: Rhoda Grant Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee: Graeme Pearson Justice Committee: Margaret McDougall Local Government and Regeneration Committee: Richard Simpson Public Audit Committee: Neil Bibby Public Petitions Committee: Malcolm Chisholm Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee: Claudia Beamish Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee: Mark Griffin Subordinate Legislation Committee: Margaret McCulloch

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Mark Drane of Dull and Weem parish.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00370, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business for the week.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on public sector pensions reform.

The next item of business is a debate on taking Scotland forward: rural affairs and the environment.

Minister, you must wind up.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today’s business.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00305, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for this afternoon. I invite Bruce Crawford to move the motion.

The next item of business is a debate on taking Scotland forward—education and lifelong learning. I call Michael Russell to open the debate.

Before we come to question 4, I just want to say that I would like to make a bit more progress and, as a result, I ask members for short questions and ministers for short answers.

Order, order.

I will take a supplementary question from Mr Fergusson, if he keeps it brief.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00308, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on Scottish broadcasting and the Scottish digital network.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-00326, in the name of Liam McArthur, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on membership of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body’s proposal to appoint Colin Beattie, Alex Johnstone, Angus MacDonald and John Pentland to be members of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit.—[Liam McArthur.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00308.2, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00308, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scotland Bill, Scottish broadcasting and the Scottish digital network, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is President Cecil O Samuelson of Brigham Young University.

Mr Harvie, will you make a point of order, not a speech?

We now move on to the next item of business, which is a debate on taking Scotland forward—justice.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00306, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 22 June 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Taking Scotland Forward – Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 23 June 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Taking Scotland Forward – Culture and External Affairs 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Proposed Offensive Behaviour in Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 29 June 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 30 June 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health, Wellbeing and Cities 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business: Proposed Offensive Behaviour in Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today’s business.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00234, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on caring for Scotland’s older people.

Question 4 was not lodged.

The first constituency question is from Alex Fergusson.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on rural schools. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, therefore there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00235, in the name of John Swinney, on borrowing powers and growing the Scottish economy.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-00256, on the establishment of a committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament shall establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Scotland Bill Committee Remit: To consider the Scotland Bill, proposed amendments to the Bill, responses to the report of the Session 3 Scotland Bill Committee, and to report to the Parliament. Duration: Until the Scotland Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn Number of members: 11 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party. Membership: Richard Baker, Nigel Don, Linda Fabiani, Adam Ingram, Alison Johnstone, James Kelly, John Mason, Stewart Maxwell, Joan McAlpine, David McLetchie, Willie Rennie.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on caring for Scotland’s older people, if the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Mary Scanlon will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00234.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00234, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on caring for Scotland’s older people, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

I apologise to Margo MacDonald for the fact that we have not been able to call her in the debate.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00233, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 9 June 2011. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 9 June 2011— delete 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland Bill – Borrowing Powers and Growing the Scottish Economy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and insert 2.00 pm Ministerial Statement: Rural Schools 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland Bill – Borrowing Powers and Growing the Scottish Economy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today’s business.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00096, in the name of Marco Biagi, on green investment in Edinburgh. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes Vince Cable’s acknowledgement of Edinburgh’s position as a frontrunner for the location of the new green investment bank; would welcome a united campaign supporting Edinburgh as the location; considers that the city is supremely qualified to be a location for the bank as it has expertise in the sectors relevant to what are expected to be the proposed bank’s future activities, and hopes and looks forward to the 50 to 100 highly skilled jobs that it has been estimated that the bank would bring and the vote of confidence in Scotland’s future that an Edinburgh-based green bank would represent.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00169, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on faster and further to secure Scotland’s place as the green energy powerhouse of Europe.

Order, Mr Hume. It is a question, not a statement.

John Scott has a constituency question.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-00168, in the name of Shona Robison, on the contribution of sport to Scotland.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on green energy, if amendment S4M-00169.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, is agreed to, amendment S4M-00169.2, in the name of Jackson Carlaw, will fall, and that, in relation to the debate on sport, if amendment S4M-00168.1, in the name of Richard Simpson, is agreed to, amendment S4M-00168.2, in the name of Liz Smith, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00169.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00169, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on faster and further to secure Scotland’s place as the green energy powerhouse of Europe, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, for which our speaker is Dr John Lennox, guest speaker at the National Prayer Breakfast for Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on taking Scotland forward: finance, employment and sustainable growth.

Your time is almost up, Mr Ewing. Will you conclude, please?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00164, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 8 June 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Taking Scotland Forward – Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 9 June 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland Bill – Borrowing Powers and Growing the Scottish Economy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 15 June 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 16 June 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time 2.45 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-00165, on the establishment of committees, and motion S4M-00178, on committee membership. Motions moved, That the Parliament shall establish committees of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Equal Opportunities Remit: Set out in Rule 6.9 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: European and External Relations Remit: Set out in Rule 6.8 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party. Name of Committee: Finance Remit: Set out in Rule 6.6 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: Public Audit Remit: Set out in Rule 6.7 Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party. Name of Committee: Public Petitions Remit: Set out in Rule 6.10 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Remit: Set out in Rule 6.4 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party. Name of Committee: Subordinate Legislation Remit: Set out in Rule 6.11 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: Economy, Energy and Tourism Remit: To consider and report on the Scottish economy, enterprise, energy, tourism and renewables and all other matters within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth apart from those covered by the remit of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and matters relating to the Cities Strategy falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Education and Culture Remit: To consider and report on further and higher education, lifelong learning, schools, pre-school care, skills and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and matters relating to culture and the arts falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Health and Sport Remit: To consider and report on health policy, the NHS in Scotland, anti poverty measures, equalities, sport and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy apart from those covered by the remit of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Infrastructure and Capital Investment Remit: To consider and report on infrastructure, capital investment, transport, housing, and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment apart from those covered by the remit of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Justice Remit: To consider and report on a) the administration of criminal and civil justice, community safety and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and b) the functions of the Lord Advocate other than as head of the systems of criminal prosecution and investigation of deaths in Scotland Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Local Government and Regeneration Remit: To consider and report on a) the financing and delivery of local government and local services, and b) planning, and c) matters relating to regeneration falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Remit: To consider and report on agriculture, fisheries, rural development, climate change, the environment and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs & the Environment Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. That the Parliament agrees the membership of committees of the Parliament as follows: Equal Opportunities Committee Membership: Clare Adamson, Claudia Beamish, John Finnie, Siobhan McMahon, Stuart McMillan, Margaret Mitchell, Dennis Robertson European and External Relations Committee Membership: Helen Eadie, Annabelle Ewing, Bill Kidd, Hanzala Malik, Jamie McGrigor, Christina McKelvie, Aileen McLeod Finance Committee Membership: Kenneth Gibson, Alex Johnstone, Derek Mackay, John Mason, Margaret McCulloch, John Pentland, Paul Wheelhouse Public Audit Committee Membership: George Adam, Colin Beattie, Willie Coffey, Murdo Fraser, Hugh Henry, Mark McDonald, Tavish Scott, Drew Smith, Humza Yousaf Public Petitions Committee Membership: Neil Bibby, Richard Lyle, Nanette Milne, David Stewart, Bill Walker, Sandra White, John Wilson Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Membership: Margaret Burgess, Bob Doris, Helen Eadie, Margaret McDougall, Nanette Milne, Dave Thompson, Paul Wheelhouse Subordinate Legislation Committee Membership: Chic Brodie, Nigel Don, James Dornan, Kezia Dugdale, Mike MacKenzie, John Scott, Drew Smith Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Membership: Chic Brodie, Gavin Brown, Rhoda Grant, Patrick Harvie, Angus MacDonald, Mike MacKenzie, Stuart McMillan, Anne McTaggart, John Wilson Education and Culture Committee Membership: Clare Adamson, Claire Baker, Marco Biagi, Jenny Marra, Stewart Maxwell, Joan McAlpine, Liam McArthur, Liz Smith, Jean Urquhart Health and Sport Committee Membership: Bob Doris, Jim Eadie, Mary Fee, Richard Lyle, Fiona McLeod, Duncan McNeil, Gil Paterson, Mary Scanlon, Richard Simpson Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee Membership: Jackson Carlaw, Malcolm Chisholm, Neil Findlay, Jamie Hepburn, Adam Ingram, Gordon MacDonald, Maureen Watt Justice Committee Membership: Roderick Campbell, John Finnie, Christine Grahame, Colin Keir, James Kelly, John Lamont, Alison McInnes, Graeme Pearson, Humza Yousaf Local Government and Regeneration Committee Membership: Ruth Davidson, Kezia Dugdale, Joe FitzPatrick, Mark Griffin, Kevin Stewart, David Torrance, Bill Walker Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee Membership: Graeme Dey, Annabelle Ewing, Alex Fergusson, Rob Gibson, Jim Hume, Jenny Marra, Mark McDonald, Aileen McLeod, Elaine Murray—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-00165, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the establishment of committees, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament shall establish committees of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Equal Opportunities Remit: Set out in Rule 6.9 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: European and External Relations Remit: Set out in Rule 6.8 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party. Name of Committee: Finance Remit: Set out in Rule 6.6 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: Public Audit Remit: Set out in Rule 6.7 Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party. Name of Committee: Public Petitions Remit: Set out in Rule 6.10 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Remit: Set out in Rule 6.4 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party. Name of Committee: Subordinate Legislation Remit: Set out in Rule 6.11 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: Economy, Energy and Tourism Remit: To consider and report on the Scottish economy, enterprise, energy, tourism and renewables and all other matters within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth apart from those covered by the remit of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and matters relating to the Cities Strategy falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Education and Culture Remit: To consider and report on further and higher education, lifelong learning, schools, pre-school care, skills and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and matters relating to culture and the arts falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Health and Sport Remit: To consider and report on health policy, the NHS in Scotland, anti poverty measures, equalities, sport and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy apart from those covered by the remit of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Infrastructure and Capital Investment Remit: To consider and report on infrastructure, capital investment, transport, housing, and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment apart from those covered by the remit of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Justice Remit: To consider and report on a) the administration of criminal and civil justice, community safety and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and b) the functions of the Lord Advocate other than as head of the systems of criminal prosecution and investigation of deaths in Scotland Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Local Government and Regeneration Remit: To consider and report on a) the financing and delivery of local government and local services, and b) planning, and c) matters relating to regeneration falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament. Name of Committee: Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Remit: To consider and report on agriculture, fisheries, rural development, climate change, the environment and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs & the Environment Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament.

The first item of business is a statement by the First Minister on taking Scotland forward. The First Minister’s statement will be followed by a debate, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

We move to a debate on taking Scotland forward. I call Iain Gray to open the debate.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is the continuation of the debate on taking Scotland forward. Speeches will be six minutes. However, we have time in hand so, if members wish to take interventions, the Presiding Officers will make allowances for that.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S4M-00106, on parliamentary recess dates, and S4M-00107, on the office of the clerk. I am sure that Mr Crawford will take his time when doing so.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-00106, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on parliamentary recess dates, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 2 July – 4 September 2011 (inclusive), 8 – 23 October 2011 (inclusive), 23 December 2011 (pm) – 8 January 2012 (inclusive), 11 – 19 February 2012 (inclusive), 31 March – 15 April 2012 (inclusive) and 30 June – 2 September 2012 (inclusive).

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00095, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 1 June 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Taking Scotland Forward – Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 2 June 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Faster and Further to Secure Scotland’s Place as the Green Energy Powerhouse of Europe 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Contribution of Sport to Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Wednesday 8 June 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 9 June 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motions S4M-00089, S4M-00090 and S4M-00091, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of Scottish ministers, junior Scottish ministers and the law officers. I shall invite the First Minister to move the motions. I then intend to invite party leaders and Margo MacDonald to make a short contribution. Thereafter, I will ask the First Minister to reply.

The next item of business is the selection of four members for appointment to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. Copies of guidance explaining the voting procedure to be followed have been placed on each member’s desk. I have received four valid nominations for appointment to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. I ask the candidates, as their names are announced, to make themselves known to members. In alphabetical order, the nominations are: Linda Fabiani, Liam McArthur, Mary Scanlon and David Stewart. Members will be aware that Liam McArthur did not make himself known to you. He is stuck in Orkney and he hopes to be here at lunch time. As the number of candidates is equal to the number of vacant positions on the SPCB, I invite members to agree that there be a single vote to elect all the candidates. If any member objects to a single question being put, please say so now. As no member objects, the question is, that the following members be selected for appointment to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body: Linda Fabiani, Liam McArthur, Mary Scanlon, David Stewart. Members voted.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-00041, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out today’s business programme. I ask any member who wishes to speak against the motion to press their request-to-speak button now.

The next item of business is the selection of the Parliament’s nominee for First Minister. I have received one valid nomination for appointment as First Minister, and that is Alex Salmond. I will ask Alex Salmond to speak in support of his candidacy. Members will then be asked to cast their vote. Members may vote for or against or they may abstain. I will then announce the results of the vote. The candidate will be selected if a simple majority of votes in the candidate’s favour is obtained. Under rule 11.11.2, no account will be taken of any abstentions in establishing whether a simple majority has been achieved. I call on Alex Salmond to speak in support of his candidacy.

First, I thank all my parliamentary colleagues from all parties for their support today. I also thank my predecessor, Alex Fergusson, for his work in the past four years. His was a most difficult period, with the potential to have to use the casting vote every day. I hope to be spared that difficulty. He was a class act and a difficult one to follow; I will do my very, very best. There are some special people who deserve my thanks, because it is only with their support and love that I can do this job: my husband Frankie, my children Louise and Steven, and my lovely grandchildren Róisín and Odhrán. I love you all. As Presiding Officer, I will be fair to all members. I will always act in the interests of the Scottish Parliament. Now we have work to do. Thank you. [Applause.]

We move to the election of Deputy Presiding Officers. Nominations for the position of Deputy Presiding Officer will open now. Members may collect nomination forms from the business team in room T1.03, which is located within the office of the chamber desk. Completed nomination forms should be returned to the business team no later than 3.45. When submitting nomination papers, candidates or their representatives may wish to provide the name of any member who will act as scrutineer on behalf of the candidate. I look forward to this, and I suspend the meeting until 4.15. 15:16 Meeting suspended. 16:15 On resuming—

Will the minister assure the chamber that the powers that the bill establishes will force local authorities to act when private landlords do not live up to the expectations of the rest of us and that local authorities will have sufficient powers to deal with those private landlords, so that we will have an end of local authorities telling members of the Scottish Parliament that there is nothing they can do?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is giving to colleges to provide work placement opportunities for students. (S3O-13274)

The minister has alluded to the fact that we had a wonderful day at the education into enterprise project at the Levenmouth campus of Adam Smith College earlier this year. The minister is aware that the project will create 800 work opportunities for students in small and medium-sized companies, thanks to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council funding that she mentioned. Does the minister agree that the education into enterprise project will provide a major boost for young people in Levenmouth and beyond? What plans are there to roll out the project elsewhere in Scotland so that other young people can have the benefits of it too?

Will the member give way?

I was struck by the member’s assertion that the Scottish Parliament would be responsible for levying almost a third of the money that it receives. That is simply not true. The figure is nothing like 30 per cent. Both the Calman commission and the Secretary of State for Scotland included the council tax in the figure, which the Scottish Parliament does not raise. The true figure is 25 per cent. It is important not to overegg the pudding.

I express my thanks to Stephen Imrie and the clerking team to the Scotland Bill Committee: they were outstanding in the support that they gave to every committee member, and they are a credit to the Parliament. My thanks and appreciation also go to Euan Lloyd of the SNP central unit for the support that he gave to Brian Adam and me throughout the period in which the committee met. It is fair to say that the Scotland Bill process was difficult, but despite our differences—on income tax, for example—the committee was united on a number of key areas. I do not have enough time to go through all the recommendations, but I emphasise that the whole committee agreed that in the next session of the Scottish Parliament we should consider a further legislative consent motion following the final deliberations on and amendments to the bill at Westminster. The final say on whether we approve the bill will, therefore, come in the next session of Parliament. It is right and proper that this Parliament has an opportunity to consider and examine whether the recommendations that the Scotland Bill Committee worked so hard to produce have been heeded. That will be the real test of the Westminster Government and of whether it has listened to what the committee has said. I welcome the proposals for further powers for the Scottish Parliament. In particular, I support the devolution of airgun legislation, on which, as Brian Adam said, we in the SNP have campaigned for many years. Although I believe that all firearms legislation should be a matter for this Parliament, devolving airgun legislation is a step forward. It is important to say that Brian Adam and I were very clear—and made it clear from the beginning—that we would work with the committee to do what we could to improve the bill and to ensure that the committee’s report was as robust as it could be. Despite some comments to the contrary, I think that few would dispute that Brian Adam and I made such a contribution. In particular, the committee recommended that the capital and revenue borrowing limits should be increased. It is fair to say that the original figures were plucked out of thin air by the Treasury and the Scotland Office. They could give no reason for choosing their figures for capital funding in the bill; there were assertions that it was perhaps to do with the cost of the Forth bridge. However, I think that the committee’s recommendations on increased limits for capital and revenue borrowing will assist the Scottish Government in the future. The committee was unanimous in the view that those limits should be increased. The committee also recommended that powers to set corporation tax should be extended to Scotland, or that that should at least be considered if such powers were given to any other part of the United Kingdom, particularly Northern Ireland, where the situation is currently being examined. Although I have argued and will always argue that Scotland needs the right to set corporation tax, it is very welcome that the other members of the committee have come some way towards the idea that if other parts of the United Kingdom are allowed to set corporation tax, Scotland should be too.

I do not think that we disagree with each other. We are saying exactly the same thing—only, you have used about 30 seconds of my time to say it. It has been constantly and consistently asserted that the bill will bring much greater financial accountability to the Scottish Parliament. From the time of Calman, right through the time of the Scotland Bill Committee, it has been asserted that this Parliament will be responsible for raising 35 per cent of what it spends, but that is simply not true. The figure of 35 per cent from Calman has been considered, and SPICe—at my instigation, I have to say, not the committee’s instigation—asserted that the figure was nearer 30 per cent. However, that figure of 30 per cent included council tax, which is not the responsibility of this Parliament. If we strip out the council tax, the true figure is nearer 25 per cent. If the powers in the bill are all that they should be, I can see no reason why people should have to hype them up. I have a really important point that I wish to finish on. HM Treasury and the Secretary of State for Scotland claimed that the estimate for setting up a Scottish taxpayer base would be £45 million—a cost that the Scottish Parliament will have to bear. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland said that the cost could actually go up to £150 million. The Liberal Democrat secretary of state defended the figure of £45 million, but refused my invitation to agree to cap the figure if he was so confident about it. This Parliament must be very careful to tie down the Treasury and the Scotland Office, or we might find that the cost of implementing the tax powers will be much higher than anybody ever expected. ICAS was very clear that it was not the first time that the Treasury has plucked figures out of thin air.

This is one of those occasions. I urge colleagues all across the Parliament to ensure—even if they care about nothing else—that we do not get ripped off for costs once again.

Given that my grandfather was killed in the pits and my father was invalided out of the pits after an accident, it is no surprise that I will concentrate my remarks on the coalfield communities in Fife. Those communities were devastated by pit closures under both Tory and Labour Governments. It is important to remember that, when the Tories came to power in 1979, there were no longer any pits in Kinglassie, Cowdenbeath, Lochgelly, Methil, Bowhill, Kelty, Ballingry, Crosshill, Lumphinnans and Cardenden—Labour had already closed them down. I welcome the support that has been given to Methil by the Coalfields Regeneration Trust and the significant financial support that has been given by the Scottish Government to the Fife energy park through regional selective assistance and grant from Scottish Enterprise. That is the big hope in a generation for Methil, and that kind of investment in regeneration will improve our communities. On Monday, I attended a meeting of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust and local people in the Coal Industry Social Welfare Organisation club in Glenrothes. The community had had grant application after grant application to the Coalfields Regeneration Trust turned down over the years, and the purpose of the meeting was to find out why Glenrothes was not a coalfield area. The explanation was that the 1999 map of coalfield areas that was drawn up by the UK Government was based on a research study that highlighted areas where, in 1981, more than 10 per cent of the population were miners. That was then overlaid with areas of multiple deprivation. Those of us present were astonished to find out that Glenrothes—which was created as a new town in 1948 to service the ill-fated Glenrothes pit—had never been on the original map. So, year after year, the money that has been made available to other communities has not been made available to Glenrothes. By any definition, Glenrothes or at least part of it—especially the older areas of Woodside and Auchmuty—must be a coalfield community; yet, since 1999, it has not received a penny because it has never been designated as a coalfield community. The name of the venue for that meeting—the Coal Industry Social Welfare Organisation—gives a clue as to the importance of coal mining to Glenrothes. It is beyond belief that, since 1999, the UK Government has not regarded Glenrothes as a coalfield community. I would be grateful if the minister would give an undertaking that he will work with the UK Government to ensure that there is a fairer acknowledgement of what a coalfield community is and that part of Glenrothes will be included in that.

What I will say is that, with regard to Glenrothes, which is clearly a coalfield community but which has had no access to any of that money over the years, what is important is that people in the communities that I represent have an opportunity to get some of the grant money that is available. Many people have said today that this debate is about people. That is true. I have some respect for John Park, but not when he uses people in the coalfield communities that he represents as an excuse for making political points. My respect for him is further diminished by his utter failure, which is shared by every Labour MSP in the chamber, to condemn the shameful treatment by the Labour Government of our ex-miners and their families. Some 2,000 miners in Scotland died while they were waiting for compensation that they were entitled to, while the Labour Government went to court to try to stop the payments. More than 8,000 miners in the UK waited more than 10 years for a settlement. Helen Eadie says that she is proud of that record, but it is a record that no person could be proud of. In addition to that, in order to fund some of the compensation, the Labour Government, like the Tories before it, pinched the miners’ pension money—the money that the miners had put into their own pension fund. Of the miners who died while waiting for compensation, 135 were in my constituency of Central Fife—I would have thought that Mr Park would have been interested in this, but I see that he is not—and 179 were in Gordon Brown’s constituency, both of which areas John Park represents as a regional MSP. That betrayal of the coalfield communities is a disgrace. By its silence, Labour condemns itself.

It is SPCB procurement policy to consider all relevant social and ethical issues throughout the procurement process. Specific criteria vary from requirement to requirement.

Vodafone has had a tender and is a supplier to the Scottish Parliament. When undertaking a tender, suppliers are asked whether they have failed to fulfil obligations relating to the payment of taxes in accordance with the legal obligations of the UK or the country in which the supplier was established. If the answer to that question is yes, the supplier would be automatically eliminated. Patrick Harvie has pointed out that Vodafone is not failing in its legal obligations and that, although it is avoiding paying tax, it is not doing so illegally. Those matters should be considered and I suggest that if the member wishes to raise any specific issues about Vodafone or, indeed, any other supplier to the Scottish Parliament he should make representations directly to the corporate body, which will consider them.

I thank Alasdair Allan for securing this timely debate on the UK Government’s proposals to leave Scotland with only one 24-hour coastguard centre. I will concentrate my remarks on the coastguard centre at Fife Ness. I do so not to make a special case for it at the expense of the other coastguard centres in Scotland, but simply because it is the centre that I know best and because it covers part of my constituency. Indeed, it covers the east coast from the Borders to Montrose, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The proposals from the UK Government are short-sighted and dangerous. The decision to close the centres has been reached in advance of the consultation. What is the purpose of a consultation if the decision has already been taken? It is important for us, as individuals and as MSPs, to engage in the consultation and to put forward an overwhelming case that reflects what so many members have said today and which makes it very difficult for the UK Government to continue its course of action. I will concentrate on the Firth of Forth. The argument for closing the Fife Ness centre is a more difficult one to make now, as over the past few years the firth has become busier, not less busy, and will continue to do so. In addition to the leisure activities that have already been mentioned, such as walking, boating and wind surfing, there are some serious, big commercial operations in the Forth. The growth of the renewable energy sector’s base at the Fife energy park at Methil over the years means that large structures can be towed out to sea at any given time, which poses potential problems if those structures run up against boats and the like. I expect the Fife energy park and the wind turbine industry to expand rapidly, making the Firth of Forth and other places along the east coast far busier than they have been in the past. Despite claims that ship-to-ship oil transfers have been ruled out, there is still the possibility they will take place in the Forth in the future—alongside all the other various other activities. They have not been ruled out. There are road and rail bridges across the Tay and the Forth, too, as well as commercial shipping and cruises. Many members have highlighted the need for local knowledge, which is imperative. It is impossible to run such a service without having the local knowledge that coastguards bring. An understanding about local knowledge has simply not been present in the MCA’s deliberations to date. The tone of the debate was set in Alasdair Allan’s opening speech. It is vital that we as a Parliament present a united front on the matter. The proposals, if enacted, will be dangerous for our commercial industries, as other members have said. There is also a real potential that lives will be lost if they go ahead.

The behaviour of the MOD over Leuchars has been disgraceful. It has proved impossible to get information from it about its intentions for Leuchars, and it has refused even to confirm that Leuchars is being considered for closure. Until a few weeks ago, no one had any idea that that was being considered, never mind threatened; that information has become available to us only in the press.  The case for Leuchars remaining open is overwhelming on the grounds of its strategic importance to the UK and the social implications of closure for the local area and the rest of Fife and Tayside. The MOD is trying to split communities by pitting Leuchars against Lossiemouth. That simply will not happen—we must not allow it to happen. The Scottish National Party supports the retention of all three facilities—Kinloss, Lossiemouth and Leuchars. I am surprised that Iain Smith is not aware of the Scottish Government's stance because we have made it clear. He seeks answers from the Scottish Government, but he should also seek answers from the Liberal-Tory coalition at Westminster, because it will make the final decision, not the Scottish Government. The campaign for Leuchars has cross-party support, like the one for Kinloss and Lossiemouth, and the support of Fife Council, which has also deplored the MOD's attempts to divide and rule. I note that Peter Grant, the leader of Fife Council, is in the public gallery listening to the debate. As Ted Brocklebank said, aviation at Leuchars dates back to 1911. Recently, £25 million was invested in upgrading the runway. Leuchars now has one of the best RAF runways in the United Kingdom and is fit for purpose for a further 25 years. Nearly 1,800 people are directly employed at Leuchars. Businesses, schools and local services rely on the base and the viability of all of them will be put at risk if it closes. The spin and off-the-record briefings must stop now. The MOD owes it to the personnel and population of Leuchars to make clear whether the base is being considered for closure. However, let us not hold our breath for the MOD. The campaign to retain Leuchars has started already, and I hope that, tonight, the whole Parliament will make its view clear to the Ministry of Defence.

Many years ago, the Conservative Government proposed another Forth crossing. Patrick Harvie is not accurate in saying that those north of the Forth supported that call. Fife Council clearly opposed it. It is simply not true that people north of the Forth have always argued for more capacity.

It is a pleasure to welcome my friend Keith Brown to his new post and to acknowledge the work that Stewart Stevenson has done. The passing of the Forth Crossing Bill at 5.20 this evening will end the uncertainty for our businesses not just in Fife but throughout the east and north of Scotland because, make no mistake, the crossing is vital for the whole of Scotland's economy. I thank the Forth Crossing Bill committee and clerks for carrying out their huge task so efficiently. I thank them, too, for coming to the right conclusion. In 2004, FETA carried out its first internal inspection of the main cables on the Forth road bridge. It found significant corrosion and an 8 per cent loss of strength in the bridge. In December 2007, John Swinney announced that, having considered all the options, he had concluded that there should be a new cable-stayed bridge. In December 2009, a dehumidification project was undertaken to try to prevent further corrosion. It is worth repeating some of that recent history of the bridge because, as John Swinney said in December 2007, doing nothing is not an option. That is true, because there is no guarantee that the dehumidification will work and, by the time we know whether it will work, it will be too late to start work on a new crossing. We simply cannot allow a situation to arise in which the existing bridge has to close to heavy goods vehicles or to traffic generally. If the bridge had to close completely or for remedial work to be carried out, as Alan Russell of Fife Chamber of Commerce said, it would cost the Scottish economy £1.5 billion a year. The effect of closure on Fife would be devastating. Businesses would seek to relocate south of the Forth, and members of the public would not be able to get to work in Edinburgh and the Lothians. Congestion on other routes to the west over the Kincardine bridge would bring chaos to the towns and villages along those routes. It is interesting that the people who have campaigned for years against a new crossing now argue that we should wait and see whether dehumidification works. We cannot wait and see. Even if dehumidification—that is the last time that I will attempt to say the word—works, the bridge has already lost more than 10 per cent of its strength. That strength cannot be replaced unless the cables themselves are replaced. Replacing the  cables would mean closing the bridge to allow the work to be done, which is simply not an option. Today the talking is over. Today is the day that the uncertainty ends. There will be a new bridge and work on it will start next year. That is great news for Fife businesses and the people of Fife, and it brings the debate to an end. Now the work needs to begin.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken to reduce crime in Fife. (S3O-12305)

Is the minister aware that the two police teams in my constituency, in Glenrothes and Levenmouth, have both announced that crime rates continued to fall in the latest quarter, building on the great work of the past few years under the Scottish National Party Government in reducing crime and the number of victims of crime? Will he join me in congratulating the chief officers and all the other officers on their continuing efforts to make Glenrothes and Leven safer than they have been for many a year?

Will the minister confirm that it is not just a Conservative-Liberal Democrat route that he has articulated? The first proposals for removing security of tenure actually came from Caroline Flint when she was  Labour's UK housing minister. I am sure that we all welcome the assurances that the Scottish National Party Government has given today.

Does Margo MacDonald agree that, over the 11 years that the Parliament has existed, we have been faced with many provisions—such as those on same-sex relationships and those in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000—against which the faith-based organisations begged members to vote but in relation to which members voted as they wished to, and not in the way that the faith-based organisations told or lobbied them to?

Margo MacDonald is aware that the committee that considered her bill had a number of criticisms of the bill. When will she address those criticisms so that we can hear her views on the committee report?

To ask the Scottish Government what action is being taken to promote public art. (S3O-12082)

The minister may be aware that, earlier this week, I welcomed Ruth Parsons of Historic Scotland to view a selection of the public art works in Glenrothes as part of my campaign to have some of them listed and protected for the future. Does the minister agree that the public art collection in Glenrothes is a unique part of Glenrothes's heritage? I invite her to Glenrothes to see for herself the hippos, dinosaurs, irises, mushrooms and other artworks.

Jeremy Purvis seemed to suggest that, because three quarters of the members in the Parliament voted in a certain way, the Government should listen to them. However, it is a long-established principle that votes in the Parliament are not binding on the Government.

No. If Richard Baker sits down, he might learn something. The principle is long established in both the Westminster Parliament and the Scottish Parliament. I regret that I do not have the quotation in front of me, but Mr Whitton can confirm that the First Minister who stated that in the Parliament was Donald Dewar.

Governments will always reflect on what the Parliament says, but a vote in this Parliament is not binding on this Government and was not binding on previous Governments. Jeremy Purvis boasts that, in the first eight years, the Government was defeated only five times. I say to him as gently as I can that the reason for that was that the Liberal Democrats were in coalition with the Labour Party—they had a majority. We have always had a Parliament of minorities; that is nothing new. We have a minority Government, but it has always been a Parliament of minorities. The difference is that the Liberal Democrats were Labour's little helpers in the first eight years. When I saw that the title of Labour's motion was "A Budget for Scotland's People", I thought that at long last the Labour Party was going to tell the people of Scotland what its plans and priorities were in the light of the hugest cuts in public expenditure for a generation, two thirds of which were the legacy of the previous UK Labour Government. Silly me—"Labour policies" is an oxymoron. No wonder Labour wants to harp on about process; it saves it from having to talk about policies or priorities. I understand why the Liberal Democrats are complicit in Labour's little game: they have always been Labour's little helpers. Those who are surprised by the Liberals' behaviour in coalition with the Tories at Westminster over tuition fees really have to look at recent history in the Scottish Parliament. Despite promising the opposite before the election in 1999, the Liberals helped Labour bring in tuition fees by the back door in this Parliament. It took an SNP Government—thank goodness—to abolish the graduate endowment tax. I am genuinely surprised by the Tories' position. Perhaps it is because there is something in the water or perhaps it is just because an election is looming.

It is also true that there have always been one-year budgets. I have just been handed the quotation that I referred to earlier—I suggest that all the other parties listen to this. In October 1999, Donald Dewar said: "As part of these perfectly normal constitutional arrangements ... the Scottish Executive is not necessarily bound by resolutions or motions passed by the Scottish Parliament."  Last week, John Swinney produced the real people's budget, protecting the most vulnerable from Westminster's cuts. Let us look at the budget that he produced: £70 million to freeze council tax for the fourth year in a row; the final stage in abolishing prescription charges; a living wage across the public sector; funding for front-line NHS services increasing by £280 million; a guarantee that the 1,000 additional police that the SNP put on our streets will continue; no changes to the concessionary travel scheme; a new Forth bridge, which is vital for the economy of Fife and the east of Scotland; and a commission chaired by Campbell Christie to look at the delivery of public services—a measure that I particularly welcome, given that I raised the whole issue of public sector reform in the pre-budget debate a couple of months ago.

I am almost finished and I have things to say. It is vital that the public service landscape is transformed, not just for the difficult financial times but so that Scotland has a better and more responsive public service. That will free up money to deliver the services that the people of Scotland need. Campbell Christie and his commission need to be bold. They need to be given the time to do their job properly, because the savings will inform budgets not just in the next three years but in the next 30 years. That is not short-termism; it is a responsible Government looking to the future of our country. What a pity the Labour Party cannot rise to the occasion and suggest the same measures. What are the Labour Party's priorities? It will not tell us in this chamber. Iain Gray and the Labour Party in Glasgow want to increase council tax—the Labour council tax junkies are addicted to rises in the council tax, punishing the most vulnerable people, just like they did with the 60 per cent rise in council tax in the first eight years of the Parliament. Since mid-2009, Labour has pledged £2.8 billion in spending plans, so what is it prepared to cut to meet those pledges? Labour can run, but it cannot hide. It is going to have to give an answer to that question in the Parliament, in the committees and to the people of Scotland.

Johann Lamont cited several organisations that support a three or four-year budget. If she gives such weight to external bodies, why did the Labour Party give such little weight to all the external bodies that wanted minimum pricing?

He is not here.

Will the member give way?

Does the member recall that the Electoral Commission made it clear in the run-up to the 2007 elections—which were a total debacle—that it could carry those out?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve dental services in Fife. (S3O-11936)

Is the minister aware that yesterday planning permission was granted for the new dental centre at Glenwood in Glenrothes? The centre, along with a similar one in Methil—which is also in my constituency—is a result of the £6.11 million investment by this Scottish National Party Government. Does the minister agree that that investment, along with the new practices in Glenrothes, will go a long way to improve the appalling situation inherited from the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Government, which  resulted in thousands of people in my constituency having no access to an NHS dentist?

I am pleased to be speaking in this debate, because it gives me an opportunity to welcome the publication of the refreshed skills strategy and highlight the work that is being carried out in Adam Smith College in Glenrothes and Leven, to which David Whitton and Claire Baker have referred. It is worth pointing out again the Government's commitment and investment of the record sum of £1.77 billion in further and higher education, with 40,000 training opportunities, 20,000 modern apprenticeships and 14,500 training places to support unemployed people. That represents a considerable investment. Through the skills strategy, there is an opportunity for the Scottish funding council and Skills Development Scotland to ensure not only that we are investing in the right kind of skills but that the investment is targeted to  where those skills are needed most, such as in the renewable energy industry, and in the areas that would benefit most. Christina McKelvie made particularly good points about the need to identify the skill sets of the future. Our problem is that in identifying those skill sets, we need also to recognise that there are skill sets that are needed here and now to enable us to attract investment in, for example, the Fife energy park and to enable people to work on the new Forth bridge and the aircraft carriers. While we must consider which skill sets will be needed in the future, there is a much greater immediate need to ensure that Fife in particular is skilled up to be able to take advantage of the exciting new developments. In my area of central Fife, which covers Glenrothes and Levenmouth, many jobs are coming in the renewable energy sector. If we lose the opportunity to ensure that local people—particularly those from Levenmouth and Methil, which is one of the areas of greatest deprivation—have the skill sets to enable them to take advantage of those jobs, we, as a Parliament and a Government, will have failed. The Scottish funding council and Skills Development Scotland are sometimes behind the curve with regard to the skill sets that are needed. We must ensure that the bureaucracy that surrounds the partnerships does not get in the way of efficient delivery. That brings me on to the work that is done by Adam Smith College in my constituency. On Monday, I visited the Leven campus and saw the work that Sandra Paterson and others undertake in supporting people who are improving their computer skills or learning them for the first time. I met many of the students, some of whom are now going into employment having learned the skills and confidence that are needed in the employment market. I had the pleasure last month of visiting the future skills centre on the Adam Smith Glenrothes campus. The new centre brings together the engineering, construction, renewables and science facilities under one roof. David Whitton, Christopher Harvie and I had a very good dinner last Friday night with the senior staff of Adam Smith College to discuss all of these issues. The new centre is designed to meet the needs of the Fife economy now and in the future. Its close proximity to Methil energy park is a positive plus in attracting companies to the park, and it is essential for the economic development of Glenrothes and Levenmouth. It has added nearly 10,000ft2 to the existing campus and contains 31 specialist workshops with three purpose-built laboratories. There is a renewable energy suite for  wind, hydro and solar studies, and the centre has the best non-destructive testing centre in any location from the east coast of Scotland down to Hartlepool in England. The future skills centre will work across the disciplines to produce multidisciplinary graduates, and I have no doubt that it is one of the best such centres in Scotland, if not the United Kingdom. I extend an invitation to the minister to visit so that he can see for himself just what an exemplar it is and what it can bring to the area, and I look forward to seeing him in Glenrothes in the near future.

The minister is well aware that, in 1999, the incoming Labour Executive did away with the Conservative plans for dualling the A92. I thank him for the money that has been invested in that road in the past couple of years. However, he is well aware—because I have written to him about a constituent in the past few weeks—that despite the money, people lack confidence about the safety of the junctions at Cadham and Balfarg. I would be grateful if he met me to discuss the matter further, as I mentioned in my letter to him.

Ross Finnie said in his speech that the Scottish National Party had been completely opposed to stock transfer. It is worth while putting on record that that was never the SNP position, and it was never the position that was argued in Parliament. The SNP was in favour of tenants' choice, and we believed that, however the tenants voted, that should be respected.

In a minute. What we objected to strongly was the bribing and blackmailing of tenants, on the basis that if they did not vote for stock transfer, housing debt would not be written off. It was the SNP Government that ensured that the promises that were made to the people of Glasgow when they voted for stock transfer were kept, and that they did not sit only in the Glasgow Housing Association. It was the SNP Government that ensured that the second-stage stock transfer took place, after the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition had singularly failed to progress it. The Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition deserves some praise for introducing far-reaching housing legislation. The work of the previous Executive put Scotland at the forefront of homelessness legislation. My criticism at the time, and my criticism now, is that the money that was needed to support that legislation to ensure that the targets were reached was never put in place by the previous Government. As evidence of that, it is worth recalling that, during the years of the coalition, the Government built fewer council  houses than the Tories did in 1995. It is also worth saying that the SNP Government has built more social housing than has been built at any time since 1982. That is to the credit of the SNP Government.

What I said was that the SNP Government has built more houses than have been built at any time since 1982. I am happy to acknowledge that the Conservative Government built more houses in 1995 than Labour did in its term of office in the Scottish Parliament. The SNP Government has kick-started council house building, introduced the home owners support fund and invested in shared equity schemes. Housing has changed completely since the 1970s. In the 1970s, the vast majority of people lived in rented council homes. Very few people in Scotland owned their homes. By the 1990s, the percentage of people living in council houses had declined rapidly, partly as a result of right to buy, but also because of the drive of the banks and building societies to increase the number of mortgages for first-time house buyers. I welcome the work that the Government is doing because it is important that we have a fundamental think about housing for the future. We also need to have a fundamental agreement about what a house is for. Other members have referred to that. Is a house somewhere in which we live, and perhaps bring up a family, or is a house more than that? Is a house a way of making profit once it is sold? Should the economy continue to be driven by house prices? As we have seen, when the housing bubble burst, housing prices fell, and they do not look like recovering any time soon. The economy cannot be driven by ever-rising house prices. Why do we measure prosperity by the price of a home? We need to ask why an extremely successful country such as Switzerland has one of the highest rates of rented housing and one of the lowest rates of house ownership anywhere in the world. If rented housing is okay for the likes of Switzerland, why is it not okay for the likes of Scotland? I have never been fixated by housing tenure. Regardless of whether we are talking about community housing, housing in the private rented sector or housing that people own, what is important is that the house that people live in is affordable, safe and warm. It is our responsibility as members of the Parliament to ensure that we keep that in mind as we go forward. As the minister said, new households are being formed at an increasing rate because of the growing number of single people and family break- ups. Recently, I was reminiscing with someone about 1975, when my husband and I got married. We got a house from Glenrothes Development Corporation four weeks before we got married and, after we had got married, we had to produce our wedding certificate so that the corporation could ensure that we were genuinely married—there was no living in sin in Glenrothes in 1975. That is the not the situation now. We have far better legislation, which ensures that people can make their own choices about whether to get married. People's choice of lifestyle does not militate against their getting rented accommodation. Factors such as family break-ups and people's aspiration to have their own home mean that the number of households that are being formed is increasing, and we need to ensure that we address that as we go forward. There is a great need for us all to work together to ensure that we provide the right kind of housing—which must be safe and affordable—in the right places, where people want it. We must put party politics aside and work together to ensure that that happens.

And Liberals.

Will the member give way?

In the next four years, Scotland's budget is forecast to be slashed by £3.7 billion—the equivalent of £4,300 a year for every household in the country. I thought that the debate on the independent budget review would provide an opportunity for all parties and MSPs to consider the review's recommendations and to make suggestions of their own, in advance of the Government's budget. Labour complains that it does not have enough information. As a member of the Parliament since 1999, I have gone through several budget processes and I can say that the cabinet secretary has given a damn sight more information than the SNP ever had in opposition. I have listened carefully to the speeches. From Labour, we have heard nothing—no proposals and no ideas. One of the best speeches today was made outside the chamber by Campbell Christie, who said: "Jobs in the public sector are directly in the firing line. The difficulty for any Scottish government is that the public spending decisions that affect these jobs are taken in London. The archaic Barnett formula currently used means the Treasury in London hand Edinburgh a block of money each year. But that is set to shrink by billions. All the Scottish parliament can decide is how to dole out the cuts and the misery. As matters stand, Scotland's government have no power to follow an alternative economic strategy by implementing growth oriented economic policies. Higher growth will create jobs and generate more tax revenues to protect frontline public services, as well as repaying the high level of debt. To achieve this, Scotland's government need greater economic powers. But the Calman legislation does not meet this need. I firmly believe a Scottish government equipped to vary all taxes—including corporation tax and national insurance—would be able to tackle the serious difficulties we face. I do not want a tax regime to be imposed on Scotland that is utterly unfair and inadequate to meet the challenges we face. I hope Scotland's politicians will join me in opposing these unfair proposals." The SNP certainly supports Campbell Christie's call. We in the chamber today need to ensure that, in the face of the cuts, front-line services are protected as far as is possible and that industry and skills are supported. The cabinet secretary recently announced support for Fife energy park, grants to BiFab in Methil and a regional selective assistance grant to support reopening the paper mill in Leslie in my constituency. In this parliamentary session, he has also set about  transforming the public sector landscape by abolishing quangos and encouraging local authorities to share services. I regret that the Parliament did not support going further with the proposed abolition of quangos.

If I have time near the end of my speech, I promise that I will let Mr Kerr in. I have things to say and ideas to propose, unlike Mr Kerr in his 14-minute speech. We need to go further. To deliver front-line services effectively, we need to ensure that those who deliver the services are as effective as possible. Councils banding together to share services is not the solution; it is a sticking-plaster. For many years, I have believed that local government reform is desirable. It should have been done in 1999, when the Parliament was established, but it was not. Local government reform is no longer just desirable—it is a necessity. Having 32 local authorities, 32 chief executives, 32 social work directors, 32 education directors and 32 layers of bureaucracy is unsustainable. The local government landscape needs to be reformed. Is local government still the best deliverer of education? Is there an argument for combining health boards and local government and doing away with the artificial interagency arguments about who pays for what? Is there a case for bringing the blue-light services together? I do not know all the answers, but I know this: the solution is not to continue as we are with the delivery of public services.

I fully accept that local authorities and health boards as they are presently constituted are doing their very best within the structures that are available to them. I am asking Margo MacDonald and other members whether those structures are getting in the way of delivering the public services that we need and causing many of the problems.

For a start, I would get rid of Trident, which would free up and save us an awful lot of money. I was talking not just about cuts but about the things that the member would like to save, such as free personal care and concessionary travel. The SNP is committed to those; it would have been helpful to hear today whether the Labour Party is as committed to them as we are. As a country and a Parliament, we now need to think about what services must be protected and what agencies are best placed to deliver them.

Will the member give way?

I thank Nigel Don for confirming that our leader is in absolutely no trouble at all and has back benchers' full support. However, is it not far more important that Alex Salmond's approval ratings from the Scottish people far exceed the ratings of all the other party leaders combined?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No was clearly said, but the point of order is this, Presiding Officer. You may have gone on to the next set of amendments, but Ms Cunningham did not move them. Therefore, no vote has been called and you are quite within your rights to go back to amendment 93 and take a vote on it.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister talked about registration. As I have pointed out, Fife Council claims that 99 per cent of its landlords are registered. That is good news, but the problem that we have is a lack of enforcement and deciding whether or not landlords are fit to be registered. They have been registered, and there is no willingness to deregister them. Will the minister please consider that matter?

Will the member take an intervention?

I start by recognising the record of this SNP Government on housing. Some 5,308 community houses were completed last year—the highest number since 1995, when there was a Conservative Government, as David McLetchie pointed out. What Mr McLetchie did not mention, however, is that between 1982 and 1997, the other 15 years of the Conservative Government, the Tories built fewer houses than the 5,308 that the SNP built last year. I turn to the housing association issues that some Labour members have raised. They say that the housing association grant has been cut, and that is true, but building costs have also gone down. I point out to Labour members that in 2009-10, the SNP Government built 5,566 housing association homes, which was more than in any other single year since devolution. The most important news is that councils have started to build houses again. In the last four months of 2009, 107 council houses were built in Scotland compared with only 40 in the whole of England. Once more, councils have the confidence to build houses because this Government made it clear in our manifesto that the right to buy would be abolished for new tenants. The bill before us fulfils that commitment while preserving the right to buy.

I disagree. I am quite sure that no council would be building council houses if it thought that they could be sold off through the right to buy. The evidence from local authorities shows that they would say exactly the same thing. It is quite right that we are abolishing the right to buy for new tenants, but it would be quite wrong if we were to remove that right from existing tenants. Despite what David McLetchie said, the Conservatives did not introduce the right to buy in Scotland. The new towns in Scotland already had their own form of the right to buy, but they did not have the right to buy at below the cost of building the house. Will the minister accept an amendment at stage 2 to provide that no house, regardless of the discount, can be sold for less than it cost to build? That would go a long way towards  preserving the new social rented houses that are being built. I welcome the Government's proposal in that regard. I turn to the vexed question of the private rented sector. I am glad that Cathie Craigie is here, because she and I have spoken often about the problems that we have in the new towns with the private rented sector. I welcome the Government's proposals to introduce a private sector housing bill, but I agree that it is appropriate to introduce measures on landlord registration now. In saying so, I am aware that the existing landlord registration scheme was introduced as part of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. The Labour-Liberal Democrat Government decided to do that rather than wait for the Housing (Scotland) Bill that followed. I repeat what I said then: the Labour Party's decision to include landlord registration in a bill on antisocial behaviour was bizarre. I have not changed my mind on that with the passage of time.

I am coming to the question of enforcement. It is disappointing that local authorities are not acting on that legislation, because they claim that they need clarity, which the Government is going some way towards providing in the bill. However, in my view, councils could do more to enforce existing legislation. There is absolutely no doubt that councils are not using the powers that are available to them. The minister knows of my frustration at Fife Council's inability to deal with private landlords in Glenrothes who have bought up maisonette flats, which are in an appalling condition. The council is registering those landlords, who are presumably fit to be registered and will take no action to deregister them. Then there is the problem of the landlords who are not registered in the first place. Fife Council says that 99 per cent of all private landlords are registered. It seems to me, therefore, that we have a tick-box exercise that involves registering landlords without looking to see whether they are fit to be registered. People are renting out the flats and creating conditions that are, quite frankly, appalling and are impacting on the whole community in Tanshall. I hope that when the private sector housing bill is introduced the minister will include proposals that will require councils to act against such landlords, because they are simply not doing so at the moment.  I will finish with a point that I made in 2006, when we were discussing the then Housing (Scotland) Bill. Many members have said how complicated the landscape for housing now is—and indeed it is. We need a consolidated housing bill to bring together all the existing legislation on housing and put it in one place. The Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats introduced a raft of housing proposals. Unfortunately, they did not put in the finance to back them up. I see that this Government is also introducing a number of housing bills and pieces of legislation. We need it all to be put in the same place. I look forward to hearing a commitment from the Government to bring together all the housing legislation in the one place to make it far easier for everybody involved in housing to know exactly where it all is.

Surely the member is aware that when the houses are sold in the first place, the capital debt is left on those houses and it is up to existing tenants to pay it out of their rent. Does the member not think that that is equally unfair?

I shall deal with the question on open standards first. The SPCB is considering adopting open standards. Under our present webcasting contract all chamber business can be downloaded by external users, but it is restricted to the Windows Media file format. The contract is due to be re-let next summer, and we will consider using open standards. The member also asked about fair-use licensing. In keeping with our commitment to making the Parliament accessible to the people of Scotland and encouraging their participation, all of our video and audio output from the chamber and committees is already free to reuse, subject to our rules of usage. The SPCB uses the Office of the Queen's Printer for Scotland online public sector information click-use licence system for anyone who wishes to reuse video and audio output, and the SPCB is currently working with OQPS on developing new licence models for Scottish Parliament copyright material.

I thank Patrick Harvie for his keen interest in the matter. As I say, the contract is due to be re-let next summer and we will consider using open standards. We will also consider the points that Patrick Harvie has made. Given the fact that the member seems to have a particular expertise and interest in the matter, our officials who are considering the re-letting of the contract will be very pleased to speak to him about the issue.

Does the minister agree that having access to a national health service dentist is the best way to improve oral hygiene? Is she aware that, in 2006, not a single dentist in Glenrothes took new NHS patients and that thousands of people were deregistered, and that, since 2007, two new NHS practices have been opened in Glenrothes and a new dental centre is planned for Glenrothes and Methil? Is she aware that 50,000 more people in Fife are registered with an NHS dentist than were registered under Labour in 2006?

I wonder whether Patrick Harvie can help me. He says that he is opposed to a new Forth crossing. If his proposal is successful, what will he say to the businesses north of Edinburgh in 2016 when they cannot get their HGVs across the Forth to where their markets are? How can he justify the loss of £1.5 billion to the Scottish economy?

I thank the Forth Crossing Bill Committee and its clerks for the work that they have put in on the Parliament's behalf to take evidence and produce the report. Having convened the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee in the previous session, I know only too well how onerous such work is. With those warm words, I wish the Forth Crossing Bill Committee well on the next stage. If the committee's members think that they have suffered at stage 1, just wait until the next one. Charlie Gordon was absolutely right about the need for more houses to be built in Edinburgh. That would prevent people from being forced to live in Fife and come across the bridge for work. As I have said before and will say again in the chamber, it is about time that we considered the artificial green belts that surround our cities and allowed Edinburgh to expand in the way that it needs to in order to house its own folk.

To be fair, the problem is not just the lack of council houses being built in the past 20 years but the lack of houses—full stop—being built in Edinburgh, and the artificial green belt does not help that. The importance of a new Forth crossing cannot be emphasised enough. As a Fife MSP, I think that it is vital not just for Fife but for the whole east coast of Scotland. In agreeing to the bill's general principles, the Parliament will make it clear that there is no question but that the crossing is required and in the shortest possible timeframe.  The Forth crossing is the largest infrastructure project since devolution and the largest project to be undertaken in Scotland for generations. The project is costly—the cost is up to £2.3 billion for all its elements. It is therefore right that the Parliament considers carefully whether a new crossing is needed and whether it is needed at this time. Some have argued and will continue to argue that a new crossing is not needed. Others have argued and will continue to argue that it should be delayed until we see whether the dehumidification system works. We cannot wait to see whether that system works; if we wait, we could end up with no crossing.

I hear the word "nonsense". I am prepared to give way to Patrick Harvie.

Not only is it possible that HGVs would be unable to cross the Forth bridge; it is certainly possible that the bridge would be unable to be repaired in the future and would have to close. That is a fact. If Patrick Harvie thinks that, from 2016, people in Fife and the north of Scotland can be left without access for our HGV traffic to travel south, he is condemning Fife and everywhere north of Edinburgh to no manufacturing at all. That is the reality of the situation. The policy memorandum is clear that the "objective is to provide, in the light of uncertainties about the future availability of the Forth Road Bridge, a continuing and reliable primary road link between Edinburgh and the Lothians and Fife and beyond in order to safeguard the economy, particularly of the east coast of Scotland." If Patrick Harvie is not interested in the economy of the east coast of Scotland and beyond, I am. As other members said, the uncertainties arise from a concern that the main cables are suffering from corrosion and loss of strength. If the dehumidification system were unsuccessful, the bridge would have to close to HGV traffic by 2017 and to other traffic some time after that. The effect on Fife and the Scottish economy would be devastating. As Alan Russell, the chief executive of Fife Chamber of Commerce and Enterprise, said: "We will not rest until such time as the new crossing is in place, because it is absolutely vital to the whole Scottish economy ... On the assumption that if the new crossing does not proceed, the existing crossing will have to close at some point, we estimate that that would cost the Scottish  economy almost £1.5 billion per annum."—[ Official Report , Forth Crossing Bill Committee , 24 February 2010; c 24.] If all the elements are included, the total cost of the project is somewhere over £2 billion. For £2 billion, we can safeguard our economy to the tune of £1.5 billion a year. It is vital that the bill goes forward. I am sorry to hear that, even after all the evidence, the Greens are still in denial on the matter. I will touch briefly on public transport. Although many members have spoken about the need for a strategic public transport system, all their comments have concentrated on bus routes. It is important that we make far greater use of the original Forth bridge—the rail bridge—particularly for freight transport. In closing, I say to the minister that I will continue to hassle him about the Leven to Thornton railway, which is much needed and will take a lot of freight traffic, particular to the new Fife energy park, off the road.

I thank the Green party for bringing us the debate on STV PR. I confess that I was beginning to get withdrawal symptoms, because it must be at least two years since we had such a debate. As a self-confessed geek about electoral systems, I thank the Green party for providing me with a timely fix.  It is important for us to understand why we are debating PR today. It is because the Labour Government, in its death throes, is desperately trying to find a lifeline for when it is thrown out of office next Thursday. Labour members have watched the return of the Tories in the Scottish Parliament through PR, and they realise that the Labour Party might need PR for itself at Westminster in the future. I agree with the Greens that STV PR is necessary for Westminster. There is no point in trying to renew that discredited institution by bringing in more new members of Parliament than at any time for about 100 years if we do not also renew the electoral system that encouraged some of the excesses. Channel 4 did an analysis that showed that those who were most at fault—those who made the most claims—were those who were in seats that had the biggest majorities. STV PR puts the voter in charge and gives every voter a voice. Perhaps after yesterday's events in Rochdale, the Labour Party does not really want voters to have that voice. STV PR takes the power out of the hands of political parties. It allows the voter to choose between parties and between candidates in each of those parties. If women wish to vote for only women candidates, they can do so. If they want to vote for only male candidates, they can do that, too; STV PR allows them to do so. If people wish to vote only for their preferred political party and for no other, there is nothing to stop them. STV PR will stop forever the obscenity of the only people who have an impact in a UK general election being a handful of voters in a handful of marginal seats that change from one election to the next. That is what determines the UK Government. STV PR will give everyone an equal vote, regardless of where they live in the UK. Everyone's vote is not equal while marginal seats and the support of people at the polls in those seats are, frankly, courted and bought by political parties. At the moment, Scotland has four different voting systems—local government, Westminster, Europe and the Scottish Parliament—and that is unsustainable. I worked hard to ensure STV PR for local government, and I believe that it should be introduced for elections to the Scottish Parliament. It is imperative that the Westminster Parliament also introduces STV PR. I want to pick up on a couple of points that were made earlier in the debate. I found Murdo Fraser's amendment and speech to be quite shameful. Although it is true that BNP members were elected to Europe under a proportional representation system, the fact is that people voted for them, and they did so because the Labour Party and the Tories have all but abandoned constituencies to  the BNP. It is worth reminding ourselves that BNP members have been elected in council elections all over England under the first-past-the-post system. It is not the electoral system that is at fault for letting in the BNP; frankly, it is down to the other political parties. I want to pick up very gently on the Greens—

On the Greens and Arbuthnott, I welcome today's conversion to STV PR. The Greens are coming home, and it is very welcome.

The member mentioned the European Parliament elections, but BNP candidates were elected because people voted for them, not because of the voting system. Why have many tens of BNP councillors been elected in England under the first-past-the-post system?

I thank Robin Harper for his support for STV and for extolling its virtues, but will he say why he made a submission to the Arbuthnott commission in favour of the additional member system—and not STV—for the Scottish Parliament?

rose—

Does Andy Kerr agree that the actions of Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, which has pushed into administration one Scottish company every day for the past two years, and which on Monday forced a company in my constituency into administration with the loss of 64 jobs, is having an effect on unemployment in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As you chair the corporate body, will you confirm that it is not like any other committee of the Parliament? It is set up under the Scotland Act 1998, and to abolish the corporate body that act would need to be changed.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There are no printed copies of the marshalled list or groupings of amendments at the back of the chamber for the benefit of members. Can somebody look into that?

If the town centre regeneration fund was such a priority for Labour, why did it not lodge an amendment to the budget? Also, why did it vote against the budget?

The member referred to a centrally imposed council tax freeze. Does he acknowledge that it is for each council to make up its own mind whether it wants to introduce the freeze?

The leader of the Labour Party said that the Deputy First Minister has let Holyrood down and asked her to reflect on her position. Does Ms Sturgeon agree that Holyrood has been let down by Iain Gray's rush to judgment, which focuses on personality and individuals to cover the fact that he has nothing to say to the people of Scotland about policies?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The SPCB regularly reviews the system to enable members of the public to watch business in the Parliament. That falls within its statutory remit. The SPCB did not formally consult members on changes to the current ticketing system. Ticketing to watch proceedings in the chamber has proved to be very popular with the public, especially the 11.40 am to 12.30 pm slot on Thursdays, which includes First Minister's question time. Demand for tickets for that frequently outstrips supply. The SPCB's decision to introduce adjustments was taken following feedback from members on the difficulty of getting tickets for constituents. By changing the maximum number of tickets that an individual member can book in advance and shortening the booking period, the SPCB aims to enable a wider cross-section of constituents from throughout Scotland to get access to the chamber.

The SPCB will always listen to members and take on board their feedback when they raise issues. I recognise the problems with groups of 25 to 30, in particular, which Elaine Smith has raised. However, it is up to individual members to make arrangements with their constituents and guests in line with the ticketing arrangements that are set out by the SPCB. The system that is operated is designed to ensure that the maximum number of tickets are used, including those that are returned at the last minute. For example, visitor services staff contact members' offices before each plenary day to inquire whether reserved tickets are still required. If they are not, they are put back into the system for reallocation to other members' guests. There is  also a ticket collection cut-off time to ensure that pre-booked tickets are not wasted. That arrangement is also in place to help members. The advance booking period has been changed from 13 weeks to eight weeks and dates are publicised to members. That means that tickets are released on a shorter cycle, which will reduce the booking times. We understand that there are pressures on members, particularly when they want to bring large groups of people to the Parliament, but there are 129 members and a limited number of tickets. The SPCB is trying hard to ensure that the maximum number of people from throughout Scotland get the opportunity to come into the Parliament. The vast majority of tickets that are given out, particularly for the 11.40am to 12.30pm slot on Thursdays, are for members themselves. Although I understand the particular problem that Elaine Smith highlights, I say to her that the changes were made in response to a number of members approaching the corporate body to say that they simply could not get any tickets for month after month. We will always look at the system, but I believe that it essentially works well. We have tweaked the system around the edges, but if any member, including Elaine Smith, has concerns about it, they should feel free to approach the corporate body and we will look at it again.

One of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body's key priorities is to promote public engagement in the Scottish Parliament's work. A wide range of activities is carried out across a number of offices to make sure that Parliament's work is transparent and visible to the public; to increase awareness and understanding of its role; and to build confidence that it is easy to engage with members and the Parliament as an institution. Those activities include publications, the website and the televising of parliamentary business. There is no central publicity function. There are two main ways in which Parliament proactively pushes out—through the print, broadcast and internet news media and advertising—information to the public about current business and engagement activities. First, the media relations office is responsible for promoting the work of the Parliament to news and photographic media. The total annual cost of that function was £596,000 in 2008-09 and £577,000 in 2007-08. Secondly, the Parliament currently uses the Scottish Government marketing services framework to advertise public engagement activities. In 2008-09, the Parliament spent £166,000 on advertising its engagement activities and part of its tenth anniversary, and in 2007-08 it spent £54,000.

Like every other public body, the SPCB will be looking very carefully at its budgets over the next few years. We will certainly scrutinise every avenue of parliamentary services, including the publicity and press budget.

The Parliament will always look at members' representations about any of the allowances. As Kenneth Gibson knows, the budget is capped and the SPCB will, of course, consider whether allowances need to be uprated in the coming financial year. I invite him to make the representations that he has made this afternoon directly to the SPCB: I am sure that when the allowances are set we will look at what he has said.

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Fife Council regarding Fife energy park. (S3O-9238)

The minister is aware of the importance of the energy park to the whole Levenmouth area and has already referred to BiFab's outstanding performance, which has contributed hugely. However, given the Crown Estate's recent announcement on licences, particularly in the Firth of Forth, I seek his assurance that he will work closely with Scottish Enterprise to ensure that more companies come to the Fife energy park so that we can reap the benefit of a windfall of jobs.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, Johann Lamont took three and a half minutes to address the motion. She was then three and a half minutes over time. A member who fails to address a motion in that way should not be rewarded.

I thank the minister for ensuring that, in Fife, we have had more central heating installations than we had under the previous Administration. With regard to the new boiler and heating systems, I welcome the focus on families with children under the age of 16—a measure that I urged the previous Administration to take when it introduced its central heating system policies.

Following yesterday's welcome news, are there any other groups to whom the minister would like to extend the energy efficiency package in order to ensure that those who are most in need of help are the ones who receive it?

Did the cabinet secretary discuss with the chief constable the stunning success of Fife's youth management scheme, which since 2007 has seen a reduction of 62 per cent in the number of police reports to the children's reporter, and a reduction in persistent young offenders in Fife from 112 in 2007 to just 47 this year? Will the cabinet secretary consider whether elements of Fife's scheme should be rolled out throughout the rest of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government when the next round of successful applicants to the climate challenge fund will be announced. (S3O-8836)

The minister is aware that Tullis Russell Papermakers in my constituency received almost £500,000 following a previous round of applications to the climate challenge fund. It will allow the company to construct its new eco-interpretation centre, which will run alongside its biomass project, which will save 250,000 tonnes of carbon emissions from its plant.  Everybody recognises how valuable the climate challenge fund is, but what steps will the Scottish Government take to ensure that as many organisations as possible know about the fund to ensure that they too can make a positive and sustainable contribution to their communities?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that Fife Chamber of Commerce has said that the proposal to pay for GARL by reinstating the tolls on the Forth road bridge is idiotic? Does he also agree with the chamber of commerce that, if business organisations and the Labour Party are going to campaign for transport projects, a carefully thought-out plan is required, which includes realistic suggestions for funding, unlike the suggestions that were made by Iain McMillan and Steven Purcell?

To ask the Scottish Government what the costs were of the G20 finance ministers meeting in St Andrews and whether Her Majesty's Treasury has agreed to meet all costs from HM Government budgets. (S3O-8478)

I note that the cabinet secretary is in touch with HM Treasury and that there is no agreement yet that the Treasury will meet the costs. The cabinet secretary is aware that the costs of the G8 summit in 2005 were more than £90 million, two thirds of which was eventually  paid by the Scottish Government. Such a situation would simply not be acceptable on this occasion.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the costs of the G20 meeting should not be paid by the Scottish Government or Fife Constabulary?

As the minister knows, I represent Glenrothes, which contains many examples of post-war building. In addition to the buildings, my constituency has a great deal of town art, which is precious to the people of Glenrothes. Is there any way of listing the town art that communities have so that it can also be protected for the future?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate. It gives me the chance to thank the Scottish Government  for its continued support for the Fife energy park in Methil. I was pleased to welcome the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, to the energy park a couple of months ago, when he announced that money would be made available by Scottish Enterprise to continue to improve the infrastructure of the energy park and the companies that work in it, including BiFab. I also welcome the recent regional selective assistance grant awarded to Stevenson Grantech in Glenrothes that will protect existing manufacturing jobs. I mention those two facilities in particular because the manufacturing industry in my constituency is important for the jobs that it provides and its contribution to the local, Scottish and wider UK economy. The manufacturing industry sells abroad and attracts foreign money into the country; it is important that we continue to support it. Much is said about the financial services industry, but it is important that we continue to support the manufacturing industry for constituencies, such as mine, that rely so heavily on it. I welcome the Scottish Government's efforts in that regard.

If I get a chance, I will let the member in. I will concentrate most of my comments on the relationship between small and medium-sized companies, the banks and Her Majesty's Treasury. I have had the most frustrating summer. I visited medium-sized companies in my constituency to ask about their difficulties, what they were doing in the recession and whether they were having any difficulties with the banks. There were times during the summer when I felt that I was in a parallel universe. Companies were telling me about the unreasonable conditions placed on them by the banks while Lord Mandelson and the Treasury were telling me that HM Government was supporting companies and instructing the banks to support them. Qualtronic, which had been in Glenrothes for 25 years and employed 35 people, was experiencing cash-flow problems because of a delay in placing orders by its major customers. Everybody recognised that it was only a delay and that the orders were never going to be cancelled because they were working for the aerospace industry—the blue-chip companies. Qualtronic approached its bank because it had been advised that it was eligible for the UK Government's loan guarantee scheme. HBOS told it that, regardless of whether it was eligible for the UK Government's scheme, it did not meet HBOS's own criteria and HBOS would not assist it.  I wrote to Lord Mandelson on 22 May and on 8 July to ask what the point was of a Government scheme when the banks were just doing what they wanted to do anyway. I finally received a reply on 26 August, which offered an apology for the delay in responding, which was "caused by the exceptionally high volume of correspondence to the department on similar issues". I am not surprised. The letter went on to say: "The EFG exists to help viable businesses during an unprecedented period of tightened credit conditions, and is not designed for the majority of viable businesses to whom banks should lend; nor is it intended for businesses who are not viable and that banks are rejecting on that basis. Decision-making on individual loans is fully delegated to participating lenders and is done on commercial grounds. ... Where there is public sector investment in financial institutions these stakes are managed at arm's length and on an independent basis." So much for the UK Government's support for businesses. Despite the fact that the public have bailed out the banks to the extent that our grandchildren will still be paying off that debt, the banks are thumbing their noses at the UK Government and forcing companies such as Qualtronic out of business. Qualtronic went into liquidation and 35 workers were paid off. It was a successful business that was forced to the wall by the banks. The good news is that, with private money, Qualtronic has been bought out and the core staff have been rehired. I also met a company that has been in business for more than 100 years, which pays its way and employs significant numbers of local people. Last year, its bank slipped a new clause into its agreement. The bank decided unilaterally that, in future, a charge of 1.5 per cent would be applied to the unused balance of the overdraft—that is right: the portion of the overdraft that the company does not use is charged at 1.5 per cent. I wrote to Alistair Darling, the chancellor, and received a reply from a Mr Ian Pearson, which concentrated on personal overdrafts, not business overdrafts. I wrote again to the chancellor on 4 August, following his public declaration that he had instructed banks to ease lending to small businesses. I pointed out the difficulties of yet another company in my constituency and challenged him on what instructions he had been giving the bank. I received a reply from yet another junior minister who confirmed that the banks were doing very little. It stated: "Decisions about the pricing, terms and conditions of loans to specific business cases remain commercial decisions for the banks and building societies. The Government expects to see banks offer competitively priced loans."  In fact, the Government did nothing to instruct the banks to get on with it and help businesses in my constituency.

I, too, congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing the debate and on the way in which she presented both the historical context and the current situation. In an excellent debate, we have heard some very good speeches from all sides of the chamber. Growing up in Cowdenbeath, I went to school with many people with Polish names and many of my friends came from the Polish community. In places such as Cowdenbeath, it is evident just how integrated people from the Polish community were. I always remember that, when I asked her what life was like during the war, my mum described the Polish soldiers and sailors who came to live in Cowdenbeath. At that time, the women of Cowdenbeath had never seen anyone so exotic and having such old-fashioned charm. The young women of Cowdenbeath were quite bowled over—I do not think the men were terribly chuffed. My mum certainly spoke well about the manners of the Poles and wished that some of our Cowdenbeath lads had been the same. I also remember how jealous I was when, on special occasions such as Christmas parties, girls from the Polish community would arrive wearing their wonderful Polish costumes. At a time when Cowdenbeath was a bit dark and grey, they certainly brightened things up considerably. Of course, my constituency of Central Fife contained several Polish communities because of the soldiers and sailors who were billeted in Windygates and Markinch. Those communities have a long history because many of them stayed on—they stayed in St Andrews as well—after the war. Chris Harvie mentioned the Polish club in Kirkcaldy, which I have had the great fortune to visit several times and where I have met the Polish community. Outside that club is one of the most poignant memorials to those who died in the Katyn forest massacre, in which the officer class of the Polish army was slaughtered by Russian and Soviet soldiers. Not only was the Polish officer class practically wiped out at Katyn, many intellectuals and others also perished. The memorial provides a great reminder of the massacre, which is commemorated every year by the Polish community in Kirkcaldy. To the best of my knowledge, it is the only memorial to Katyn on Scottish soil.  Moving forward, I think that we in Scotland are fortunate, as communities and as a nation, to be able to welcome the many young Polish people who now stay here and contribute to our economy. They contribute to our economy and to our culture in exactly the same way as the Poles who came here in 1939 and in the 1940s. Scotland and Poland are far richer for those connections between the two countries. Long may they continue.

Given my record over the past few weeks, when I spoke here opposing the Government on an issue in my constituency, I object strongly to the member's suggestion that I would not criticise ministers. However, I will not criticise them on this occasion, because on this occasion they are right.

It is a pleasure to be able to speak in the debate, because it gives me an opportunity to pay tribute to the many volunteers in my constituency who give their time, expertise and energy to assist their communities and the people within those communities. Talking about ill-judged speeches, though, I think that we just heard one from Hugh Henry. He talked of fear and intimidation in the voluntary sector, but he obviously did not live in Fife for the 40 or 50 years in which Labour held thrall. However, I cannot see any way in which local organisations in Fife are not speaking up about threats to their funding or otherwise. I spent part of the summer recess visiting projects in my constituency to find out more about their work and to give them my support. There are too many organisations to mention in this short speech, but my thanks go to all of them for the time that they spent with me. I want to concentrate on and highlight the work that is done by organisations that are volunteer led and supported, rather than refer to the voluntary sector that is supported by Government, council or health board funding, because there is a difference.

No. I will mention first the Leven community cinema project, which was set up by the community council following a survey of the people of the  town that showed that the overwhelming majority wanted a cinema. The first film was shown in December 2008. Led by Frank Walker, Alan Briggs, Pam MacDonald and Leven community council, the cinema project is going from strength to strength, and is now looking to acquire its own premises. The project was awarded £6,000 from the awards for all scheme. I was delighted to welcome my friend Michael Russell, the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution, to present the project with its award. The Leven community cinema project has managed to attract young people from schools to help with something in which they are interested. So inspired was I by the work of the Leven cinema project that I got together with David Nelson, who is the chair of Auchmuty tenants and residents association and Kingdom FM radio's volunteer of the year, and, following a public meeting in Glenrothes, set up a community cinema group there, which is driven by a new volunteer called Gavin Howe. The first show is likely to be in late November or early December in the Rothes halls. I want to highlight, too, Auchmuty tenants and residents association, which now has its own community flat, providing a welcoming environment and a place where people can go for support and advice. David, Maureen, Jan, Kenny and a host of other volunteers have worked tirelessly over 25 years, with no reward apart from knowing that they have made their community a better place in which to live. Their garden and the work of the Pitteuchar garden project so inspired the judges in the Britain in bloom contest that Glenrothes was awarded a silver gilt medal. Among other projects that I want to mention is St Ninian's charity shop and community café, which is a haven that offers home-made food at a reasonable price and a welcome to all. The project, which is now looking to extend the premises, donates its profits to other worthy organisations in the town. There is also Home-Start in Glenrothes, which supports vulnerable families and picks up on work that social work cannot do. If I had more time, I would mention many other organisations. The test of a voluntary organisation or, indeed, any other organisation is what it delivers, who it assists and whether it makes a real difference to its community. The voluntary sector is many things, including people who volunteer and voluntary sector organisations that are supported by central and local Government and health boards. However, the test of the voluntary sector is the one that I laid out; it is not, and cannot be, about simply providing jobs for people within the voluntary sector. They must demonstrate what they can do and assist their communities. That is  the test, now and in the future, for any voluntary organisation.

Does the member not agree that one of the difficulties that the voluntary sector is facing is the move to compel people who do not want to go into employment or training to accept a place in the sector? Surely the whole ethos of volunteering is that it should be voluntary. Does the member agree that compulsion in this matter is very wrong and will she condemn the United Kingdom Government for trying to force through such a measure?

The behaviour of the local authorities and the unions on equal pay has been unacceptable, and I welcome the Local Government and Communities Committee's report. It is clear that the poorest of the most poorly paid workers have been exploited as a result of the failure to settle the matter and implement the single status agreement. Other members have spoken about the delays. Many of the women concerned are now retired and have never received settlement. I do not think that anybody—the unions, COSLA, local government, the Scottish Government or the Scottish Executive prior to it—has come out of things particularly well. Duncan McNeil highlighted the litigious nature of the matter and mentioned no-win, no-fee lawyers. I want to concentrate on them. At the end of 2007, when 97 per cent of all the Fife claims had been settled, a group of constituents came to see me at my surgery. Fife Council had settled, but those constituents had not received a settlement because they were being represented by a firm called Stefan Cross Solicitors, which is based in Newcastle upon Tyne. They had been signed up by that firm through its agent in Scotland, Mark Irvine. They had signed up on the basis of a badly photocopied leaflet that had been distributed through their workforces. It urged them to get in touch with Mark Irvine by phone or by e-mail and boasted: "Action 4 Equality Scotland can help you to pursue a claim on a NO WIN, NO FEE basis." Many of my constituents got in touch with Mark Irvine. The next communication that they received was a contingency agreement from Stefan Cross Solicitors. The women had already signed that agreement by the time they came to see me. Many wanted to accept the Fife Council award that  their colleagues were being given, but they could not do so because they were represented by Stefan Cross Solicitors. If they had withdrawn from the agreement with that firm at that point, they would have had to pay £500 for every six months that it had represented them. I am using the word "represented" very loosely; I will come back to that in a moment. By the time the women came to see me, withdrawing from the agreement with Stefan Cross Solicitors would have cost them more than £3,000. That was two years ago; they are now in for another £5,000. It is hardly surprising that the litigation is on-going. The women simply cannot afford to withdraw from the agreement. In January 2008, the women would have had to settle for almost £3,000, despite the fact that the level of representation from the solicitors was a disgrace. In February 2008, they finally received a letter from Stefan Cross Solicitors in which the firm apologised to them for not having provided an update before, despite the fact that it had represented them for three years. The letter to the women—members should bear in mind that it is from a solicitor—finishes by saying: "If you want to keep up to date with developments then visit the action4equality blog at www.action4equalityscotland.blogspot.com. This is the best source of information. Because of the sheer volume of cases we would not recommend ringing" the solicitors office "as it is often very difficult to get through and the admin staff are unlikely to have any additional information that is not on the website." I have found the actions of the no-win, no-fee lawyers to be despicable. They have exploited those women just as much as the councils or anybody else. The Government should carefully consider the activities of Action 4 Equality Scotland and Stefan Cross Solicitors. Many people know that miners in my constituency were represented by solicitors in compensation claims cases. The solicitors took so much money from the system that the Government and the courts ordered them to pay back millions of pounds. It is time that somebody looked at the activities of lawyers such as Stefan Cross from Newcastle, and we need to consider carefully the activities of people such as Mark Irvine and Action 4 Equality Scotland. Just how much Stefan Cross and similar solicitors are ripping off such women needs to be investigated. We should not be surprised that the issue is being caught up in the courts, because the longer it is, the more money there will be for pariahs such as the company in question.

Is the cabinet secretary aware that Glenwood health centre in Glenrothes was deemed unfit for purpose as far back as 2000? I raised the issue with her last year, when I expressed concern about the timescale for rebuilding Glenwood, and have done so repeatedly with NHS Fife. Is she aware that the timescale has slipped yet again, with building work now not expected to be completed until late 2011? Will she raise the issue with NHS Fife at the earliest opportunity?

The Public Petitions Committee has done the Parliament a great service by holding its thorough inquiry into the workings of the committee and the petitions system. I will discuss the steps to which the corporate body is committed in the future, but it is important that we mark how successful the Scottish Parliament and its Public Petitions Committee have been over the past 10 years. Measures such as the transmission of every committee and plenary meeting on the web and our festival of politics have been copied by Parliaments throughout the world. When David Whitton and I were fortunate enough to be part of the Scottish Parliament's delegation to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association meeting in Malaysia last year, we discussed how people can engage with their Parliaments. Speaker after speaker from throughout the Commonwealth paid tribute to the Scottish Parliament for the work that it had done and freely acknowledged that they had taken on board some of our initiatives. As other members have said, it is important that we do not stand still and that we move forward. In this our 10 th anniversary year, the SPCB's strategy shows considerable commitment to continuing to engage widely and directly with Scotland's  communities, especially those that have not yet engaged with their Parliament. A new Scottish Parliament website is in development, and we are using a range of online media, including video podcasts of our weekly "Holyrood Highlights" programme, audio podcasts covering a wide range of topics and, from this month, more interactive online educational tools to support the new style of personalised learning under the curriculum for excellence. Visitor analysis indicates that personal experience can strongly influence and inform attitudes. In our engagement programme, we have therefore expanded the routes for people to gain a personal experience of the Parliament. We are now running with an annual programme of about 450 member-sponsored events, which accounted for 90,000 of our visitors over the past year. Those events, along with member-sponsored exhibitions, offer groups of all kinds an opportunity to engage with the Parliament by presenting their work to members. The SPCB is committed to an annual programme of major events, ranging from committee-sponsored events such as business in the parliament to events that examine key issues for Scotland, such as Scotland's Futures Forum seminars. We know from feedback that hosting high-profile exhibitions such as the World Press Photo exhibition and programmes such as our groundbreaking festival of politics can play an important role in drawing in new audiences and encouraging them to learn more about the Parliament. The moving stories exhibition is a new method of community outreach, which is touring venues across Scotland this year. Various engagement events have been held at exhibition venues, including receptions for local groups and twilight training sessions for teachers. In late November, the SPCB will pilot a new engagement event aimed specifically at grass-roots community groups and organisations that have not yet engaged. It is called the "Understanding and Influencing Your Parliament" conference. To be hosted by the Presiding Officer, and with several members already on board as speakers, the conference will focus on the practical aspects of engagement. We have established the education and community partnerships team to focus on reaching communities beyond the central belt and those sections of society that are traditionally underrepresented in engagement programmes. A new pilot, the community partnership project, is now running, with groups from three audiences that research has shown are underrepresented in public engagement. Those groups are young people, especially difficult-to-reach 16 to 24-year-olds, people with disabilities, and people from  black and ethnic minority backgrounds. The real strength of the project lies in the fact that it encourages local people to use their issues and enthusiasm to engage with the Parliament. For example, one of the project partners has already submitted an e-petition on national health service translation and interpreting services. The SPCB is backing a further pilot project on committee outreach, which will result in an incremental increase in the scale of community engagement support accompanying each outward committee meeting. That is being carried out initially with the Public Petitions Committee, but it might be possible to consider similar support for other committees in the future. Educating young people and supporting teaching about the Parliament has been a key service since 1999. Over the past year, the SPCB has increased capacity for both the inward and outreach educational programmes. The inward service has almost doubled uptake from young people to 11,300, with about 35 per cent of them coming from schools that had not previously taken part in the education programme. The outreach programme has held sessions in schools in 88 per cent of constituencies in Scotland, supporting engagement with 110 members. I am pleased to note—I am sure that all members are, too—that this week the SPCB has introduced free guided tours, thereby making all aspects of visiting and engaging with the Parliament free to the public. The SPCB will continue to work with the Public Petitions Committee and all the other parliamentary committees to ensure that the work that is being carried out across the Parliament supports our aspirations to engage comprehensively with all the people of Scotland, regardless of where they live and whatever their personal circumstances are. As we move into the second decade of our re-established Parliament, we note the many successes and the many challenges, but we all recognise that the work does not stand still, and that more needs to be done.

Is David Whitton aware that only 5 per cent of Diageo blends are shipped abroad to be bottled, compared with 12 per cent of blended whisky from the rest of the Scotch whisky industry being bottled abroad?

I start by expressing my sympathy for the workforce at Kilmarnock, who now face the possibility of redundancy or transferring to Leven. I am aware that a statutory consultation is on-going between the company and the unions, which has yet to run its course It is ironic that the one area that will benefit from the news of the closure of the Johnnie Walker plant in Kilmarnock is my constituency of Central Fife, because it is the one area that understands the devastating blow of the closure of that plant. In the village of Markinch, where I live, we understand only too well what it means to lose an iconic brand. In 1983, when the Distillers Company Ltd closed the Haig bottling plant in  Markinch, 340 people were made redundant and 220 workers were transferred to Leven. Last year, many members travelled by train to Markinch for the Glenrothes by-election. They cannot have failed to notice the red brick buildings beside the station, which used to house Haig's. Indeed, the Liberals and the Conservatives had their campaign headquarters in the old Haig's building. Markinch is a village of fewer than 3,000 people. Haig's had been on the site in Markinch for more than 100 years. Nearly every household in the village had at least one person who worked there. When the Haig brand moved from its home in Markinch, we, too, knew the real effects—economic and emotional—of an iconic brand being moved from its home. Around the same time that Distillers closed Haig's, it also removed 11 of its malt whisky distilleries in Scotland. The MP for the area, Willie Hamilton, and Harry Ewing MP, who spent most of his life in Leven—and who sadly died last year—managed to secure an adjournment debate in the House of Commons on 4 March 1983. I urge members to read the Hansard report of that debate, because, like me, they will be amazed to see that the arguments that were used against Distillers are identical to those that have been used in the Kilmarnock campaign against Diageo today. Those arguments are about the lack of consultation and social responsibility and the company walking away from an iconic brand. The rationalisation of the whisky industry in Scotland did not begin with Diageo; it has been going on for a long time. I know that the task force and the local MSP Willie Coffey and Des Browne have worked hard and will continue to do so to ensure that a climate is created that will attract new employment to Kilmarnock. I recognise the huge challenge that that presents, but I am sure that those involved will not stint in their efforts to overcome this blow to the communities. I welcomed the original decision and the final decision by Diageo to invest £100 million in Leven. As has been said, Levenmouth is an area of high and long-term unemployment; it has never recovered from the pits being shut down. However, I have great hopes for the energy park in Methil. Diageo is undoubtedly Levenmouth's largest employer. It has already invested heavily over the years in Leven and Cameronbridge. The whole of the UK white spirit industry, including Gordon's gin, as well as grain whisky is produced at Cameronbridge. Haig's took over the Cameronbridge distillery in 1822, but there had been a distillery on the site for a number of years. Cameronbridge was the first distillery in the world to produce grain whisky.  I was delighted when Diageo announced that it intended to build a £65 million bioenergy park at the distillery. It is a matter of pride to me that the oldest grain distillery in the world is now at the forefront of renewable technology. The new bioenergy plant will generate nearly all the steam and electricity needed to operate Cameronbridge. It will result in 56,000 tonnes of CO 2 being removed from the air, which is the equivalent of removing 44,000 cars from the streets of Scotland. More important, it will result in a huge saving in energy costs. That investment has enabled Leven and Cameronbridge to compete world wide. I know that I did not make myself popular when I argued that the investment that Diageo had earmarked for Leven had to continue. It was my view then, and it is my view now, that if the investment does not go into Leven, the long-term future of Leven will be put at risk. I do not regret what I did. It is imperative that Future Skills Scotland and others work with the people of Kilmarnock to provide training and reskilling. However, it is a fact that the new jobs in Leven present a once-in-a-generation opportunity for the area. As others have said, it is an area of high unemployment, with people living on benefits, and has the third lowest average wage of any constituency in Scotland. I ask the cabinet secretary, once it is clear—

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it really is distasteful that Mrs Eadie continues to raise the problems of individual constituents in the chamber? Is he aware that Saga, which is an organisation for elderly people, recently voted Fife Council as the best council in the whole of the United Kingdom for the services to old people? Does he agree that Mrs Eadie's efforts would be much better employed if she were to have a word with her fellow MP for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath—Mr Gordon Brown, with whom she shares a constituency—to do something about the £500 million cuts that are coming our way? Would not that be a far more effective way of protecting her constituents and mine from cuts in services?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You are right. The matter is not for you, and it is not a matter for the Parliament. If anybody has any complaints about the minister's behaviour, routes are available to them to make their complaint. However, the matter is certainly not for you or Parliament.

I congratulate my good friend Willie Coffey on securing the debate tonight and on the commitment and leadership that he has shown to his constituents in his determination to secure the Johnnie Walker jobs in Kilmarnock. As I said earlier to the cabinet secretary, the task force of local politicians, local authorities, Scottish Enterprise and the trade unions has worked extremely hard in a short period of time to maximise the campaign to persuade Diageo to stay in Kilmarnock and Glasgow. However, as the constituency MSP for the Diageo plants in Leven and Cameron Bridge, I have a duty no less than Willie Coffey's to ensure that those plants have a long-term and sustainable future and I know that he understands that. No one wants to see any jobs lost anywhere in Scotland, but my first priority is my constituency. I was grateful for the cabinet secretary's assurances this afternoon about the future of the Leven and Cameron Bridge facilities. However, there is real concern about the long-term future in Leven if all the promised investment is to be switched from Leven to Kilmarnock, as the task force is reported to propose. Diageo in Leven employs 500 people and is the largest employer in the area. Cameron Bridge has been producing whisky on the same site for almost 200 years. It is  not some fly-by-night operation that has just come in from nowhere—it has been there for 200 years. Cameron Bridge is close to Windygates and at one point it employed practically the whole of Windygates. My friend Councillor David Alexander from Windygates is the first person in his family for almost 150 years who has not worked at Cameron Bridge. We therefore have a whisky heritage, too, and it is important that that is recognised. Diageo in Leven and Cameron Bridge also has a loyal workforce. Leven houses 17 production lines, five of which are dedicated to whisky. As Ted Brocklebank said, the base product of Johnnie Walker whisky is old Cameron Brig, which is almost impossible to buy anywhere round about the constituency. The remainder of the lines in Leven—this is very important—are dedicated to bottling white spirit, including Gordon's gin, Smirnoff vodka, Captain Morgan rum and Tanqueray, and another 135 Diageo product lines. I understand the desire to keep jobs in Kilmarnock, which is the home of Johnnie Walker, the leading brand of Scottish whisky. However, it is essential that Diageo continues to invest in the Leven plant. I support the desire to bottle all whisky in Scotland, but I also support the workers in Leven. Some of the arguments that are being used in the campaign leave Leven in a very vulnerable position, given the range of other national drinks that are bottled there. Leven won those products against internal competition from other Diageo companies around the word; it won because the productivity is high there and, more important, investment has been put into the plant. In addition, the workforce is first class. Diageo must continue to put in investment to secure and improve the existing lines, or we run the risk in the long term that the lines and jobs in Leven could be lost not just to somewhere else in Scotland but overseas. I appreciate the cabinet secretary's comments today, but I urge him to be careful with the task force proposals in case Leven is disadvantaged by them. Like Kilmarnock, Levenmouth is an area of high unemployment. We know what it is like to lose jobs and what it was like when the mines shut down and the shipyard shut down. We have one of the highest unemployment rates in Scotland. We have three generations of people who have never worked. We need to ensure a long-term, sustainable future for Diageo in Leven and Cameron Bridge. My constituency of Central Fife has the third-lowest average wage of any constituency in Scotland. It is imperative that we keep and sustain jobs. The long-term sustainability of Leven is imperative, and I am happy to work with the cabinet secretary or anybody else to assure it.

I recognise the work that has been carried out by the task force in such a short time to put together proposals to save the threatened jobs in Kilmarnock and Glasgow. However, does the cabinet secretary recognise that there is genuine concern among the workforce and people in my constituency that the reported task force proposals could affect the long-term future of the Leven plant?

The criteria on compassionate release have been applied absolutely and fairly to every person who has met them. If they have been applied fairly and consistently by justice ministers present and past, it would be wholly wrong to make an exception for al-Megrahi, because that would be a political decision.

rose—

I start with the premise that Mr al-Megrahi is guilty. I do so because a Scottish court returned that verdict. Until, and if, the verdict is set aside, he will die in Libya a guilty man. Like others, I have been wrestling with the concepts of justice, mercy and vengeance. I have struggled to understand why our friends in the United States are angry and hurt that our Cabinet Secretary for Justice agreed compassionate release for Mr al-Megrahi. They fail to understand Scotland's legal system. As I pondered what to say today, I came across a speech by Martin Luther King. In life, Martin Luther King was not the icon that he became in death. He opposed the Vietnam war at a time when it was not popular in the United States to do that, and was vilified for doing so. A few days  before his assassination, in reflecting on the choices that he had made, he said: "Cowardice asks the question, 'Is it safe?' Expediency asks the question, 'Is it politic?' Vanity asks the question, 'Is it popular?' But conscience asks the question, 'Is it right?' There comes a time when we must take a position that is neither safe nor politic nor popular, but because our conscience tells us that it is right." Expressions of humanity and justice towards our fellow human beings do not always make easy and popular decisions. Where an individual or group has wronged us, it is often easy to deny their humanity instead of conceding that they are—as we are—human and mortal. Mercy is in the hands of those who give it. It is an expression of our values and humanity, regardless of the actions of those who receive it. Compassion is about being better people and not about the goodness or wickedness of the person who is on the receiving end of the mercy. There is nothing that any of us can do to ease the pain of those who mourn those who died at Lockerbie. Mr al-Megrahi's death, whether in a prison in Scotland or at home in Tripoli, will not lessen the pain, which will endure always. Our legal system demands justice, not vengeance. If Mr al-Megrahi were to die in a Scottish prison, that would be vengeance, not justice. Some have claimed that the release means that Mr al-Megrahi served only 11 days for every person who was murdered at Lockerbie. However, even if he had served the remainder of his life in Greenock prison, only a quarter of a day would have been added for every person who died. Mr al-Megrahi is dying. His body is ravaged by cancer. He will die, and he will die soon. Kenny MacAskill freed Mr al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds, despite the grave crime for which Mr al-Megrahi was convicted. That was done not to minimise the suffering of victims' families, here and in other countries. The decision to release a dying man had at its heart justice and mercy—two intertwined principles that are woven into the fabric of the Scottish legal system. Those principles are the foundation of our society, and those who would scoff and sneer at those values do all of us in Scotland a disservice. Without the option of mercy and compassion, there can be no true justice. It is vital that the distinction between justice and mercy is uppermost in our minds, because vengeance is rarely just, it is never merciful and it breeds only further resentment and hate. When the Cabinet Secretary for Justice took the decision to release Mr al-Megrahi to die at home, it was not cowardice that asked the question. It was not expediency that asked the question. It was not vanity that asked the question. It was conscience  that asked the question, and the answer was that it was right.

Will Robert Brown give way?

Will the member give way?

Who will the member choose?

Will the member give way?

I remind the Cabinet Secretary for Justice of the four words that are intertwined on the mace: wisdom, integrity, justice and compassion. Those are the values that underpin the actions of the Parliament and the Government. Is the Cabinet Secretary for Justice aware of the many expressions of support from some of the victims' families, the Church of Scotland and Archbishop Conti, whom he mentioned earlier? There still seems to be some confusion about what is meant by compassionate release in Scots law. Would the cabinet secretary set out more fully what that means and the guidance that underpinned his decision?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Her Majesty's Government about the enterprise finance guarantee scheme. (S3O-7532)

The minister knows that I have written to him about a company in my constituency, which applied for assistance under  the scheme but was refused because the bank continues to assert that the company does not meet the bank's own criteria. Will the minister assure me that he will continue to discuss with the Treasury how the UK enterprise finance guarantee scheme can better meet the needs of Scotland's businesses?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Given my long-standing commitment to a new Forth road bridge, it would be wholly inappropriate for me to be dragged on to a committee that will deal with it.

My speech will be short. I will speak about who will serve on hybrid bill committees. Private bill committee members were drawn from among those members of the Parliament who did not represent the particular area affected by the bill. In the last two sessions, it seemed that members from Fife were disadvantaged because of the number of bills that we had to consider. For example, Nanette Milne's colleague Ted Brocklebank, Christine May and I—all Fife members—served on the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee. I am looking forward to ensuring that I am not dragooned on to the Forth crossing bill committee because of my interest in the matter. I am sure that members who have escaped the onerous task of serving on such committees—particularly those from the north-east, such as Nanette Milne—will be delighted to consider an M8 bill, if one comes along, or the Forth crossing bill.

Were many of the powers that ministers are using to implement policy not introduced by legislation that the previous coalition Executive bludgeoned through in the face of the rest of the Parliament?

I assure the chamber that it is a great pleasure to speak in this debate and that I will speak about the subject. After all, when the bill is passed at 5 o'clock, Scottish Parliament and local government elections will be separated. Indeed, as someone who since 1999 has spoken in every chamber debate on this subject, I am particularly pleased to speak in this stage 3 debate. I will be more generous than David McLetchie and acknowledge that the Conservatives have contributed as much as the SNP to the debate on separating local government and Scottish Parliament elections. I am delighted that the SNP Government has adopted a commonsense approach and done the right thing by the voters and local government. In the stage 1 debate, I mentioned the support for the move from McIntosh, Kerley, Arbuthnott and now Gould. As for Andy Kerr's comment that the decision taken in 2001 to combine both sets of elections was the right one, I have to tell him that it was not and that it was certainly not supported by anyone who examined it before or after 2001. I regret the wasted years during which Labour and the Liberal Democrats opposed the decoupling of the elections. I bitterly regret those parties' failure to decouple the 2007 elections, when a new voting system was introduced for local government, despite the warnings about the chaos that would ensue. That was precisely why, when the motion to pass the bill that introduced proportional representation through the single transferable vote was debated, I lodged a reasoned amendment saying that the two sets of elections should be decoupled. It is regrettable that the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats  did not take the opportunity then to separate the two sets of elections, but it gives me no pleasure to say, "I told you so." I welcome the belated support from Labour and the Liberal Democrats for the separation, but I must say that Mike Rumbles gave every impression of being dragged kicking and screaming to support the bill. It is clear that, even now, after all that has happened in the ensuing years, Mike Rumbles personally does not believe that the two sets of elections should be separated. Every single word that he said confirmed that. Why is it important to hold the local government elections in a different year from the Scottish Parliament elections? Scottish local government is a separate tier of government. It is not subservient to the Scottish Parliament; it has powers of its own and responsibilities for housing, education, social work, planning and other issues that affect the daily lives of millions of people in Scotland. Indeed, I venture to say that there is no power of local government that does not affect the lives of ordinary people in Scotland. It has statutory powers. Councillors and councils deserve to have their record decided on by the electorate, but no one could examine the elections of 1999, 2003 or 2007 and say honestly that local government issues featured in the campaigns. The SNP Government has respect for local government. That led to the signing of the concordat between the SNP Government and Scottish local authorities. The SNP believes in the parity of esteem between the Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliament and local government. Councils must have their own democratic mandate. The challenge for politicians of all political parties and none is to engage with voters and increase turnout. We will do that only if people believe that their participation will make a difference. PRSTV will help to ensure that we have a fair voting system and that every vote counts. I look forward to a proper information campaign before the next local government elections because, frankly, such a campaign was missing in 2007. Members might say that there was an information campaign, but few people out there understood it, so the message did not get across. I congratulate the minister and the Local Government and Communities Committee on ensuring that the bill has received a smooth passage. I am delighted that, at long last, local government will have its day in the spotlight.

The minister is aware of the representations that I have made to him about the housing need and the level of housing investment to housing associations in Fife. I would be grateful for his assurance that he will carefully consider that need and the level of investment that is required. Also, will the minister take the opportunity to congratulate Fife Council on acquiring last week the first new council houses in Fife for more than 20 years?

When the cabinet secretary next meets Norma Graham, will he pass on the congratulations of Fife's communities to her, her  predecessor Peter Wilson and all her officers for achieving a 16 per cent drop in recorded crime—the largest drop in Scotland—together with a 30 per cent increase in conviction rates? Will he join me in deploring Claire Baker MSP's false claims to local press that crime in Fife has risen when the official figures tell us that it is at a 25-year low, police numbers are rising and the police in Fife are doing a magnificent job in protecting our communities?

It is a real pleasure to speak in this debate. Cashback for communities was launched by our Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, in January 2008 and has to date provided substantial money to youth projects the length and breadth of Scotland. It is Kenny MacAskill's drive and commitment that have made the scheme the reality that it is. To date, more than £12 million of criminal cash has been ploughed back into our communities through partners such as YouthLink Scotland, the SFA, the SRU, basketballscotland, sportscotland and Scottish Screen.  The cashback scheme provides for diversionary projects for young people. I know that the impact on our communities of the injection of these funds is considerable. As others have said, the scheme takes money from criminals—drug dealers in particular—who want to destroy our communities, and invests it to try to build those communities up again. Something that Bill Aitken said struck a chord with me: we need a new look at the scheme. The scheme depends on organisations and others coming forward with projects, but many of our communities have been destroyed by the drug dealers and in some areas there are no local organisations. We need to build capacity within our communities, including the capacity for people to volunteer and to be involved in bringing forward projects. If we do not have people to run the organisations and volunteer for projects and help to bring them forward, then some of the worst-affected communities will never benefit from the scheme. I ask the cabinet secretary to look at the possibility of allocating some of the money for capacity building in our communities, to try to bring forward projects and encourage people to volunteer. It is from the volunteers in those communities that we will get the projects of the future. I remind the cabinet secretary that another reason for the lack of volunteers is the criminal vetting process. I know that the cost of vetting a volunteer falls on local organisations, and I wonder whether funding the vetting process might be a worth while investment. That would take the cost away from the poorest communities and get more people to come through the volunteering route, which would also help to build capacity. It would also support those who wish to be vetted so that they can work with young people. That said, many projects for young people in Central Fife have been supported by cashback for communities, and I have worked very hard to try to encourage existing organisations to take advantage of the money that is available to them. Glenrothes YMCA and YWCA received money to fund a Friday night music project and a film making project; Levenmouth YMCA got £26,000 to develop its street live project, which I know that Kenny MacAskill has visited; Levenmouth youth initiative got money for summer programmes for young people; and Barnardo's Levenmouth links project got money to fund a summer programme. Glenrothes YMCA also received additional funds. I add my thanks to that of Councillor David Alexander, our councillor for Kennoway, who has worked so hard with partners to bring forward the Kennoway sports association application, which has received £100,000 to develop a new sports pavilion at Cotlands park in Kennoway. I cannot  begin to tell the cabinet secretary how much it means to that particular community that they have something to support the many youth football teams and other teams that are springing up in Kennoway. That is happening because there is hope, and because there are facilities for the young people who live there to be able to take part in sports. I am particularly pleased about the Fife cashback media project, which is working with young people in Glenrothes and elsewhere in Fife; the Glenrothes project deals with generational discrimination. Those local projects are all important. I acknowledge that another £70,000 for Fife has been announced today, and I will do my best to ensure that a lot of that money comes to my constituency of Central Fife. It is essential that money is invested in diversionary measures in our communities, particularly in the Levenmouth area, which has been devastated by the closure of the pits, the lack of hope and aspiration in the community and the criminal activity that goes on there. I am delighted that the cashback for communities money has been complemented by the work of the Scottish National Party-led Fife Council—and in particular the work of Dave Alexander, who is the chair of the area committee in Levenmouth. The council is investing in the Levenmouth area, because the SNP believes in communities and in young people. After decades of neglect by Labour councils, the area is experiencing investment at last. That is probably best summed up by the former Levenmouth Labour councillor, Joyce Smith, who was quoted recently as saying—

Indeed. However, I believe that it is important to invest money, unlike Labour councillors who suggested in the past that there was no point in investing in young people because they would destroy that investment. The SNP believes in young people, which is why I am absolutely delighted that at long last that kind of money is going back into our most deprived communities, such as Levenmouth.

I think that I am just coming to the end of my speech. The cashback for communities scheme is so important to our deprived communities. I will do my best, and I know that the cabinet secretary will do his best, to ensure that communities such as Levenmouth and Glenrothes are recipients of  more money from cashback for communities in the future.

Will the member give way?

It is a great pleasure to speak in the debate. I am sorry to hear that Ted Brocklebank has never been fortunate enough to be part of a Scottish Parliament delegation, but I am sure that his speech today will serve as a job application to his party to be part of the delegation for Scotland week next year. I was fortunate to be part of the Scottish Parliament delegation for Scotland week this April, together with the Presiding Officer, Sarah Boyack, Murdo Fraser and Tavish Scott. All of us who were part of the delegation would echo the view of the minister, Michael Russell, that the warmth of the welcome for Scotland in New York, Quebec and North Carolina will stay with us for some time to come. In New York, the Scotland week march down 6 th Avenue was well supported by the diaspora, to say nothing of the thousands of ordinary New Yorkers who turned out to give the marchers support. It was good to see that the homecoming Scotland team had been working well—as we walked, we saw many saltires that I am sure had been given out just before the march. The team had given out so many of them that by the time we came to the end of the march, they had run out. That probably shows the great demand for saltire hats and the like. In Quebec, the delegation met committees to discuss joint concerns and opportunities around renewable energy issues, relationships with federal Governments and other opportunities for us all. It was clear that interest in Scotland was genuine and tangible. As a measure of that, the delegation was present as a motion to commemorate tartan day was introduced in the Parliament. It was interesting that the representatives of the federal Government, who were introduced to the Parliament just before the Scottish delegation, had nothing like the welcome from the Parliament that the Scottish delegation had. Since I came back, I have referred in the chamber to the fact that our Presiding Officer was quite taken with being referred to as the President of Scotland. I know not what Mr Salmond, our beloved First Minister, would make of that, but the delegation rather enjoyed it. I was also delighted to hear a good Fife accent when we visited St Andrew's church in Quebec. It turned out that the curator of the kirk came from Lochgelly, 2 miles away from where I was born and brought up, and her good Fife accent was undiluted after 30 years in Quebec. The Scottish delegation met the governor of North Carolina and both houses of the General  Assembly, and the Presiding Officer made a presentation to them. Murdo Fraser and I had in-depth discussions about the federal Government's stimulus programme, to which I have referred in previous debates. The Scottish Parliament and the minister co-hosted a reception for the Scottish community and both houses of the Assembly. I was surprised to find out that North Carolina had the highest percentage of citizens claiming Scots ancestry in the United States. The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has yet to discuss what our future relationship with the US and Canada will be. We need an evaluation of the most recent Scotland week. However, I am clear that the Parliament and its MSPs have opened up great links with the state legislatures in the US and the provincial Governments in Canada. We have much to learn from their powers and their relationships with other Governments and by exchanging views on matters of joint interest. It is clear that the Parliament has a role in making links with other legislatures, but the Scottish Government's Scotland week programme did not make full use of the parliamentary delegation. Many more joint events could have taken place. For example, the reception for the Scottish community in Raleigh, North Carolina—at which Murdo Fraser and I worked the room in our own inimitable way—was co-hosted by the minister and the Presiding Officer. It is clear to me from that event and others that the Scottish Government should in future work far more closely with the Scottish Parliament to ensure that we get as many bangs for our buck as possible from the Scottish Parliament's and the Scottish community's representation and to ensure that Scotland is showcased in the best possible way. I would like some commitment from ministers that, in future years, they will try to ensure that they and the Scottish Parliament work together far more closely than happened during the most recent Scotland week. There is great interest in Scotland at every level—from the political to the personal, and from the industrial to the cultural—from people who share a heritage and a vision for our world. I am happy to support the Government's purpose of establishing new links and building on the existing ones. There is much more to be done, but no one denies that a great start has been made.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister agree that if we want to engage youngsters at school, one way would be to reduce the voting age to 16, thereby engaging young people in civic education when it actually matters, rather than waiting until they leave school before giving them the vote?

Will the member give way?

On the issue of bin collections, David Whitton's remark is totally and absolutely untrue, and I would appreciate it if he withdrew it.

It is a personal pleasure to speak in this stage 1 debate on the decoupling of local government and Scottish Parliament elections. As David McLetchie has said, for eight long years the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats set their faces against reason and democracy in refusing to decouple the elections. However, today we have heard no apology or admission that they were wrong, nor an admission that the coincidence of the elections contributed to the debacle of the elections in 2007. The decoupling of the two sets of elections is a long-standing commitment of the Conservatives as  well as the Scottish National Party—I freely acknowledge that. However, it has taken an SNP Government to produce the bill, just as it took an SNP Government to abolish the tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges, to provide free school meals and to provide free prescriptions by 2011. Those are all measures that were proposed by the SNP in opposition and opposed by the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive. I never understood the stubborn refusal of Labour and the Liberal Democrats to decouple the two sets of elections. There seemed no logic to that refusal, which flew in the face of all the evidence. In 2001, I spoke in the debate when Labour and the Liberal Democrats brought to Parliament the bill to combine the two sets of elections. I said then: "The Executive believes that the bill will increase the turnout at local elections. That is no doubt true, as parliamentary elections currently attract larger turnouts. However, such turnouts will not confer any additional democratic legitimacy on local government. ... The serious flaw in the Executive's argument is its naive suggestion that an artificially inflated turnout provides an increased mandate for local government. It is quite clear that the reverse is true, and that will have a cost in the form of a democratic loss for the very local authorities for whom the bill is intended. The local agenda will be overshadowed and overtaken by the coverage of national elections. No member of this chamber could seriously argue that local authority issues will even surface, far less be given a decent hearing, in the press mêleé of the parliamentary election campaign. Councillors will not be able to make their case for election or re-election as they will be completely displaced from the agenda by MSPs seeking to make their case."— [ Official Report , 20 December 2001; c 5031.]  That was the argument for not having coincident elections, but it was rejected. Had it only been the Opposition parties that opposed coincident elections, I might have understood the refusal of Labour and the Liberal Democrats to decouple the elections, but that was not the case. In 1999, the report of the McIntosh commission recommended that the two sets of elections should be separated and that local government elections should be held at the mid-point of the parliamentary session. The report of the renewing local democracy working group that was set up by Wendy Alexander and chaired by Richard Kerley recommended in 2000 that the two elections should be separated. In the face of all that evidence, the Executive announced that it would legislate to bring the two elections together. In 2006, the Arbuthnott commission recommended decoupling—I was going to use a quote from the commission's report about the potential for confusion, but David McLetchie has already put it on the record. During the passage of the Executive's Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004, which  introduced single transferable vote proportional representation, my reasoned stage 3 amendment to decouple the elections was defeated. David Mundell's proposed local government elections (Scotland) bill, which sought to decouple the elections, found support among the Scottish National Party but went no further. Labour and the Liberal Democrats ensured that, in 2003 and 2007, the local government elections and the Scottish Parliament elections were held on the same day. The debacle of the 2007 election was, in part, caused by the insistence of Labour and the Liberal Democrats to introduce a new form of voting for the local government elections even though those elections were to be held on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections. Everyone told them that there would be difficulties in introducing a new form of local government elections in that manner, as little information about the changes would get through to the voters, which would lead to confusion. As David McLetchie so eloquently said, they were telt. As the Gould report made clear, separating the two elections will minimise the potential for voter confusion. We are convinced that combined elections are a disservice not only to local councils and candidates but to the electorate. The disservice that Labour and the Liberal Democrats did to local government over the eight years deserves at least an apology, although I notice that the Liberal Democrats have put forward as speakers in this debate two members who were not even in the Parliament from 1999 to 2007.

I have no doubt that that is the case, but Iain Smith was the local government spokesperson who set his face against the decoupling of the local and parliamentary elections, and I would have loved to have heard him say in today's debate, "I am sorry, Mrs Marwick. I am sorry, Mr McLetchie. All of the arguments you made were absolutely right and I was wrong." It would have been nice to have heard that apology, but it is no surprise that he is not here to offer it. It is important that we go forward, but there should be an admission of guilt on the part of the guilty people. I am delighted that an SNP Government has introduced this bill, and it goes without saying that the minister will have my whole-hearted support at 5 o'clock.

The member talks about accepting the independent Gould report, but why did the Labour and Liberal Executive, when it introduced the bill to couple the elections, ignore both the McIntosh report and the Kerley report, which had recommended decoupling?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance  on the circumstances in which a member can withdraw a question for answer by a minister. Today Claire Baker withdrew question 7, which referred to her false claim of a rise in violent crime in Fife. Last week Ms Baker issued press releases and spoke on the local radio stations, saying that she would be demanding an explanation from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice for why crime in Fife was rising. In fact, crime in Fife has reduced by 16 per cent in the past year—the largest reduction in the whole of Scotland. Ms Baker withdrew her question today, denying the justice secretary the opportunity to put the record straight.

Presiding Officer, will you consider whether it is acceptable for a member to behave in that way? Will you look at tightening the circumstances in which a member can withdraw a question at the last minute, particularly if it is just to protect her from humiliation?

As I suspect most people do, I think that the size of the UK Labour Government's debt is so large that I cannot quite remember how many zeros should be added to the end of the figure. Even if I remembered, it would be likely that one more zero had been added by the time that I finished my speech. However, I know that the Labour Government has borrowed more money than the combined borrowing of every previous UK Government ever. I also know that my four-year-old grandson will be an adult and will probably have his own children before the debt that Labour has built up is paid off.

We would have done several things. We certainly would not have allowed the banks to get into the current state and we would have built up an oil fund from our revenues over 40-odd years—the Labour Government has squandered that money. The Labour Government has broken the fundamental contract with the people that we pay tax for the services that we receive. The Government is forcing us to pay not for services that we will receive, but for its mismanagement of the economy. The man who preached prudence is now addicted to debt. I was fortunate to be part of the parliamentary delegation to the USA and Canada for Scotland week. When I was in Quebec, I was struck not just by the warmth and regard for Scotland, but by the fact that all parties—regardless of whether they are sovereigntists such as the Parti Québécois or federalists such as the Liberal Government—put Quebec's interests first. All the parties supported the language and culture and—most important—were prepared to take on the federal Government if Quebec's interests were being affected by its decisions. Judging by Labour's amendment, I think that the Labour Party in Scotland has many lessons to learn. For months, the Labour Party in Scotland has denied—in the face of all the evidence to the contrary—that the Scottish budget will be cut by £500 million. Last week, Iain Gray claimed that the chancellor's budget was good news for Scotland. Andy Kerr's amendment continues that theme. It is astonishing that Labour just does not listen or learn. Does the Labour Party in the Scottish Parliament not acknowledge, as the federalists in Quebec do, that it has a duty to the Parliament  and to the people of Scotland who elected its members?

It is unfortunate that Iain Gray and Andy Kerr are Gordon Brown's men in the Scottish Parliament, parroting the spin that is prepared in Downing Street. If Andy Kerr wants to parrot more, please intervene.

The problem for Labour is that nobody believes it, north or south of the border. The International Monetary Fund does not believe the assumptions that underpin Alistair Darling's budget and neither do the City and the country. I will contrast the actions of the US federal Government with the actions in Scotland of the Labour Government. As part of Scotland week, Murdo Fraser and I met Dempsey Benton of the Office of Economic Recovery and Investment in North Carolina. Mr Benton, who is a personal appointment of the Governor, has a role of ensuring that the money that the federal Government allocated to North Carolina is spent appropriately to aid recovery. North Carolina has a population of more than 8 million, which is almost comparable with Scotland, with our population of 5 million. In advance of the meeting, I confess that the fine detail of the US recovery programme had passed me by. I had assumed that the bulk of the money would be spent on infrastructure projects to kick-start the economy. In fact, President Obama's stimulus package is worth a total of $789 billion, $225 billion of which was allocated to states under a funding formula—the last phrase sounds familiar.

No. I want to finish the point. North Carolina will receive $6.1 billion to support core projects, which is to be dispensed in accordance with federal rules. At a time when the Scottish Government is facing cuts that the UK Labour Government is imposing, the US states are receiving huge amounts of money to stimulate the economy. The money that is being dispensed to the states is over and above their existing budgets. It is worth while for me to highlight some of the additional  projects and money that are being made available to North Carolina. For example, weatherisation projects—in other words, fuel poverty measures including central heating—will receive an additional $132 million; child care, an additional $67 million; higher education, another $5 million; public housing, $83 million; school lunches, $3 million; highways and bridges, almost $1 billion; and education programmes, $750 million. The White House estimates that the package will save 105,000 jobs in North Carolina alone. Thanks to the actions of the UK Labour Government, its cuts will result in at least 9,000 job losses in Scotland. The complicity of the Labour Party in Scotland is clear to see and yet, day after day, its members are calling for more money for housing, education and policing. Labour members should explain why they support Trident and identification cards and which services should be cut as a result of the cuts that their Government in London has brought upon Scotland. Indeed, we will demand that of them.

Mr President, five minutes will not be necessary. The proposed rule change is very sensible indeed. In the previous two sessions, I argued—as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee and as a member of other committees—that equal opportunities seemed to be getting lost within the Parliament. Part of the reason for that was that committees seemed reluctant to take responsibility for such issues as long as we had an Equal Opportunities Committee in place. It is very sensible that the proposed rule change will require all committees to take equal opportunities into account in their work and to refer to that in their annual report. The Parliament has a very good reputation on equal opportunities, but the proposed rule change is an improvement because it will ensure that every committee—not just the Equal Opportunities Committee—addresses equal opportunities in its work.

I welcome the First Minister's very full statement. Is he aware of the fury in Fife that the Dunfermline Building Society, which had been in existence for 140 years, has been asset stripped by the UK Labour Government? What further discussions will the First Minister have with the Nationwide about the future of the Dunfermline Building Society's staff? In particular, does he share my concern for the short-term future of the headquarters staff at Pitreavie and the longer-term future of the branch staff? Will he seek clarity on the position of the Dunfermline Building Society's agencies that are located throughout Fife? In all the comments that I have heard over the weekend, no one has mentioned the position of the solicitors and other firms that have acted as branches of the Dunfermline. Will he therefore seek clarity on their situation and on whether Nationwide intends to retain the agencies and the staff who work there?

The motion in my name, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, invites members to agree that the SPCB appoint Stuart Allan as the new Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner. The Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002 provides that the commissioner is to be appointed by the SPCB with the agreement of the Parliament. Last week, the Parliament debated the motion on the appointment of a new Scottish Public Services Ombudsman. It was made clear then that, although the Parliament is not subject to the code of practice on ministerial appointments to public bodies, we follow the guidelines to ensure that best practice is observed and the process is fair. On the SPCB's behalf, I thank Louise Rose, the independent assessor, who oversaw the process and has provided the Parliament with a validation certificate that confirms that the process complied with good practice and that Mr Allan is appointed on merit after a fair, open and transparent process. We received 45 applications for the post, which shows the high level of interest in it. We unanimously recommend that, from a strong field of candidates, Mr Allan be appointed. He will bring to the post significant experience of investigating complaints about standards. He is the chief investigating officer and is responsible for investigating and reporting to the Standards Commission for Scotland when councillors or members of devolved public bodies might have contravened the relevant codes of conduct. The Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner is a part-time appointment of between five and 10 days a month. Similarly, the role of chief investigating officer is part time, and Mr Allan will continue in that role until his appointment ends in January 2010. Mr Allan's appointment as Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner will be for  two years, with the possibility of reappointment for a further year. That recognises that the Parliament has established the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee to consider the future structural landscape of SPCB-supported bodies, which include the standards commissioner. The appointment period provides flexibility should the committee make recommendations on the post. Stuart Allan qualified as a solicitor in 1973 and has spent his career in public service. He has acted as an adviser to several organisations, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Office and the Assembly of European Regions. He has also acted as returning officer and regional returning officer at local government, parliamentary, Scottish Parliament and European elections. In 2001, the Scottish ministers appointed Mr Allan as the first chief investigating officer under the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc (Scotland) Act 2000. In 2004, he was reappointed for a second term and, in 2007, he was reappointed for a third term. He will demit office in January 2010. The Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner is an independent investigator of complaints that we as members might have breached the code of conduct for members of the Scottish Parliament, which gives guidance on how we perform our parliamentary duties. Following an investigation, the commissioner prepares a report to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee that sets out the details of the complaint and the investigation, the facts that the commissioner found and his conclusion. Any sanction is for the committee and the Parliament to decide. The post is important. SPCB members are confident that we have made the right choice in nominating Stuart Allan. I believe that he will prove to be an effective, pragmatic and fair commissioner. I am sure that the Parliament will want to wish him every success in his new role. The Parliament will also wish to recognise Dr Jim Dyer's contribution as the commissioner in the past six years. I move, That the Parliament agrees, under section 1(2) of the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002, to appoint Stuart Allan as the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner.

To ask the Scottish Government what proposals it has to improve levels of dental provision in Fife. (S3O-6345)

I thank the minister for her reply and for the Government's commitment to improving dental health provision not only in my constituency but throughout Fife. The minister announced that two new dental centres will be provided in Glenrothes and Levenmouth. Notwithstanding that it is for NHS Fife to take the matter forward, can the minister offer a timescale for the expected completion of the buildings?

I am interested in what the member says about the homelessness target. Does she agree with Iain Gray that the Labour Government introduced the best homelessness legislation in Scotland and then did not fund it?

That is not—

The only thing that is missing from Labour's motion is an assertion that the evil SNP Government drowns little puppy dogs. This is the second time Parliament has had such a debate from Labour. The first took place after the Scottish Government's first six months in office. We might think that, after two years, Labour would have come to terms with the fact that it did not win the Scottish Parliament or council elections. Instead, however, it tries to suggest that the Scottish people were deluded into voting SNP. Not a bit of it—Labour is as negative now as it was during the election campaign, and that negativity explains why it did not win the Scottish Parliament election. Labour defines itself by what it is against, rather than what it stands for—first and foremost, Labour is against the SNP.  My father was in the Labour Party for most of his life. He let me stay up to watch Harold Wilson win the 1964 general election. What struck me about my dad was his deeply held belief about what Labour was for. He believed for a long time that Labour would be there for him and for the community in which we lived. I cannot remember my dad ever talking about what Labour was against—he talked about what Labour was for, and what he thought a Labour Government would do when it came to power. Labour forgets that the votes in debates such as this do not matter that much. It matters that Labour voted down our budget, and it matters what people in our communities think about the progress that the Scottish Government has made.

I will not take an intervention from Lord Foulkes, whether he is standing up or sitting down shouting. It is clear that, whatever happens at 5 o'clock tonight, the people out there know that the SNP Government is delivering for them, despite the fact that it is a minority Government and the fact that the Labour Party prefers to play games and to have juvenile student-union debates instead of making the contribution that it should make in the chamber. Today is the 25 th anniversary of the start of the miners' strike. The communities in which I grew up and the communities that I have the honour of representing in the Parliament are still suffering from the effects of a Tory Government that created a scorched earth policy. When Labour came to power in 1997, it promised to end child poverty, and to reduce it by 2010. The Labour Party was in power in this Parliament for eight years, yet the levels of poverty in Levenmouth, Kennoway and parts of Glenrothes are among the highest in the country. Gordon Brown was Chancellor of the Exchequer for much of that time, and now he is Prime Minister, striding across the world stage like the bit player he is. The man who promised to halve child poverty by next year is failing even to make a dent. The recent report from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation states that on current estimates, the UK Government will fail to meet its target by 2010, and that to meet that target, the UK "would have to invest an estimated £4.2 billion a year". We have a Prime Minister who fiddled the books, and a Labour Government that could never find the money to tackle poverty, but which bailed out the banks to stop them failing. The same Labour Government has failed the one in four children in Scotland who is still living in poverty.  Scotland's children are twice as likely to be poor as those who live in Scandinavian countries. The SNP Government has met 50 per cent of its manifesto commitments after two years. I am proud of a Government that has delivered the removal of the tolls from the Forth and Tay bridges, which was opposed by Labour and the Liberal Democrats in office; that has frozen council tax for the past two years, in comparison with a 60 per cent increase under the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration; and which has introduced free school meals for all primary 1 to primary 3 children in Scotland, which the Labour Party and Liberal Democrats also opposed in office. I am proud of an SNP Government that is reducing prescription charges and will abolish them, which should be compared with the increase that the UK Government announced today for charges in England; that has put the highest number of police on the streets, in comparison with the abandonment of our communities to the criminals by the Labour and Liberal Democrats; and which has abolished the graduate endowment, which Labour and the Liberal Democrats introduced. I turn to the Liberals, who want the Government to concentrate on the economy rather than on the constitution. That is from a party that voted against an SNP Government, and then voted for it when the First Minister wrote to the Calman commission. That is hardly putting the economy first. Harriet Harman spoke recently about the court of public opinion, but in the Scottish Parliament, the unionist parties want to deny the court of public opinion—the people of Scotland—the chance to vote in a referendum on their own future. The people voted for an SNP Government because we offered vision and hope—and we have delivered—rather than the negativity of the Labour Party. Labour has learned nothing, and as a result it will be in Opposition in the UK and in Scotland for a very long time.

The minister may be aware that Glenrothes town centre is wholly privately owned, which means that we do not have a high street as such. When the minister draws up the criteria for the funding, will he consider the situation of town centres, especially in our new towns, that were sold to private companies by both the Tory Government and Labour local authorities? Will he consider  what areas such as Glenrothes town centre can do to benefit from the regeneration fund?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will you confirm that the council tax is discredited and that, under your Government, it rose by 60 per cent between 1999 and 2007? In the light of your concern about the SNP postponing the introduction of the local income tax, will you confirm whether you would vote for it?

Will Marilyn Livingstone explain to me—and, more important, to the people of Levenmouth, whom we both represent—why she is prepared to vote against a budget that includes  additional investment in Methil energy park, which is so important for the future of that area?

Will the member take an intervention?

I congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing the debate. I am delighted to add my support to the motion and to speak in the debate. Mary Mulligan said that Shelter might not want to celebrate its anniversary. Perhaps "commemorate" is better. Most people in Shelter recognise that, when the charity started, it was not expected to be around in 40 years' time, but the challenges are such that—unfortunately—Shelter will be with us for a long time; it is unfortunate not because Shelter does not do a wonderful job, because it does, but because of what that says about housing conditions. I was privileged to work for Shelter Scotland between 1992 and 1999. I always knew that one job I would do was work for Shelter, because "Cathy Come Home" made a great impression on me. I am well aware that Shelter was established before that fantastic play, which was written and directed by Ken Loach, was shown on BBC television as "The Wednesday Play". Watching "Cathy Come Home" was a searing experience for many people in Britain, as they had never before seen such housing conditions. The impact was even greater on me because my mother, who rarely cried, was in tears. That made a huge impression on me. Since that first viewing, I have seen "Cathy Come Home" many times. Unfortunately, there are parents—mothers—who still live in such housing conditions, although Shelter's work has stopped families being separated simply because they are homeless. That is one of its greatest achievements. My admiration for those who have worked, and who continue to work, for Shelter has no bounds. I am thinking in particular of those who work in its housing aid centres, who give direct help and advice to those who are homeless and face huge challenges in so doing. From its inception, Shelter Scotland has retained its independence—its independence from Government. That makes it not only a unique Scottish charity but one of the foremost charities of Scotland. Over the years, although Shelter has contributed to the homelessness task force and other Government programmes, it has retained its independence. It can do that because its core services are funded by donors.  It is appropriate and right that Shelter has an independent voice; its independence enables it to speak genuinely on behalf of those who are homeless or in housing need. Shelter must never lose that independence. It needs to be free to speak out and up for homeless people, regardless of which Government is in power. I encourage it to do that whenever it feels the need to do so. Its criticism can hit home, but that should make us all redouble our efforts. We can always do more than we are doing. I am pleased to speak in the debate. Other members will have many different things to say. I hope that Shelter is not around for the next 40 years, although I suspect that it will be around for a good number of years. Commemorating Shelter's 40 th anniversary and the publication of the booklet helps us to focus our minds on the challenges that face us all—not only the Government but local authorities. In our surgeries, many MSPs see people in acute housing need. It is up to us to redouble our efforts and to work to ensure that, in 40 years' time, we do not have the same debate in the Scottish Parliament.

Will Andy Kerr give way?

I assure the member that I never supported the building of a second bridge until the viability of the existing bridge was called into question. However, what do we do if we wait until the tests are conducted, find out that the bridge is unsustainable and cannot continue in its present form, and then have to close it? How do we fill the gap when the people of Fife and the north of Scotland are left with no alternative crossing?

The new Forth crossing is the most important infrastructure project for generations and ends years of uncertainty for businesses and commuters alike. It is vital not only for Fife's economy, but for the economy of the whole of east central Scotland. It is a pity that the arguments that we have used in the past have not been accepted and that there seems to be some doubt about whether the bridge should go ahead. Of course it should. The SNP recognises the importance of a new Forth bridge. That brings me to the nub of the argument. The previous Labour-Liberal Administration would not give any commitment to the building of a new crossing as it had no funding plan in place, beyond retaining the tolls. In the strategic transport projects review, the Scottish Government confirmed that the new crossing will be built at a cost of between £1.72 billion and £2.34 billion and that it will be funded through public procurement. It will not be funded through PFI, and it will certainly not be funded through the tolls so beloved of Labour and Liberal members that they refused to remove them from the existing bridge when they were in office. Although the Scottish Government has produced proposals that will ensure that the new crossing is toll free, can we rely on the Opposition parties to support that move? On "Good Morning Scotland" on 10 December, Des McNulty—

If the member lets me finish my point, I will be delighted to let him in. On 10 December, Des McNulty confirmed that the Labour Party would look at "all possible options" for funding the bridge. He was followed by David Whitton, who said on "Newsnight Scotland", when asked whether Labour would consider PPP or tolls for the project: "I don't know if that rules them out or in." Iain Gray was at pains this morning to say that Labour rules out the introduction of tolls. This is the hokey-cokey politics of Labour: it rules tolls in, it rules them out, it rules them in and shakes them all about—depending on what way the Forth wind blows.

I certainly ruled in a manifesto that said that the SNP Government would get rid of the tolls, which Labour and the Liberal Democrats refused to do. I am delighted that that was the first action of the Scottish Government, and that the bill to do so was the first that the Scottish Government brought in. There is a limited number of ways in which the new bridge can be financed. We believe that the costs should be met by public procurement, and we have sought Treasury permission to spread them over 20 years. The alternatives are either PFI or tolls: tolls on the existing bridge to pay for the new bridge, tolls on the new bridge, or tolls on both. The Treasury agrees that PPP is no longer an option, given that its use would not solve the budgeting problems were the scheme to be classed as a public spending scheme. Labour is now saying no tolls. Frankly, that leaves only the SNP Government's preferred method of funding. It is beyond time that the Labour Party, both north and south of the border, stopped playing its stupid, childish games with the bridge and the east of Scotland economy and gave its support to spreading the costs. We have it from Gordon Brown himself that methods other than public procurement are unacceptable. In 1985, the future Prime Minister said that he would bring forward a private member's bill to abolish tolls on the Forth road bridge—he did not do so, although he said that he would. At the time, he called the funding mechanism for the present Forth bridge "an unfortunate experiment in privatisation". He also said that "motorists crossing have to pay for the bridge four times over", and asked: "What explanation can the government now give for their refusal even to consider the finances of the bridge, which is clearly an essential element of our road system?" The Treasury's refusal to allow the SNP Government to spread the costs over 20 years is bizarre. Unlike local government and the Northern Ireland Executive, the Scottish Government is not allowed to borrow. No one would argue that the whole £2 billion cost should be found out of one budget, because that would have a devastating effect on the overall budget and on other capital projects.  The Treasury's claim that the Scottish Government cannot meet the capital costs from budgets that have not yet been allocated is simply not credible, because that is precisely the method that is used to repay the costs of PFI and PPP projects that have been completed since 1999. I am grateful to the Scottish Parliament information centre for providing me with the sums that the Scottish Government—and future Scottish Governments—must find to meet the costs that have already been committed to PFI projects. In 1999-2000, £51 million had to be found to meet the costs of PFI. In 2008-09, £608 million has had to be found. The cost of meeting PFI-PPP payments will rise steadily until 2016-17—and beyond—with a staggering cost of £914 million in that year's budget. Budgets that have not yet been allocated are already committed to meeting the PFI costs to which the Labour and Liberal Administration committed itself between 1999 and 2007. Given that future budgets are committed, perhaps the Labour Party and the Treasury can explain why the SNP Government cannot spread the capital costs of the new bridge over 20 years. The Scottish Government is committed to providing the replacement Forth crossing by traditional procurement methods and to delivering it on time, on budget and, most important, toll free to the people of Scotland. The Labour Party should stop playing games and support the Government.

To ask the Scottish Government what assistance is provided to environmental projects in Fife. (S3O-5219)

The minister is well aware of the fantastic environmental initiative in Markinch in my constituency—the Bleachfield project—that has seen a former landfill site transformed into an environmental garden that can be used by the whole community. Does the minister agree that volunteers such as Jack Chalmers and the Milton and Coaltown of Balgonie community council should be commended on that project and that similar initiatives should be encouraged?

I congratulate John Swinney and Stewart Stevenson on the statement on the STPR. Years of neglect and underinvestment by the previous Administration and successive United Kingdom Governments have left Scotland with a transport infrastructure that the Scottish Chambers of Commerce describes as dilapidated. Listening to Mr Rumbles, other Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party members who have spoken today, I am tempted to ask them why, if they think that all the schemes that they have mentioned should be in the Government's STPR, their parties did not deliver them in the eight years during which they were in government. It will surprise nobody to learn that I will concentrate my remarks on the new Forth bridge. In December last year, the Government confirmed its intention to build a multimodal, cable-stayed bridge. Members are aware of the reasons why it is needed. The cables on the existing bridge are decaying, and heavy goods vehicle restrictions might need to be imposed, although it does not look as though the bridge will have to be closed completely.  Today, the Government has announced that the project will be publicly funded. In other words, there will be no private finance initiative funding and there will be no tolls.

The minister will probably address that matter in summing up. The project will be publicly funded—it will certainly not involve PFI and it will not be funded by tolls. I welcome the sensible steps that have been taken to reduce the cost by £1.7 billion, but the new bridge will still cost up to £2.3 billion and it is vital that the Government realises the best value for that money. Does the minister intend to make representations to the Treasury to ask for any VAT that this Government pays on infrastructure projects to be returned to it to allow us to do more? The prospects for using the present bridge for public transport are welcome. I listened to Des McNulty on the radio this morning: it almost sent me back to sleep, but I got myself out of that. He was not happy with the funding or with the two-bridge strategy. He suggested that the bridge could have been built using PFI, which brings the Skye bridge to mind, and he would not rule out the Labour Party imposing tolls to pay for it—where has Des McNulty been?

I will quote what Mr McNulty said this morning on the radio when the question was put to him. The interviewer said: "To be clear, to keep your options open, you would keep the option of returning the tolls, then" to which Des McNulty replied: "No, what I said is we would do is look at all—all possible options." The possible options include tolls. Some of us remember that it was a Labour Government that imposed the tolls in 1964, and it was the Labour-  Liberal Executive that refused to remove the tolls between 1999 and 2007. I will turn to the Leven to Thornton rail link, which the south east of Scotland transport partnership will approve for consideration tomorrow. I am well aware that that project is too late for the current STPR, and that it is a regional and not a national priority, but I would welcome an assurance from the minister that he will meet with SEStran to consider how the link can be taken forward—I know that he is aware of how vital it is for the Levenmouth area. The Forth bridge is the most exciting and important infrastructure programme for generations. It is vital for the economy of Fife and the whole of the east coast of Scotland. The whingeing from the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties is remarkable if one considers that when they were in Government they refused point blank to commit to building a new Forth crossing. The STPR is a well-thought-out review from a Government that is intent on delivering for all people in Scotland.

Last session, I was part of the committee that considered the Schools (Health Promotion and  Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill. We heard evidence on the need to improve the health of all our children and on how school meals are an essential part of that. We received evidence on the stigma that is attached to receiving free school meals, and we heard about the success of the three-year pilot project in Hull that provided free school meals. We also received evidence about the low uptake of school meals generally. I tried in vain at stages 2 and 3 of that bill to convince the Lab-Lib Executive to support a pilot project for free school meals in Scotland. That is why I was delighted that the SNP Government decided to pilot free school meals. I was doubly delighted that the whole of Fife was chosen for the pilot—and what a success it has been. Throughout the trial period, the uptake of school meals rose from 50 to 77 per cent. From speaking to parents in Glenrothes and Levenmouth, I know of their support for the nutritious school lunches that their children are now provided with. I was lucky enough to be invited for lunch at Aberhill primary school in Methil—school dinners have certainly improved a lot since my school days. The order allows local authorities to provide free school meals. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Government are clear that funding is in place for that as part of the local government settlement. I expect Fife Council to implement free school meals for all children in primary 1 to 3. We need to tackle poverty, obesity and the stigma that is attached to free school meals. Why has the pilot been such a success in Fife? Parents whose children were previously entitled to free school meals did not take them up because of the stigma that was attached to doing so, but they took up free school meals when they were free for all children. Many so-called middle-class parents are struggling to make ends meet. They cannot afford to pay for school meals but are not entitled to free school provision. It is the children in those families whom we need to look after. Most children's organisations and practically every organisation that is concerned about nutrition and health hope that the order will be agreed to today. I urge members of all parties to agree to the motion. If they do, it will be one of the most important things that the Parliament has ever done for the children of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made towards the proposed reopening of the Leven to Thornton rail link. (S3O-5022)

The minister will know that the final report on the Leven to Thornton railway will go to the board of SESTRANS—the south-east Scotland transport partnership—next week. Will he seek to convince SESTRANS, which is the regional transport authority, of the importance of the reopening of the line to the people and businesses of Leven?

To ask the Scottish Government what plans there are to upgrade the Glenwood health centre in Glenrothes. (S3O-4939)

Is the minister aware that the Glenwood health centre serves thousands of people in the west of Glenrothes and that the building's condition was deemed to be inadequate and substandard as far back as 2000? Of course, the previous, Labour Government did nothing about it, despite the concerns that were raised at the time by patients, doctors and other professionals. The minister will be aware of my concern that the people of west Glenrothes should get a health centre that is fit for purpose. Will she set out a timetable for the replacement of the Glenwood health centre?

No.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to ensure that Scotland receives a full share of spending by the energy supply companies on improving domestic energy efficiency. (S3F-1018)

Does the First Minister agree that the UK Government's response to the energy crisis is not sufficient and that financial support for the 44,000 households in Fife that have been plunged into fuel poverty is a necessity? Does he  agree that the concerns that were expressed to him last weekend by the people of Glenrothes, Leslie and Cardenden should also be heard at first hand by the Prime Minister? Will the First Minister encourage Gordon Brown to come to Glenrothes and explain why he is denying people the vital financial assistance that they will need this winter?

To ask the Scottish Government what impact the rise in energy costs will have on fuel bills in Fife. (S3O-4245)

The minister is also aware that 31,000 households in Fife are already fuel poor, and that a further 13,000 households will become fuel poor as a result of the recent 42 per cent hike in energy prices. Does the minister agree that the response of the United Kingdom Government to my constituents, who will have to choose between heating and eating this winter, is woefully inadequate?

On Jamie McGrigor's comments, will Dave Thompson confirm what is in paragraph 62 of the report, which is that Jamie McGrigor agreed in committee with the commissioner and the majority of the committee that Wendy Alexander was in breach of the 2006 act, and that where he did disagree was on the sanctions? There is no doubt, according to paragraph 62, that he agreed that Wendy Alexander was in breach.

Many thanks, Presiding Officer—I am now able to resume. I, too, pay tribute to John MacDougall, whom I knew for a very long time. He was a good man, who is missed by a great many people in the Glenrothes constituency. I would respond to Ted Brocklebank by saying that the Leven to Thornton rail link has of course been one of my highest priorities for a long time. I point out to both Claire Baker and Ted Brocklebank that the Leven to Thornton link, which is the number 1 transport priority of Fife Council, has the support of all the other parties that are represented on the council: the Liberal Democrats, the Conservatives and the Labour Party. Fife Council's number 1 transport priority is not the A92, the Preston roundabout or the Redhouse roundabout; it is indeed the Leven to Thornton railway line. That is the decision of the council. When I came to Glenrothes in 1975, it was clear that we needed the section of the A92 there to be dualled. As Ted Brocklebank has pointed out, the Conservative Government promised in 1995 that the A92 would be dualled from the Preston roundabout to Balfarg. Claire Baker is also right: it was clear from the press coverage at the time that, although the Conservative party was promising the dualling of the road, the minister of state, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, was making it clear that there was no money available at the time and that the dualling would not take place until such time as it became available. To jump forward a couple of years, Henry McLeish was elected in 1997 and became the Scottish roads minister. He was promising action at the notorious A92 junction in April 1998. In 1999, Sarah Boyack, under the strategic roads review, dumped the project completely, and mine was the only voice in opposition to Ms Boyack. I said in the chamber at the time: "The minister has ditched the long-promised improvements to the Preston roundabout in Glenrothes on the A92 to Balfarg. She claims that there are more  appropriate alternative measures. Has she spoken to Tullis Russell and Company Ltd, the town's largest employer, whose factory gates open out on to the A92? Has she spoken to ... Henry McLeish, or to anyone in Glenrothes? Will she outline the appropriate alternatives and the time scale for their implementation?"— [ Official Report , 4 November 1999; Vol 3, c 364.]  When it was under Labour Party control—interestingly, Christine May was the administration's leader at the time—Fife Council refused to back me in my call for dualling that stretch of road, insisting that minor improvements would suffice. I am indeed grateful to my dear friend Michael Woods, who was the councillor for Pitteuchar from 1992 to 2007, for his commitment to keeping the scheme alive when the Labour Party in Glenrothes did not want to know. Over the past year, a campaign for dualling was started again by the Glenrothes area futures group. I have been happy to give it my support. I have made it clear to the group, however, that I believe that a lot of work and campaigning needs to be done to get the project back up the agenda. New approaches, appraisals and costings are needed. In 1995, the cost was £21 million, but it will have risen since then. As Ted Brocklebank mentioned, a great deal of feeling was expressed at a public meeting that dualling was the preferred option and should go ahead. Other voices said that improvements could be made to the Balfarg junction in the meantime. Anybody using the A92 at the Balfarg junction knows that it is one of the most unsafe parts of the road. People take their lives in their hands every time they use it. I urge the minister to reconsider the case for dualling the A92, and to consider reviewing the Balfarg junction and the stretch of the A92 as it enters Glenrothes at the Cadham junction. Despite the improvements that have been made over the years, exiting from those junctions does not fill anyone with confidence. I wonder whether the minister, in reconsidering those issues, could report back to the members who are most interested in them—and of course to the Glenrothes area futures group—about what he plans to do for the A92 in the immediate and longer term.

I am grateful to Ted Brocklebank for securing the debate and I welcome the members of the  Glenrothes area futures group who are in the public gallery. It was a great pity that, yesterday, because of a mix-up in Claire Baker's office, she did not turn up to a meeting with the minister that she had asked for. That is a shame, as it was a most productive meeting.

I think that it is quite clear that Claire Baker was not at the meeting yesterday. I recorded the fact that it was a great pity that there was such a mix-up. I have always supported the dualling of the road from Preston roundabout to Balfarg. I have lived in Glenrothes since 1975 and am well aware of all the campaigns that have taken place. I say to Ted Brocklebank—[ Interruption. ]

I would be extremely grateful.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Over the past few days, Margaret Curran has been all over the television, demanding a statement from the cabinet secretary on the loss of the data. I notice that Margaret Curran is not here today to listen to the debate.

I wonder whether you agree with me that that is disrespectful to the chamber.

It is certainly true that the Government has provided the money and COSLA has created the framework within which all local authorities should act. Does the minister agree that the Labour councillors in Glasgow City Council are intent on following the lead of the previous Labour Administration, which ruled out free school meals for children in receipt of working families tax credits?

Is the minister aware that, although the Redhouse roundabout upgrade is important, the number 1 transport priority in Fife is the reopening of the Leven to Thornton railway, and that Fife Council has already allocated £2 million to help it to go ahead? I ask the minister to bear in mind Fife's transport priorities when he or his officials meet SEStran and Fife Council officials.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The question that you should put is whether the financial resolution should be withdrawn. That was what the minister moved.

Question.

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to strengthening and improving the ministerial code. Does he recall that, in 1999, Donald Dewar—the then First Minister—asserted that the Parliament had no right to investigate lobbygate and the conduct of his Labour ministers because he had personally investigated the issue under the ministerial code? Does the First Minister agree that it is hypocritical of Ms Alexander and Ms Baillie to demand improvements now when, in power, they blocked any independent involvement whatever in the ministerial code and even tried to block the Parliament from fulfilling its responsibilities?

Is the First Minister aware that the Maritime and Coastguard Agency has published draft regulations that, if brought into force, will force all ship-to-ship transfers to take place within harbour authority areas? Does he agree that those regulations would leave the Firth of Forth wide open to many further applications to transfer oil there? Will he make representations to the MCA on the need to exclude the Firth of Forth from those regulations? Does what has happened not illustrate again the need for the Parliament to have powers to regulate ship-to-ship oil transfers in Scottish waters?

Will the minister confirm that the first act of the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive in 1999 was to cancel the dualling of the A92 from Glenrothes? Does he  agree that the refusal of the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive and Labour Fife Council to invest in the transport infrastructure in Fife has left unrealised many projects that the various communities regard as priorities? Will he meet me to discuss how the Leven to Thornton junction railway can be progressed as a priority?

The member argues that the previous Executive put forward a strategic plan that was supported. However, it did not deliver on housing, which is why we inherited a housing crisis from that Government.

I associate myself with Ted Brocklebank's comments about Suboxone. I know that he has, like me, visited the Drug and Alcohol Project Levenmouth, for which I have the greatest respect. It is clear that it believes that Suboxone is not being prescribed in the right quantities and to the people who need it. I ask the minister to reconsider the matter, and I invite her to join me in visiting the project to hear at first hand from an organisation that helps drug addicts and their families in the area.

The Leven to Thornton rail link will be a branch line that starts at Leven, comes in through the Thornton junction and goes on to Kirkcaldy. There is no need for additional capacity; there is plenty capacity and it will do the job.

I am pleased to be able to open this debate on the reopening of the Leven to Thornton rail link, a matter that I have pushed for more than 10 years. I know that Ted Brocklebank and Iain Smith also support the reopening of the line to passengers.

I thank Marilyn Livingstone for her intervention and support. She knows full well that I both support the reopening of the Leven to Thornton rail link and think that work to improve the Redhouse link is essential. I have no hesitation in supporting that project. However, the two issues need not be taken together. The proposal to reopen the Leven to Thornton junction branch line to passengers would allow a link to the Fife circle at Kirkcaldy. I welcome people from the Levenmouth area who have joined us in the public gallery to hear tonight's debate. In all my years as an MSP, I have never encountered such a spontaneous response to an issue. I hope that the minister will take note.  For too long, we in Levenmouth have campaigned against things—against pit closures, against job losses and against ship-to-ship oil transfers. By contrast, the campaign to reopen the Leven to Thornton link is a campaign for something. I am indebted to Jim Corstorphine, who has kindly given me a copy of his book "East of Thornton Junction", which has helped to fill in some of the gaps in my knowledge of the line's history. The line from Leven to Thornton junction was part of the Fife coast line, which stretched around the Fife coast from Thornton to Leuchars. The Thornton to Leven railway was opened in 1854 and was closed to passengers as part of the Beeching cuts, after a long campaign that included a public inquiry at Scoonie hall in Leven. That campaign was in vain, and on 4 October 1969 the line was finally closed. However, although the rest of the Fife coast line was ripped up and built over, the Leven to Thornton track remained. Until a few years ago, it was used regularly for freight, mostly from the now defunct Methil power station. Importantly, the line has never been decommissioned by Network Rail. Levenmouth is the largest urban conurbation in Scotland without access to a railway station. It also has poor connections to the road network. The main road through Fife bypasses the area completely, and access to Kirkcaldy is by way of the A915—Standingstane Road—which is notoriously ill-equipped to cope. Levenmouth was devastated by pit closures, the rundown of Methil docks and the loss of Kvaerner, all of which contributed to its economic depression. The tragedy is that, until fairly recently, no steps were taken to address that economic disadvantage. The results of that long neglect are clear: 41 per cent of the area's population is economically inactive, compared with a Fife average of 34 per cent and a Scottish average of 35 per cent. The opening of the Leven to Thornton line to passengers would enable people to get to jobs elsewhere in Fife, in Edinburgh and in Dundee, and would attract new businesses into the area. It would also enable people in the east neuk of Fife, in Iain Smith's constituency, to access a train from Leven. Reopening the line is essential for the regeneration of the Levenmouth area. We also need the line to be upgraded for freight transport. We have long argued that we need to get freight off the roads and on to rail. Diageo, which has a plant at Cameron Bridge, is negotiating with Network Rail on a development that will allow Diageo's products to travel by rail again. However, the negotiations have been  protracted. I urge Network Rail to find an acceptable solution. In addition to Diageo, we have Fife energy park in Methil, which is one of the Government's top strategic priorities for Scotland. It is essential that, as well as upskilling the workforce in Levenmouth, we attract people with the necessary skills to Methil. To do that, we need transport links. It is self-evident that I also expect the line to be used for freight to and from the energy park. There have been many campaigns to reopen the line. In 1999, Scott Wilson carried out a feasibility study for Fife Council, which concluded: "It would be feasible to introduce a passenger train service over this existing single track branch line with a new station constructed at Leven." The cost at the time would have been between £1.7 million and £3.3 million. The tragedy is that the then Labour-controlled Fife Council refused to support the reopening, and since then Levenmouth has declined even further economically. What has changed? The Scottish National Party and Liberal-controlled Fife Council has made reopening the line one of its top priorities. The south east of Scotland transport partnership is carrying out a feasibility study. Fife energy park is creating new jobs and Diageo is expanding its operation. The threat remains that the Forth road bridge could be closed to freight before the new bridge is built. In any case, freight needs to find another way in and out of Fife. Most important, the community wants the project to go ahead. I understand that to make the line fit for passengers it needs to be rerailed, signalling needs to be installed and drainage and telecom issues need to be addressed—that is all. There is no need for the compulsory purchase of land and no need for legislation, unlike with many other rail projects in Scotland since 1999. However, we need the will for the project to happen. I do not expect a decision from the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change today—SEStran is still carrying out its survey—but I would like him to confirm that this financially modest scheme, which would help the whole of Levenmouth and the east neuk, will be given a fair wind by his department.

Will the member also pay tribute to Professor Sir John Crofton's work on TB and other diseases?

The member talks about targets. What housing targets did the Labour-Liberal Executive set in 1999? Why did it spectacularly fail to meet any of those targets, never mind actually build houses?

It is accepted wisdom that, when initiating a debate, members should ensure that, whatever the subject chosen, they do not needlessly leave themselves open to criticism. If the Labour Party had asked me for advice, I would have strongly advised Johann Lamont not to debate housing today, because—how can I put it—it is not Labour's strongest hand of cards. The first line of Labour's motion reads: "the Parliament regrets the SNP government's lack of a coherent housing strategy". I respectfully suggest to Labour members that they would not recognise a coherent housing strategy if it stared them in the face. The one thing that the Labour Party never had during 10 years in government was a housing policy, never mind a coherent one. I am not the only person who thinks so. As I was reading The Herald newspaper in August last year, I choked on my tea when I read: "Wendy Alexander has been taken aback at the strength of feeling about affordable housing, in her tour of Scotland listening to Labour Party activists. ... the leader-elect said the housing issue had surprised her most in feedback from the party, and that Scotland had fallen behind England in finding solutions to the housing crisis." Taken aback? Wendy Alexander should have been taken apart by Labour activists. She was the minister responsible for transferring Glasgow's housing stock to the Glasgow Housing Association, making promises to tenants that she knew she would not keep. To be fair to Wendy Alexander, she was talking about the crisis in the previous five years in which the number of home starts rose by 7 per cent, whereas it rose by 18 per cent in England. Five years before last August, Wendy Alexander was not a housing minister, but Johann Lamont and Margaret Curran were. They are the members who have to take part in today's debate for the Labour Party in the knowledge that Wendy Alexander has criticised them for their lack of any kind of policy. Between 1997 and 2007, the Labour-led Administration—the Liberals are not off the hook on this one, either—built an average of 4,300  homes a year in the social rented sector, despite a 1999 manifesto pledge to build 6,000 houses a year. The Labour-Liberal Executive built fewer houses in each year between 1997 and 2007 than the Tories did in 1995. That is why the current Government inherited a housing crisis, albeit one that it will tackle.

I am sorry, I did not understand—

I do not remember the programme, but the first-time buyers grant in isolation has never been the solution to Scotland's housing problem. We need a coherent housing strategy. The minister lays down the foundations for just such a policy in "Firm Foundations". Shelter Scotland, which has been critical of the Government, not least about the amount of money given to housing, recognises and is encouraged by the priority that the Scottish Government has given to housing. The housing supply task force, coupled with an explicit commitment to increase general housing supply by 2015, is the clearest recognition for decades that housing production has lagged behind the need to replace housing stock. The SNP Government will take no lectures from the party that now finds itself in opposition; that party was fortunate enough to be in government for 10 years, during which it did not tackle the Scottish housing crisis but added to it. The Labour Party should judge the SNP Government after 10 years, not 10 months—we will transform Scottish housing in the way that it should have been transformed decades ago.

By and large, this has been a good debate with many  measured speeches, which reflects the commitment throughout Parliament to tackling fuel poverty. I am grateful to Johann Lamont for mentioning our good friend Margaret Ewing, who did such fantastic work on the issue. I know that Alex Neil, too, would have liked to contribute, but the debate has been unfortunately too short. I will make an exception for Frank McAveety, who is quite an exceptional person. Some of us have long memories, so we remember the Labour-Liberal Democrat record in Government. We acknowledge that there are three contributory factors to fuel poverty: household income, the energy efficiency of houses and fuel prices. I recall a debate in November 2003 in which Opposition members were forced to debate a motion that congratulated the Executive on the central heating programme's success in reducing fuel poverty. In that debate, I said: "Although I accept that the Executive has made progress, I think that it is disingenuous to suggest that the reduction in the number of fuel-poor families is ... down to Executive and Government action."— [ Official Report , 20 November 2003; c3522.]  Most independent commentators at the time acknowledged that the reason why there was a drop in fuel poverty up to 2002 was that price rises had been limited—there had been very few. I warned then that what comes down will go up and that when fuel prices started to rise, we would see a consequent increase in fuel poverty, which has proved to be the case. In 2002, 580,000 people in Scotland were in fuel poverty, and by 2005-06, the figure had risen to 959,000. Most of that increase was down to rises in fuel costs. I take issue with what Frank McAveety said and contrast the record of this Government on the central heating programme with the record of his Executive. In Glasgow in October, November and December 2007—the three worst months of the year—under this SNP Government, there were 648 installations. In the same period in 2006, when Labour was in Government, there were only 34 installations in the Glasgow postcode area.

Yes, in a moment. In my area of Fife, in October, November and December 2007, there were 183 installations in the KY postcode area. I will let members guess how many installations there were in the same period in 2006. Precisely none. This Government will not take lectures from those who failed abysmally to ensure that the central heating programme was available when it was needed. The record speaks for itself.

The previous Executive was responsible for managing the transfer of responsibility, in which it failed abysmally. I welcome the fact that the minister has said that there is going to be a review of the programme. When the programme was introduced by the previous Executive, I said that I wanted it to be extended to families with young children. The one life-enhancing experience for young children is to grow up in a dry, warm home. I hope that the minister will consider including in the programme further categories of people who could benefit from it.

I speak from my long association with the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee, of which I was the convener. That was the longest-running committee of the Parliament, as it met for something like three years. As I recall, the committee had piles of evidence that were 4ft high, and 5 o'clock starts on winter mornings to get to Galashiels to hear evidence were not the ideal start to the working week. Having been the committee's convener, I remember the stances of its former members and their reactions to the proposals for the Borders railway. Des McNulty has lodged an amendment to Mr Purvis's motion, asking the Scottish Government to "reinstate earmarked funding for the capital costs of the Borders railway with a view to taking forward the construction of the project without delay, and believes that ministers should be asked to appear before the relevant  parliamentary committees to answer urgent questions over the delivery of the project, its escalating costs and the implications of the proposed funding arrangements for future transport and infrastructure projects." That is the same Des McNulty who, during the preliminary stage debate on the bill, expressed his serious concern about the ability of the promoter and the Liberal Democrat minister to bring forward the project. For example, he highlighted increases in estimated costs, saying: "In August 2002, the estimated cost of the railway was £73 million. By January 2003, it was £100 million; by March 2003, it was £126 million; by September 2003, it was £130 million, where it remained at that until September 2005, when it went up to £151 million. That does not seem to me to be evidence of firm cost appraisal and effective cost management by the promoter."——[ Official Report , 28 September 2005; c 19527.] I do not remember Des McNulty at that time calling ministers before a parliamentary committee to explain cost increases in the management of the project.

I think that the member will find that the committee was not completely satisfied that the costs were robust. A Liberal minister repeatedly assured us that the costs were sound. As with everything else about this project, if there are any overruns, the involvement of Liberal ministers should be mentioned. The Borders railway project has had a long history. First, it was going to be constructed in 2003; then, the timescale for its completion went to 2012. However, as I pointed out in my question to the minister after last week's statement on the project, Liberal Democrat ministers were already setting up the possibility that construction might not start until 2016 by lodging amendments that allowed the timescale to slip. Despite the protestations of the committee, which wanted the timescale to be brought forward, the Liberal Democrats, along with the Labour Party, voted to extend the timescale so that work would not begin until 2016.

The committee was assured by the Liberal Democrat minister that he expected the project to be completed by 2012. If that was really the case, there was no reason to extend the timescale to 2016—unless, of course, there was no way that the project was ever going to be completed in the timescale that Jeremy Purvis has set out. Indeed, that has been borne out. Neither Mr Purvis nor his party has laid a single bit of track or allowed construction to go forward. [ Interruption. ]

I am finishing, Presiding Officer. It is a pity that I was interrupted by Mr Purvis from a sedentary position. I am confident that construction of the Borders railway will begin under this Government, because the SNP—unlike the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party, which spent eight years fighting between themselves about whether the project should go ahead—has a long history of commitment to the project. Indeed, it was the in-fighting between those two parties that blighted the project in the first place.

The member is well aware that the bill that was presented to the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee was for a line only as far as Galashiels. I wonder why his party's transport minister did not argue at the time for a line as far as Hawick.

As convener of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee, I welcome the SNP's commitment to ensuring that the project is built. I remind members that it was Tavish Scott who lodged the amendment at stage 3 that extended the period to  develop the land by up to 10 years—in other words, until 2016. That amendment was supported by the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats. Tavish Scott said: "large-scale construction projects can be subject to delay."— [ Official Report , 14 June 2006; c 26667.]  At that time, he was already anticipating that it could take until 2016 to build the project, so it ill behoves the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party to whinge and complain about any delays in the project. [ Interruption. ]

My question to the minister is about developer contributions. Under the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Act 2006, developers of housing near the line of the Borders railway were to contribute to the cost of the project, but I did not hear the minister mention that. Will he elaborate?

Not having a majority, and therefore not testing it, was precisely the reason that the Liberal Democrats gave for not supporting my bill on proportional representation by single transferable vote when it came to the chamber in 2002.

Will the member give way?

I was pleased to welcome the minister to Methilhill primary school in my constituency for the national launch of the childsmile school programme, to which the minister has just referred. Given the success of that programme and the access that it gives young children to NHS dentists and to early treatment for the prevention of tooth decay, can  the minister indicate how quickly it will be rolled out to the rest of Scotland, so that others can benefit like my constituency?

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to address antisocial behaviour by restricting inappropriate advertising of alcohol in and around retail premises. (S3O-2284)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that advertising such as the booze busters line by R S McColl in many of our communities is unacceptable? Will he issue guidance to licensing boards indicating that such advertising is completely unacceptable and that action needs to be taken?

Does the member not accept that those who participated in the pilot projects stood to lose the most if the proposed scheme went ahead, which is why the pilot projects did not work?

Does the minister agree that we have witnessed one of the most brass-necked displays that the Parliament has ever seen, given that it was the Labour Government that refused point blank to introduce the measures that Pauline McNeill is now imploring an SNP Government to introduce? Can I assure the minister—

Does the minister agree that the initial results from the pilot areas in Fife show that the provision of free school meals introduced by the Scottish National Party Government is going very well? Can I implore the minister to ensure that, once the pilots are finished, we continue to take the measures that I know the Government is committed to on child poverty?

I am grateful for the responses that the minister has given, although I think that Jim Tolson was almost expecting the minister to go out and do the work himself. Members have referred to the quality of the information that FETA releases, which is important. It is vital that all information is managed correctly, so that commuters and those who use the bridges receive it as quickly as possible. Will the minister have a chat with FETA about how it is managing information release at the moment?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I truly regret having to raise this as a point of order. Earlier today, Mrs Helen Eadie accused Mrs Sandra White of not having declared an interest. I raised that as a point of order with the Deputy Presiding Officer, whom I invited to invite Mrs Eadie to withdraw the accusation, which was wholly without foundation. Presiding Officer, I do not have to tell you that to be accused of failing to register an interest is a serious matter. I ask you therefore to reflect on the Official Report of today's meeting and to consider what was said without foundation and the points of order that I made. Will you consider referring the matter to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee to allow a judgment to be made? Members have a qualified privilege in the chamber, but they cannot be allowed to make accusations about another member and, when they are shown that those accusations are false, neither withdraw them nor apologise to the other member and to the chamber. Presiding Officer, will you reflect on the situation, take the matter further and have it dealt with in the manner in which it should be dealt?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. About 10 minutes ago, my colleague Sandra White mentioned Scottish and Southern Energy. At that point, Mrs Helen Eadie raised a point of order in which she alleged that Mrs White had not declared that Scottish and Southern Energy had given assistance, by way of an employee, to the Scottish National Party, which the SNP had declared to the Electoral Commission. I have since had the opportunity to check that. I assure members that the allegation is wholly untrue—there is no such entry on the Electoral Commission's register. Further, the SNP has never received an employee in kind from Scottish and Southern Energy. This is a serious matter. The allegation suggests that Mrs White was not being honest in her remarks. Presiding Officer, I ask you to invite Mrs Eadie to withdraw the allegation and to apologise to Mrs White and the rest of the Parliament.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer, I fully appreciate that it is entirely a matter for members whether they make a declaration of interests. Mrs White made no such declaration because she had nothing to declare. My point of order was that Mrs Eadie made a false allegation in the chamber. Presiding Officer, I am asking you, on behalf of the Parliament, to invite Mrs Eadie to withdraw that allegation, which is wholly without substance.

Will the member acknowledge that it was the previous Labour administration in Fife that put the home care charges in the previous budget? That is why they have risen.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her extremely full response to Richard Simpson. Is she aware that at a recent meeting, Fife NHS Board made it clear to all the MSPs who bothered to turn up that there have been more discharges this year than in any previous year? She is well aware that the Labour Party left Fife Council with no reserves whatever and an underfunded social work budget, and that any present problems are directly related to the previous administration. Will the cabinet secretary welcome the positive initiatives of Fife Council and the health board, and will she join me in condemning the scaremongering of some Labour MSPs who should know better?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Ms Alexander in her questioning of the First Minister raised issues regarding sportscotland, youth courts, police in Grampian, police numbers and police pensions—I might have missed one or two others. In total, Ms Alexander took 13 minutes for the question and answer session. If Ms Alexander cannot focus her questions, she should not complain about the kind of answers that she gets from the First Minister. The effect of that was that there were seven minutes of normal time left for questions from back-bench members.

Although I appreciate the overrun that you have allowed today, Presiding Officer, will you reflect on First Minister's questions and on whether an adequate balance between questions by front-bench members and questions by back-bench members was achieved?

Does the member accept that the electoral system of PR and STV was not at  fault? The fault lay with the instruction and information campaign, which was supposed to have started much earlier; it simply did not take place, and when it did it was inadequate.

Does Duncan McNeil agree that while it is important that these issues are not rushed, any changes that are made for the 2011 elections should be in place in good time so that they can be understood by the population?

Presiding Officer, 3 May 2007 was the best of times and the worst of times. My pleasure at winning the constituency of Central Fife—the fulfilment of a promise that my friend David Alexander and I made to each other on the dismal night of the 1987 election count—was tempered by the grotesque chaos of the election process. That process denied thousands of people postal votes. It infuriated those who were similarly denied their right to participate in the election by virtue of ballot papers that had been changed since the previous election and not properly explained. Those ballot papers added to the confusion surrounding a new voting system for local elections and the combining of Scottish Parliament and local government elections on the same day. It is easy to be wise after an event, but what does one say to the two separate bodies responsible for the two elections who were warned in advance that holding two elections on the same day and changing the voting system would inevitably lead to chaos and that it would all end in tears?  Andy Kerr has recognised his role, particularly in the decision to hold two elections at the same time. Ron Gould said in his report: "What is characteristic of 2007 was a notable level of party self-interest evident in Ministerial decision making". He also said: "It became clear that both the Scotland Office and the Scottish Executive were frequently focused on partisan political interests in carrying out their responsibilities, overlooking voter interests and operational realities within the electoral administration timetable."

I ask Mr Kerr to let me finish this point. I have no problem with Iain Smith having a go at the Labour Party and the Scotland Office. However, Iain Smith is denying that, as part of the Scottish Executive, it was the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats who were responsible for bludgeoning through this Parliament the coupling of the elections in the first place and for the lateness of the information given to the local government administrators.

That is certainly not what he said in the report, although he might have said that later after a bit of pressure. It is self-evident that responsibility and accountability for the Scottish Parliament elections should rest with the Scottish Parliament. We also need to recognise that the chaos of May 2007 was not a one-off event. There were problems in 1999, regardless of what Cathie Craigie said. I recall that, when the Scottish Office put out material about the Scottish Parliament elections, it said that voters should use their two votes and never mentioned the fact that there was a local government election on the same day. To try to deny that there were problems in 1999 and 2003 is to deny the truth, which is that the electoral system in Scotland and the UK is broken and needs to be fixed. The present system, in which returning officers are autonomous in their own areas, is simply unsustainable. There must be a chief returning officer, and election administrators' practice and training must be consistent throughout Scotland. We, the body politic in Scotland, must get it right. I am relaxed about a fuller review and about the committees of this Parliament and the UK Parliament considering the matter, but any review must be concluded early enough for arrangements to be approved in plenty time before the 2011  elections. That is the key point. The culture among, and training for, election administrators must be changed. We are all partners in the election process but, in future, the voters and their interests—not those of the political parties or the political institutions—must be paramount. Two principles must underpin any review: first, the responsibility for the Scottish Parliament elections must be passed to the Scottish Parliament; secondly, the Scottish Parliament and local government elections must be decoupled. Way back in 2000 and 2001, both McIntosh and Kerley recommended that the local government elections should be decoupled from the Scottish Parliament elections. For Andy Kerr's benefit, I point out that, in 2001, the Scottish National Party and the Conservatives voted against the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill at stages 1 and 3. In 2004, the Parliament approved PRSTV for local government elections, but the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats rejected a reasoned amendment in my name to decouple the two sets of elections. I pay tribute to the role that David Mundell played in that attempt. He, Tommy Sheridan and I tried to amend the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill—which introduced PRSTV—to decouple the elections, but that measure was ruled to be outwith the bill's scope. So 3 May 2007 was an appalling night for democracy for the people of Scotland. We must take steps to get it right before the 2011 elections. Otherwise, the electorate will not forgive us.

I assure the member that the SNP opposed the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Act 2002, which brought both elections together. Furthermore, when Parliament passed the legislation to introduce proportional representation for local government elections, I lodged a reasoned amendment to decouple the elections. On both occasions, we were opposed by the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats.

The announcement is great news for the people and businesses of Fife and the whole of the north-east of Scotland. I support absolutely the decision that the Cabinet has reached. However, I remain concerned about the gap between 2013, when the existing bridge is expected to close to HGVs, and the time when the new bridge will be operational. That gap is due in no small part to the delays of the previous Executive and, in particular, the previous First Minister, who told me in November 2005 that it was a "particularly daft" idea to start planning.

If it is not possible to close that gap, what additional measures is the cabinet secretary considering for getting freight around Fife and across the Forth? I ask him to look at the reopening of the Leven to Thornton railway line for freight. Will he consider giving a commitment to the ferries from Kirkcaldy, Burntisland and Methil that will be needed in future to get commuters from our side of the Forth to Edinburgh?

The minister supports Mark Lazarowicz's bill in principle, but does he agree that a far quicker route would be for the Westminster Government to bring forward the draft regulations on which it said it does not intend to consult before 2008? If the regulations were consulted on quickly, the Westminster Government could put the necessary legislation in place and we would not have to rely on a private member's bill.

Will the member give way?

We are an hour and 15 minutes into the debate and we have already heard George Foulkes and Mike Rumbles arguing about what the motion means. I am not speaking in this debate for the Scottish Parliamentary corporate body—I am speaking as a member of it. If the Opposition's motion is agreed to, that body will be instructed "to allocate appropriate resources and funding for this review." I am astonished that a motion that seeks to set up a commission to recommend changes that would "improve the financial accountability of the Scottish Parliament" also contains an instruction for the SPCB to find the resources and funding for that commission without specifying how much money is required, how long the commission would last or what its membership should be.

I will not give way. Let me make progress. How can the Opposition parties expect to be taken seriously when they support a financially irresponsible motion? In their winding-up speeches, Opposition members must tell us how much the proposed commission would cost and where that money would come from. We are not surprised at the financial delinquency of the Opposition parties, which, after all, voted to spend £500 million on the Edinburgh tram project. That money could have been spent on the police, universities or housing. Doing so would have been of more benefit to the people of Scotland than the vanity projects of Tavish Scott and Sarah Boyack. The Labour Party and the Liberals have always been profligate with other people's money. However, I am surprised that the Conservatives, who boast that all their manifesto commitments were fully costed, are now prepared to cast that aside for a motion that I would not dignify with the suggestion that it was drawn up on the back of a fag packet. The SPCB's budget for this year is already in place. Staff must be paid and the outreach and education projects are well advanced. The  Opposition should tell us what costs are involved in its proposals and what cuts it wants to be made to pay for the commission.

Let me continue. I will take an intervention if I have enough time at the end of my speech. I am sorry. [ Interruption. ]

The Opposition is going to hear what I have to say about financial accountability. The SPCB's budget is top-sliced from the consolidated fund. In simple language, that means that the Parliament gets its money before the Government gets its own money. Do the Opposition parties want the additional amount—the unspecified costs—that will be needed for the proposed commission to come off the Government's budget?

Now we are getting there. What cuts do the Opposition parties want to be made to pay for the proposed commission? [ Interruption. ]

The Government's national conversation has already been fully costed, but the Opposition is asking for funding from the SPCB. The SPCB's budget for 2008-09 has already been considered by the Finance Committee. Ms Alexander and her friends should not solicit money from the Parliament for their projects—whether for trams or commissions—without saying where that money will come from. Will funding come from the money for the Parliament's work with schools, its information technology function or its building maintenance? Perhaps, in this family-friendly Parliament, money for the crèche might be cut. However, I have a better idea.

Just wait for it. [ Interruption. ]

Members are well aware that there is an on-going allowances review. I hope that it will conclude that members need more money for our staff and offices and that it will report in time for changes to be made in April. Any increase in allowances will have to be met from the SPCB's budget. Members will be aware that a submission has been made to that review on behalf of Ms Alexander. It seems that she cannot  do the job of leader of the Opposition without having a massive increase in her leader's allowance, which, it has been said, should rise from around £22,000 a year to up to £63,000 in order to match David Cameron's allowance at Westminster. That is despite the fact that SNP Opposition leaders had to make do with minimum staff and resources for eight years. I have a challenge for Ms Alexander. If the allowances review concludes that the office of the Labour Opposition leader—whoever that may be at the time—should have more Parliament money, is she prepared to say today that she will forgo that amount, to allow the constitutional commission to be funded by the SPCB? By the time that we vote tonight, Ms Alexander needs to have told the Parliament and the people of Scotland what she considers more important. Is it money for the Labour leader's office or, in the words of her motion, does she recognise "mainstream public opinion" and support "the establishment of an independently chaired commission to review devolution in Scotland"?

Politics is about priorities. What will Ms Alexander choose—the commission or more money for the Labour leader's office?

I am curious about your embracing of devolution. Only two years ago, you sent an e-mail to Jim Sillars saying that there had not been an original idea from the Labour Party in Scotland for 50 years.

I am sure that, as a fellow Fifer, the member will also recognise the status of Dunfermline as a city and royal burgh.

To ask the Scottish Executive what encouragement the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture is giving to schools, such as Pitteuchar East primary in Glenrothes, to develop relationships with schools in Malawi and other parts of the world. (S3O-1454)

I assure the minister that "Pit-tew-ker" is the posh way of saying Pitteuchar. In Glenrothes, we say "Per-chucker". Pitteuchar East primary school has had a link with Namadzi primary school in Malawi for three years. There are letter-writing and song-writing projects, among others. There are 15 schools in Fife that have established such links with Malawi. What work has been done by the Scottish  Government to monitor the links between schools and other organisations in Scotland and Malawi? Does the minister intend to publish a list of those links, for the benefit of us all?

You voted to keep them.

You voted to keep them.

You did.

rose—

On 4 September 1964, the tolled Forth road bridge was opened. Exactly 43 years later, on 3 September 2007, the first ever Scottish National Party Government introduced the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill to the Parliament. To the people of Fife and Tayside, the bill is another promise made and kept by the SNP Government. The road to get here has been long and tortuous. The journey has involved broken promise after broken promise by Labour to the people of Fife. Having carefully examined the stage 1 report  of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, I must say—with all respect to the committee members—that the report is a bit po-faced. The report criticises the lack of public consultation, despite the fact that there is no requirement for public consultation. I say as kindly as I can to the committee that the bridge tolls have been subject to public consultation: it was called an election. Labour paid a heavy price for its broken promises to the people of Fife. Those broken promises go back a long way. In 1964, the Labour Government said that the tolls would be removed when the capital costs of the Forth road bridge were paid off. In 1985, Gordon Brown informed the Forth Road Bridge Joint Board inquiry into proposed increases in bridge tolls: "The unjust treatment of bridge users is exemplified by the fact that they effectively pay several times over for the facilities they use—as taxpayers, rate payers, road-tax payers and as toll payers." Gordon Brown even went as far as to promise, by press release, a bill at Westminster to abolish the tolls. However, that promise went only as far as lodging a proposal in the House of Commons library; it was never translated into a bill that was considered. When Gordon Brown had time to do something about the matter in Government in 1997, he still did nothing. In March 2006, when an SNP motion to scrap the tolls on the Tay was defeated by Labour and Liberal Democrats, I said: "One thing is sure: the SNP will vote to scrap the tolls on the Tay bridge. If we are defeated, the campaign will continue. An SNP Government will scrap the tolls on the Tay and Forth bridges next year."— [ Official Report , 30 March 2006; c 24570.]  And that is just what we are about to do. I found it mildly amusing that, in a recent motion, Helen Eadie castigated the SNP for not setting a date for the abolition of the tolls—that from a member who voted to keep the tolls on the Tay when her party was in Government. Of course, the bill is subject to the Parliament's timetable, not the Government's. However, provided that the Liberals and Labour support the bill, it is reasonable to assume that the tolls will be removed from the Forth and Tay bridges by January next year. I offer particular thanks to The Courier newspaper, which came in behind the campaign and was truly a voice for the people of Fife, Tayside and Perthshire on the issue. I also thank my friends Shona Robison and Bruce Crawford, who would have dearly loved to speak in the debate but cannot do so. I turn again to the committee's stage 1 report. Paragraph 182 states:  "However the fact remains that in Scotland it is only those who live in, visit or work in Fife who are subjected to the requirement to pay bridge tolls." However, in paragraph 183 the report states that the committee "is of the view that equity is a subjective as opposed to a scientific argument and, as such, should not generally be considered as a transport policy objective." Not surprisingly, I disagree profoundly with that statement. I know that I speak for the people of Fife when I say that I do not care what issues are used to support the abolition of the tolls or what arguments are used to retain them. There is, and has been since 1964, only one issue: fairness and equity. It is not a perception of unfairness for Fife to have two tolls when no other part of Scotland has any—it is unfairness.

No. I do not want to finish without referring to the toll plaza—the vanity project that was agreed by Tavish Scott and FETA and cost £5 million to build. It will now cost us millions more to dismantle the plaza and remodel the road network. I say to Alison McInnes that it is a pity that when the Liberal Democrat Tavish Scott was the Minister for Transport he did not put in the bus lanes that were necessary. When he ordered a review of the review in March 2006, FETA had already made plans for a new toll plaza, including electronic collection. I asked the minister to halt that work while the review of the review took place, but he refused. However, I am a generous soul. I assure Labour and Liberal Democrat members that at 5 pm tonight they can vote to redeem themselves. After all, if a repentant sinner can enter the kingdom of heaven, repentant politicians are welcome to enter the toll-free kingdom of Fife.

I am not trying to be difficult, but I do not understand how the member can speak on behalf of the committee when, as the committee's convener, he distanced himself from the report and disagreed with its conclusion.

On a point of order. It is appropriate that the minister has talked about indiscipline and talking out of turn, as we have heard yet again obnoxious comments from Mr Foulkes from a sedentary position. Given your previous strictures on the matter, Presiding Officer, is it now time to deal with Mr Foulkes, whose behaviour is unacceptable?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the Minister for Communities and Sport on the work that they have done over the past six months to produce the most coherent and radical housing strategy in decades. Just as John Wheatley, a Glasgow MP, brought forward a strategy for housing in the first ever Labour Government, it has taken Ms Sturgeon, a Glasgow MSP, and the first ever SNP Government to really tackle Scotland's housing crisis. Will Ms Sturgeon tell us whether the proposal to establish a low-cost initiative for first-time buyers has found favour with mortgage lenders, and how many first-time buyers she hopes the scheme will support?

Does the First Minister agree that a good Scots word to describe the conduct of the election campaign in May is "boorach"? The people who suffered for it were the people of Scotland. I, too, am interested in a number of the recommendations in the report, and I am grateful that the First Minister has indicated that he will accept them. Not the least of those, as he has already mentioned, is the need to have a chief returning officer. It was simply unacceptable not just at this election but at previous elections that the whole process was so fragmented, and that individual returning officers were allowed to make  decisions. How quickly will he have discussions with the UK Government about its role in the matter? Will he seek from that Government a timetable to introduce the recommendations and changes in the Gould report?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Was the phrase "is required to" put in the amendment by the member? Why have you accepted a change? Is that the normal process?

Thank you for that clarification.

I am sure that the minister is aware of the historic Wemyss caves in Dysart in Fife, which have great showings of Pictish art. I am well aware that the Wemyss caves have been under threat of coastal erosion for many years—we have certainly lost more than we should. Will the minister enter into discussions with SCAPE, which is based in St Andrews and is bound to be well aware of the Wemyss caves, and Fife Council to see what we can do to protect what is left of one of the major sites in Scotland? If the site was anywhere else in the world, it would have been protected by now.

I thought that I would contribute to the debate in the spirit of conciliation and consensus for which I am renowned. Then I looked at the petty, mean-spirited motion from the Labour Party. Despite that, I will point out a number of the Labour Party's problems and give its members pointers about how they can address them. The Labour Party cannot come to terms with the fact that it lost the election and is no longer in control of Scotland's councils. It has the arrogance of a party too long in power and lacks the humility to realise that it does not have a God-given right to continue to be in power. Wendy Alexander's apology to the Labour Party for losing the election was par for the course, but her apology should have been to the people of Scotland for 10 years of broken promises. Wendy Alexander said that the SNP had seized the agenda of hope and aspiration. Too right we did, but the agenda of hope and aspiration is not Labour's; it is not even the SNP's—it is the agenda of the people of Scotland. It was part of our manifesto and the campaign that we ran. Where Labour delivered mediocrity, the SNP brought vision. Where Labour looked inwards, the SNP looked outwards. Where Labour dampened down aspiration, the SNP raised horizons. Today's Labour motion is more of the same negativity that was prevalent in the May election campaign. Is it any wonder that Labour lost the election? Let me repeat that—is it any wonder that Labour lost the election? Every manifesto proposal that Labour highlights in its motion was opposed by the party at the election. I take it then that Labour's new-found concern for communities and hard-working families in Scotland means that it will support the SNP Government in delivering over the next four years on all those commitments. I welcome Labour's conversion and look forward to its support over the next three and a half years on each and every one of the issues that it has highlighted today.

I look forward to my friend the minister making an announcement on housing proposals in the very near future. I suggest that Jackie Baillie has the patience to wait, because I will address housing in a moment. Let us look at what the SNP has delivered in my constituency of Central Fife, which since time immemorial has been in Labour Party hands. To be fair, however, the late, great Willie Gallacher—the only communist ever to be elected to Westminster—might have had a bit of the constituency at one time. The SNP has committed to remove tolls from the Forth and Tay bridges. Labour and the Liberal Democrats steadfastly voted against that proposal in this Parliament before the election and supported it after the election; today, we had Iain Gray—the Kenny Dalglish of politics—saying that Labour's stance is mebbes aye, mebbes no.

I am not quite sure I got that, but in 1964 when the Forth road bridge was opened, I was 11 years old. I remember the unfairness of the tolls at that time. My dad, who was in the Labour Party, could not understand it when the Labour Government brought in the tolls. Let us look at what else the SNP has done in Central Fife. We have free school meals for all pupils in primary 1 to primary 3. We introduced regulations to give ministers a role in the decision on ship-to-ship oil transfers, while Gordon Brown and the Labour Party at Westminster refused to act. We supported the Fife energy park at Methil and the world-leading wave technology from Pelamis that will power the Orkney wave project, as announced last week by the First Minister. Already the SNP has funded 20 more teachers in Fife, six of them in primary schools in Levenmouth. No one in the SNP will take lectures when, for the past eight years, we had a Labour Government so desperate for the trappings of power that it forgot why it wanted power in the first place. Of the many broken Labour and Liberal promises over the past 10 years, I will focus on just one. When she was minister with responsibility for housing in 2000, Wendy Alexander told Housing Magazine : "We propose to address the housing situation radically. We will build 18,000 new homes in three years."  In fact, Labour built fewer houses between 1999 and 2005 than the Tories built in 1995. No wonder there is a housing crisis. In four years, the people of Scotland will make their judgment on the success of the SNP Government. In those four years, we will work hard to get cross-party support for our proposals. Labour will also be judged if it stands in the way of the measures in our manifesto that were supported in May by the people of Scotland.

What did the Labour Government call the weapons of mass destruction that were never found in Iraq? [ Interruption. ]

It was an intervention, not a point of order.

Will the member take an intervention?

I start by responding to a couple of points that previous speakers have made. I agree completely with Tom  McCabe that the monolithic housing department that was Glasgow City Council needed to be broken up. Before 1999, I referred to Tom McCabe's colleague Frank McAveety, who was then the leader of Glasgow City Council, as the largest slum landlord in western Europe. Tom McCabe did not address the fact that we have replaced the monolithic housing department that was Glasgow City Council with another monolithic housing department—Glasgow Housing Association. That is the reality. It is a pity that Johann Lamont is not in the chamber, because at one point in her speech I tried to intervene to ask her about part (3) of the Labour amendment, which states that we should explore "possibilities of community right to buy as a means of delivering community ownership." I point out to the missing member that Kenny Gibson and Fiona Hyslop lodged just such an amendment, which Labour members defeated, during consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. It is a bit rich now for the member to call for something that the SNP advocated but Labour rejected. It is important for us to look forward, but it is equally important that we recognise where the problems have come from and who is responsible for them. I understand that Johann Lamont and other Labour members would like us only to look forward and to just accept that they had no part in the matter. Even today, she continues to be in denial about her personal role, as a former housing minister, and about the role of Labour and the Liberal Democrats in this debacle. We must remember that wholesale stock transfer was the flagship policy of the Labour-Liberal Executive. It is right and proper that SNP members and the people of Glasgow should judge Labour and the Liberal Democrats by the failure of that policy.

I ask the member to give me a minute to make some progress. The people of Glasgow voted for second-stage transfer of their homes to community associations, but the GHA inspection report makes it quite clear that GHA was never set up financially or structurally to achieve that aim. There are two possibilities at play: either the previous Executive was so stupid that it did not put in place the mechanisms by which second-stage transfer could proceed, or it knew exactly what it was doing and did not anticipate that second-stage transfer would proceed in the future. The reality of the situation is that, from 2001 onwards, my colleagues and I asked repeatedly about  timescales and timetables. In May 2006, Johann Lamont said that second-stage transfer in Glasgow was not a problem to with there being a financial black hole and that progress was being made. In November 2006, another former housing minister, Malcolm Chisholm, said that ministers wanted "some transfers to move forward in the near future ... Indeed, that will be an absolutely central priority for me over the next few weeks, and I am having on-going meetings with the different players in Glasgow to ensure that that happens."— [ Official Report , 30 November 2006; c 29909.]  No wonder the previous Labour Government refused to accept Kenny Gibson's amendment to the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which would have put a five-year limit on second-stage transfer. If the previous Executive had accepted that amendment, second-stage transfer would have by now taken place in Glasgow. I understand that 39 bids—accounting for nearly a third of the housing stock in Glasgow—to take forward the programme have been made to GHA. The cabinet secretary is committed to second-stage transfer. Along with her SNP colleagues, she has already acknowledged that GHA was never more than a transitional body, so I hope that she will move as quickly as is practicable to ensure that the maximum number of transfers can take place as quickly as possible.

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the enhanced role that Fife Council will be given in regeneration and local economic development. The SNP-led council in Fife will want to build on the very low level of business start-up in the kingdom. In his statement, the cabinet secretary recognised the importance of Fife energy park in Methil in my constituency. Does he agree that it is imperative for the Levenmouth and wider Fife economies that the regional board continues to promote the Fife energy park as a centre for excellence in renewable energy? Will he encourage the relocation to Fife of the Scottish Enterprise staff who are responsible for renewable energy?

Is the minister aware that Post Office Ltd has decided to close the Crown post office in Glenrothes and relocate services to W H Smith in the Kingdom centre? I have been in constant communication with Post Office Ltd and have been told that, although some changes might be made at the edges, it is absolutely determined that its decision will not be changed as a result of the consultation. Does the minister share my concern that a town the size of Glenrothes will be landed with a less efficient postal service and will he join me in putting pressure on Post Office Ltd to think again on this matter? Perhaps he might be able to do so at his next meeting with the organisation.

The minister will know that, over the years, the Labour Fife Council axed teachers' jobs to save money. I raised the issue on many occasions before the May election. Will she therefore accept my thanks for and congratulations on the provision of 20 additional teachers in Fife, five of whom will serve the Levenmouth area of my constituency? If Patricia Ferguson does not want extra teachers in her constituency, I will take as many as she can give us.

Is the minister aware that the average weekly household income in Levenmouth is £100 less than that of the rest of Fife and of Scotland? Does he agree that the Levenmouth area was devastated by the closure of the pits and by the past 10 years of criminal neglect by the Labour Party at every tier of government? Will ministers meet me to discuss the importance of reopening the Leven to Thornton rail line to freight and passengers so that people in Methil and Leven can access jobs elsewhere and so that our large companies such as Diageo and Tullis Russell can transport freight by rail if the Forth road bridge is closed to freight traffic in 2013?

I, too, thank Trish Godman for bringing this matter to members' attention for this debate. In 2002, I met in my office a deputation of people from Brunton Gardens in Markinch. About a year after they bought their homes, they got through their letterboxes a demand from the Greenbelt Group to pay up for maintenance. They were incensed because until that point they had not realised that there was such a maintenance contract in their title deeds. The developer never told them of it when they bought their houses and their lawyers never advised them of it. There continues to be a problem in that direction.  I met Alex Middleton, the managing director of Greenbelt, along with the residents of Brunton Gardens. I can remember to this day his mantra. He told me that his company was an honest, decent company and he used a particular phrase over and over again: his company was a "private sector company with a public sector ethos", and it cared. The evidence shows that Greenbelt has not cared. In fact, one of the residents of Brunton Gardens suggested to me that what was happening to them was nothing less than extortion. I raised the matter with the then Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, during consideration of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill. I asked him whether there was any way in which that bill could be amended to help people in the situation that I have described. Unfortunately, we got no result from that, but what has happened in the past few years shows that Markinch was not an isolated incident and that it is, in fact, happening all over Scotland. Frankly, house owners are being held to ransom by companies that are simply not carrying out the work that they should be doing. I ask the minister to look at all the law in this area, whether it is consumer law, planning law or whatever. I hope that he can come back to the members who are in the chamber to scope a way forward for this Parliament, in conjunction with the UK Parliament or local authorities—I really do not care. We need to scope some way forward to ensure, for example, that legislation will be tightened up if that is necessary. We must ensure that current and future home owners in new developments have their rights protected. We must also ensure that, if they are obliged to pay for maintenance work, it is for work that is done, and not just to support a company—regardless of what kind of ethos it claims it has.

In reaching a decision about whether to have a bridge or a tunnel, will the minister bear in mind that the number 1 priority for business in Fife and Tayside is that the gap must be closed between the possible closure of the bridge to HGVs in 2013 and the opening of a new crossing, which should happen in 2016? Will he make that the number 1 priority so that we can somehow telescope the timescale left to us as a legacy by the previous Government, which refused to take any action on the matter in November 2005?

I welcome my friend Shirley-Anne Somerville, who became an MSP today. I first met her when she was a 15-year-old schoolgirl who helped out in a local government by-election in Kirkcaldy. She is bright and articulate and she will enhance the Parliament. [ Applause. ] I am gratified that we have a Government that understands that governing is not just about using the Parliament as a legislative sausage machine. Whenever a problem arose for the previous Labour and Liberal Executive, regardless of what the problem was, its mantra was that something must be done, and that something was legislation. Whether we needed it or not, we got legislation just to show that the Executive could do something. I am glad that the Government is refusing to go down that road.  In its first 100 days, the Government has shown us what a Government should be. We now have the Parliament that the people of Scotland hoped for when, in 1997, they voted overwhelmingly in favour of setting up the Scottish Parliament. As Donald Dewar said at the opening of the Parliament, "This is about more than our politics and our laws. This is about who we are, how we carry ourselves." In the past 100-odd days, the Government has carried itself well.

We set them up to ensure that we bring in talents from Scotland and abroad and to ensure that the Government looks ahead with the best brains that we have so that we do the right things for the people of Scotland. I listened to Cathy Jamieson. Labour is in denial about losing the election, but it is also in denial about its role in the past eight years. It is in denial about the crisis that it created in housing and about the fact that it forced students into debt in the first place by introducing tuition fees. I welcome the First Minister's assurance that there has been constructive dialogue with Westminster about legislation on air-guns. I look forward to hearing the results of the talks in the near future. I am delighted that the Government, in its first 100 years—[ Laughter. ] I expect 100 years. This is the start of our first 100 years. I am delighted that every school pupil in primary 1 to primary 3 in Fife will get free school meals through our pilot scheme. I argued for that measure when Parliament considered the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill, although I was defeated by Labour and the Liberal Democrats. I welcome the commitment to exempt a person's main home from the enforcement process of land attachment. We will overturn the draconian measure that was bludgeoned through the previous Parliament by Labour—we had nae consensus then. On the abolition of tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges, I was crossing a street last week when a man called my name. When I turned around, he gave me the thumbs-up and shouted, "At last—no more tolls. Well done the SNP!" That measure  means a lot to the people of Fife, who know that this SNP Government will keep its promises.

The First Minister is no doubt aware that the family of Andrew Morton, the young child who so tragically lost his life to the scourge of air weapons, attended yesterday's meeting of the Public Petitions Committee in support of their petition to ban those deadly weapons. Can the First Minister assure Parliament that, in the Government's discussion with Westminster regarding air weapons, he will do all that he can to relay the huge sense of frustration and anger that the Morton family and the people of Scotland feel at the lack of action that there has been to date to tackle the scourge of air weapons and to make it clear that we need legislation in Scotland to address Scotland's problem?

I welcome the plans that the cabinet secretary has announced: ministers will have more powers to help stop ship-to-ship transfers off Methil, in my constituency. The regulations will give powers to call in proposals that have a significant environmental impact and to issue directions about how those assessments should be carried out. At the moment, the power to assess the impact of ship-to-ship oil transfer in the Forth is in the hands of Forth Ports, which stands to make money if it agrees that such transfers should take place. It is worth quoting article 6 of the habitats directive, which requires member states not to consent to plans or projects that could damage special protection areas or special areas of conservation unless there is no alternative solution and a plan or project must be consented to for "imperative reasons of overriding public interest". It is clear that SPAs and SACs could be damaged if Forth Ports gives the go-ahead. It is also clear there are alternative facilities at Sullom Voe and Scapa Flow, which are keen to get the work, and that there are no "imperative reasons of overriding public interest". A private company with a conflict of interests must not be allowed to determine the public interest, never mind override it. Ministers have taken a significant step towards greater control over such developments. It is a victory for all the communities and councils around the Forth. It took the SNP Government just one month after the election to put the measures in place. Mike Rumbles criticised John Scott, and Sarah Boyack said that she has been working hard on the issue since January. I appreciate that, but I say to her as kindly as I can that one is tempted to ask what Rhona Brankin was doing during her time as Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, when she had meetings with me and other members. The regulations will give the Scottish ministers greater powers over Forth Ports' assessment of the plans but, as the minister said, they will not put the final decisions into ministers' hands. I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment on finding a way through the legislative spaghetti that he inherited, but only the Westminster Government can transfer  the powers from Forth Ports to the Scottish ministers so that they can decide on the matter. I regret the fact that, although Richard Lochhead has been in touch with the Westminster Government, the former Secretary of State for Transport was a bit tardy with his response. Now that Gordon Brown is Prime Minister, he has a duty to act immediately to ensure that the views of his constituents in Kirkcaldy, as well as my constituents in Methil and Buckhaven, are heeded. I suggest that he orders his UK ministers today to get the situation sorted out once and for all.

I point out to Cathy Peattie that the Presiding Officer, regardless of who it has been, has never voted against the status quo. He has always voted for the status quo, which is why the Government was defeated when it was. I welcome the minister's commitment to a new Forth crossing. He is well aware that I am not concerned about whether it is a bridge or a tunnel, but that whatever is chosen is started and completed as quickly as possible. I continue to be concerned that there will be a gap between 2013, when the bridge is likely to be closed to heavy goods vehicle traffic, and 2016, when the new crossing is expected to open. I recognise that the delay can be laid exclusively at the door of the previous Executive. In November 2005, I asked: "Does the First Minister recognise or even acknowledge the strategic importance of the Forth road bridge for the whole of Scotland? "Does he understand that, at the very least, the bridge is facing frequent closure for repair, that heavy goods vehicles are likely to banned from it from 2013 and that the Executive needs to have a plan B in place? Will he therefore give an undertaking that the work on the case for a new Forth crossing will begin now?" The First Minister said: "It would be particularly stupid of us to start to carry out the work on a new Forth road bridge... That is a particularly daft suggestion and we will not take it up."— [ Official Report , 17 November 2005; c 20862.]  That is the reason why there is likely to be a gap between 2013 and 2016. Notwithstanding the tardiness of the previous Executive, I hope that, in summing up, the cabinet secretary will give some comfort on that matter. I urge him to take the opportunity to give confidence to the businesses from the east of Scotland that the gap can be closed. We cannot have a situation in which there is no Forth crossing for HGVs between 2013 and 2016. Let me turn to public transport options on the bridgehead. We need better and cheaper train  journeys from Fife if we are to reduce both the pressure on the bridge and carbon emissions. Until the rail prices are reduced and there is a more frequent service from Edinburgh to Fife and northwards, there will be continuing pressures on whatever crossing is built. Whether we keep to the existing bridge, build a new bridge or build a tunnel, there will always be pressure at that point unless we do something about the number of commuters going in each direction. That is why I urge the minister to look seriously at what can be done to ensure that the rail operators reduce fares. It costs over £14 a day for a return ticket from Markinch to Edinburgh. That is simply out of many people's reach. I understand why people take their cars to work in such circumstances. The question whether an incoming Government should be allowed to determine its own priorities has been thrown up several times today and in previous weeks. Margaret Smith said that we are engaging in the old politics and that we will have our way, regardless. I refer her to what Sarah Boyack—who is not in the chamber—once said. In 1999, as the Minister for Transport and the Environment in the incoming Labour-Liberal Executive, Sarah Boyack made a statement in which she ditched the previous Conservative Government's commitment to improvements to the Preston roundabout on the A92 to Balfarg, which is in my constituency, and reduced the A8000 from trunk road status. There was a debate, but the majority Government held no vote on whether what was proposed should be implemented. I was the convener of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee, not one member of which was convinced of the robustness of the funding and the business case for the Borders railway, which is why we insisted on the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications coming to the committee and giving commitments. It is important to keep commitments. I welcome the minister's statement and the debate.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the minister's commitment to a new Forth crossing. Is he aware of the concern, particularly among businesses in Fife, that there could be a gap between 2013, when it is possible that the existing bridge will close to heavy goods vehicles, and 2016, when it is expected that the new crossing will be complete? Does the minister agree that the gap would have been shorter if the previous Government had acted more quickly? What comfort can he give that he will do all that he can to ensure that this vital link for the whole of Scotland is completed before 2016?

I thank the member for using my Sunday name. My comments about Glen Bramley related not to the £2,000 grant, but to the shared equity scheme—the Scottish housing support fund—that the SNP proposes.

I am delighted to welcome my friend Stewart Maxwell to his first debate as the minister responsible for housing. He has a difficult brief because he has  inherited a mess from Labour and the Liberal Democrats, who neglected housing in Scotland for the eight years for which they were in government. I acknowledge fully that the previous Administration put through the Parliament a raft of homelessness and housing legislation that had the SNP's support but, by and large, that legislation was underfunded and those chickens are coming home to roost. Let us examine the state of housing in Scotland. We face record waiting lists, record levels of homelessness and the lowest number of first-time buyers on record. We did not need the research document that has been issued today to tell us that; the trends have been apparent for a number of years. Given the importance of housing, I am delighted that the SNP Government has decided to hold a parliamentary debate on the subject in its first month in office. In the second session of Parliament, the previous Executive, in contrast, did not hold a single debate on housing in 2003. It was not until 4 February 2004 that it held a debate on the subject. In the first parliamentary session, the first such debate was not held until 10 November 1999, when the topic was homelessness rather than housing. The SNP Government should take no lectures from the Labour members who complain about a lack of commitment to housing. The housing organisations claim that 30,000 houses are needed in Scotland. I have no doubt that they are right, but that is simply recognition of the backlog in house building that the previous Executive allowed to build up. The previous Executive's record is quite shameful. Every year between 1999 and 2004, the Executive built fewer houses than the Tories did in 1995. That is why we have a backlog. I am delighted that the housing minister will progress the proposal to create a Scottish housing support fund, which was in our manifesto. That will make an enormous difference to first-time buyers. As Mary Scanlon mentioned, it is not dissimilar to the Tories' policy, but it is a great deal better. I invite Mary Scanlon to engage with us. Patrick Harvie said that our proposal could be inflationary, but I am sure that he attended the meeting of the Communities Committee in session 2 at which the previous Executive's expert, Professor Bramley, said that a properly targeted Scottish housing support fund—which is what the SNP proposes—would not produce inflationary pressures in the housing market. Patrick Harvie should have another look at what Professor Bramley said. There are many things that the Government must do. I urge the minister to examine, at the  earliest opportunity, the situation of the GHA and to ensure that those housing associations that are in a position to receive houses receive them as quickly as possible. We must not allow the GHA to prevent that, and we look forward enormously to its happening, because the previous Executive failed to deliver for the people of Glasgow.

I congratulate the cabinet minister for moving this issue forward quickly. I look forward to an announcement about the conclusions of the study being made in the near future. Does the minister agree that we are so late coming to conclusions because, in November 2005, the former First Minister said that it was a particularly stupid idea to start making plans? If that had not been his position, we could have been a lot further forward than we are at the moment.

I congratulate my good friend Joe FitzPatrick on his first speech. Like him, his speech was gracious and informative. I look forward to hearing many more of them in future. I add my condolences to the family of Harry Ewing. Like me, Harry Ewing was born in Cowdenbeath, so I always followed his political career with interest. I was delighted that, when he became a lord, he called himself Lord Ewing of Kirkford which, as Helen Eadie will know, is an area of Cowdenbeath. Harry Ewing was a giant of the Labour movement and he will be sadly missed by his many friends in Fife and beyond. I thank the cabinet secretary for his speech and, in particular, for his reference to ship-to-ship oil transfer off Methil in my constituency. I look forward to his briefing tomorrow and I know of his determination to find a way out of the legislative mess into which we have been led. I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate and to highlight the progress that is being made in Central Fife, for example by the energy park in Methil and by important businesses such as Tullis Russell, which has been producing paper in Markinch for nearly 200 years, and Diageo. On  Monday, I had the great pleasure of visiting Diageo's Cameronbridge distillery in Windygates to find out more about its £40 million expansion plans. There has been whisky production on the site for almost 200 years. Those companies are two of the oldest in Fife, if not in Scotland, and I am delighted that they are both pushing ahead with plans for biomass energy projects. They are setting a necessary example to some of our newer businesses. Tullis Russell has proposed a £100 million biomass project, which will reduce Scotland's emissions by 20 per cent and contribute 6 per cent of Scotland's renewable energy targets. When I was in Brussels last week, there was real excitement about the Tullis Russell plans. The project is of precisely the kind that Scotland needs and I know that the SNP ministers have been working hard with the company to make its plans a reality. That is in contrast to the previous Executive, which did nothing to help Tullis Russell to bring its plans to fruition. Diageo is determined that the Cameronbridge distillery expansion will generate environmental benefits. It expects to be able to reduce carbon dioxide emissions through bioenergy options. I was surprised to learn that the distillery at Cameronbridge uses a quarter of all Scotland's wheat production. Without getting technical about whisky production, I can tell members that, after the process is completed, the spent grain is disposed of. That grain will be used in the new biomass plant. I cannot be alone in hoping that there will be emissions from that plant and that the air around Windygates will be filled with whisky fumes—alas, I fear that that will be a vain hope. Diageo also wishes to open up a disused railway line from Methil to Cameronbridge to enable rail freight to be carried, which will reduce road transport by up to 2 million heavy goods vehicle miles a year. However, it is proving difficult to get agreement from Network Rail on the matter. Tullis Russell and Diageo are doing their bit for the environment. In fact, they are leading the way in Scotland and I am delighted to offer them all the support that I can. However, it is vital that individual companies are given the support of Government, Government agencies and agencies under the direction of ministers. We need to ensure that those organisations match the ambition of our companies and make it clear that we will not accept it when obstacles or bureaucracy are used as excuses for inaction.

Mr MacAskill will remember the tragic murder of Karen Dewar by Colyn Evans. Colyn Evans had committed many crimes while he was under the age of 16 and was under the supervision of a children's panel. Will the minister consider the case to see whether we should be targeting people who have committed sexual offences even though they are under the age of 16?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The potential for a vote existed, but the division bell did not ring. Will you explain why?

In fairness, the Deputy Presiding Officer, Trish Godman, raised the issue of the staff during the minister's speech, but Des McNulty, who is leading the debate for the Labour Party, never said a word.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member give way?

In one of my last speeches before the election, I led the SNP debate on abolishing the tolls on the Forth and Tay road bridges, so it is appropriate that my first speech in the new parliamentary session should be in support of the SNP Government's proposal to abolish those tolls. Forty-three years after tolls were introduced on the Forth road bridge and 39 years after their introduction on the Tay bridge, the first SNP Government has taken only two short weeks to announce how and when it intends that the tolls should be abolished.

I am sorry that Ted Brocklebank has just taken one of my lines. Stewart Stevenson has already used a portion of my speech, so perhaps I should not be surprised that Ted Brocklebank has lifted another section of it. I cannot pay tribute enough to the role that has been played by The Courier as well as Fife Council, the National Alliance Against Tolls and the many individuals who have campaigned against the tolls for 40-odd years. They will be delighted that this day has come. I am grateful to the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change for setting out the timescale and mechanism for the removal of the tolls. It is clear that we aim to be toll free by 2008. I was impressed with Alison McInnes's first speech. I did not agree completely with what she said, but I welcome her to the chamber and I look forward to her future speeches, on which I hope I will agree with her more. She asked why this was our first transport debate. The answer is really quite simple, Ms McInnes. This was an SNP manifesto commitment to the people of Fife and the people of Tayside, so it is absolutely appropriate that our first transport debate is on abolishing the tolls on the Forth and the Tay. As members are aware, today's debate is the third debate in 18 months on getting rid of the tolls. This is my third speech on the unfairness of the tolls for the people of Fife and Tayside and on the extra taxation that is involved for our businesses. I welcome the support that we have received from  the Conservatives. Only the sheer pigheadedness of Labour and the Liberal Democrats has kept in place the tolls, which have discriminated against the people of Fife all this time. In March 2006, the former Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, Tavish Scott, announced that the tolls would be removed from the Erskine bridge. A debate on an SNP motion prompted the minister to announce a review of that review, which Labour and Liberal members then voted for instead of voting to abolish the tolls on the Tay. Repeatedly, the then minister was pressed to call a halt on the relocation of the toll plaza while the review was taking place, but he refused. That decision by Tavish Scott has cost millions of pounds, as the toll plaza has been renewed. I believe that Tavish Scott should be surcharged for that money.

Sit down, Mr Smith. Labour and the Liberals now want the SNP Government to write a blank cheque for EARL and the Edinburgh trams. I think not. Those projects will be evaluated. The days of underestimating public infrastructure projects are over. We need to get some honesty into the process. I welcome the rigour that John Swinney is determined to apply in the future.

No, I will not. Turning to the proposed legislation, I understand why it is necessary to proceed as outlined but I urge the minister not to close his mind to consulting on whether to abolish FETA. Several existing bodies—not least the Executive itself—could oversee the additional transport projects around the bridgehead. I have no doubt that the bridge's safety and maintenance requirements will remain, but I am not convinced that FETA, as constituted, is necessarily the only vehicle to deliver those. Let me turn to the concerns raised by staff, as I promised them I would. I seek the minister's assurances that, well in advance of the legislation, FETA will carry out an appraisal on the possible level of redundancies and that every effort will be made to help those who are affected to find alternative employment. Des McNulty's amendment calls for "any employees affected" to be "treated with dignity and respect". The SNP wholly supports such a call. However, is that the same Des McNulty who, in welcoming the removal of the Erskine bridge tolls, never once mentioned the staff? On that very issue, I have  received an e-mail from someone working for FETA, who says: "I think it is right that you are also aware of concerns as staff here are particularly aware of the shabby way that the Erskine staff were treated e.g. only finding out that their jobs were to go within 30 days live on television, without the courtesy of letting them know a few minutes in advance." As a result, we will take no lectures from Labour members about the best way of treating staff. We will treat the staff with the respect and the dignity that they deserve as a reward for their professionalism over the years, and I hope that the minister will address the issue when he sums up. This is a great day for the people who live in Fife, Tayside and further north. Many of us have waited a long, long time for this. I am very pleased with the proposals and I thank the minister for what he has said today.

Why did the Conservatives support the SNP in the debate on the abolition of tolls on the Tay and Forth bridges in March this year—and why did they not link their support to EARL and the tram scheme?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Tullis Russell biomass project in my constituency will reduce Scotland's carbon emissions by 20 per cent and contribute 6 per cent towards Scotland's renewable energy targets? Is he aware that the previous Liberal-Labour Executive refused to support the project? Will he encourage the First Minister and ministers who will meet Tullis Russell  today to give the company the financial support it needs to help the environment and save 550 jobs?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement and his  recognition that the current legislative framework is, quite frankly, a boorach. In particular, I welcome the fact that, within two days, we have had a statement on the abolition of tolls in Fife and a statement on ship-to-ship oil transfers. This Administration has done more in two days than the previous one did in eight years. Does the minister agree that it is simply not credible that a private company that stands to profit from the proposed ship-to-ship transfers is also the competent authority for examining the environmental impact of the proposals? Does he agree that that democratic deficit must be closed quickly? As the minister is aware, I will visit the European Commission next week. Will he and his officials meet me in advance of that visit to discuss what support I can give him in examining how, in the short term, Europe might be able to help us to deal with the problem of the proposed ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Firth of Forth?

I express my joy that the discrimination against the people of Fife will end at long last. Is the First Minister aware that it is 43 years since a Labour Government imposed the tolls on the people of Fife? It has taken the formation of the first SNP Government for an announcement that the tolls will be abolished. Will he join me in thanking The Courier,  which has campaigned against the tolls for a year? Will the First Minister also say whether Mr Gordon Brown, the next Prime Minister, has yet telephoned to congratulate him on his move to abolish the tolls? Mr Brown himself proposed such a measure in a private member's bill at Westminster 22 years ago, but he did not follow through when he was in Government.

I add my congratulations to Tulliallan primary school. Will the minister explain why the number of secondary teachers in Fife has reduced since 1997? Can he also explain to the people of Fife why, despite the investment that he claims has been put into schools, there are schools in Glenrothes that are raising funds through open days and fairs? The money that is raised is not going on extras for the children, but is being used to buy books and equipment.

The minister talks about being asked what nationality he is. Why would the Liberal Democrats deny the Scottish people the right to answer a referendum question on whether they want independence?

I wonder why the member's party has not taken the opportunity to implement the policies that he has just outlined over the past eight years.

I congratulate Mark Ruskell on securing the debate. I will start with a declaration of interest: I believe in rail travel and I travel by rail every day. I think that it is the best way to travel but, unlike the Greens, I do not believe in rail travel to the exclusion of every other kind of travel. We need a further crossing of the Forth. That is as important as connecting our communities by rail—one should not be done instead of the other. It is almost 10 years since I became involved in the campaign to restore the Thornton to Leven rail link. Levenmouth is the largest urban conurbation in Scotland that has no access to a rail link. To me, the case for reopening the line is as overwhelming now as it was 10 years ago. I believe that the whole corridor is intact and that compulsory purchase would not be needed. I well remember the case that was considered by Fife Council—when Christine May was its leader, I think—which was a travesty. Despite the huge conurbation and despite the fact that the line could be connected to the Fife rail line, Fife Council found that the reopening of the Leven to Thornton rail line would be uneconomic so it refused to support it. I am glad that time has moved on and that there now seems to be a willingness to acknowledge the case for the reopening of the Thornton to Leven rail line. That is mostly to do with Diageo. I cannot say how welcome the company's intervention in the debate  is; its commitment to the reopening of the line for freight brings the tantalising possibility that we will also see the return of passenger travel. The new station at Markinch is very welcome and there will be more car parking space. More car parking space has also been provided at Kirkcaldy. However, Roseanna Cunningham made the important point about ensuring that there is provision further back on the line. If people in Leven and Methil did not have to travel to Kirkcaldy and Markinch but instead had their own railway station, we would not always be looking to expand the car parks at those railway stations. I understand that there is still a problem with the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail line, in respect of freight, with Transport Scotland and English Welsh & Scottish Railway Limited. I understand that Transport Scotland has not yet agreed to encourage EWS to come off the Forth rail bridge and use that line instead. Unless that problem can be solved, it will limit Diageo. I would love to hear the minister comment on that point, because I know that it has been a worry.

That was one of the finest speeches that I have heard in the chamber for a long time, and I am very sorry that it marks Susan Deacon's final contribution to Parliament. Like everyone else, I want to pay tribute to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. I was working with Shelter when the Children (Scotland) Bill was going through Westminster. I think that I am right in saying that, in the Scottish Grand Committee, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was absolutely steadfast in ensuring that, for the first time, local authorities had a duty of care to young people and a duty to assist older children who were leaving care. However, I will remember Lord James best for what he did not do. As Minister of State for Home Affairs and Health at the Scottish Office, he ensured that homelessness legislation that the Tories introduced in England and Wales was not introduced in Scotland. He, his officials, Shelter Scotland and many other organisations fought very hard to ensure that that regressive legislation did not see the light of day in this country, and we should pay great tribute to him for that. I wish him well in whatever he does in the future. He has graced this Parliament and has been a real gentleman to most of us. Before I turn to the motion under debate, I should also say that Parliament was visited by a group of Madras college pupils, led by Lynn  Brown, who is an absolutely inspirational modern studies teacher. Despite the HMIE report that Iain Smith referred to, which slammed the college's physical state, the institution itself does extremely fine work, and teachers such as Lynn Brown must be congratulated on their commitment to the young people in their care. Iain Smith mentioned Fife Council's education service. Last month, the council's latest education budget indicated a cut next year of £5 million, which comes on top of the £10 million cut that was made in 2006-07. Over the years, it has been almost impossible to find out from Fife Council the number of teachers who are employed in Fife—in fact, one official document gives two separate figures. It is hardly any wonder that the council has never allowed the information to emerge. As I made clear to Hugh Henry, in 1997, 1,733 teachers were employed in Fife; however, that number has now fallen to 1,691. That has not happened because pupil numbers have fallen: the current teacher pupil ratio in Fife is exactly the same as it was in 1998. The Labour mantra might well be, "Education, education, education", but any analysis of the figures for Fife's education service as set out in the statistical bulletin will show that there has been cut after cut after cut. I am not the only one who is saying these things. I have a leaflet from two Labour candidates that was distributed in Levenmouth, which is part of Gordon Brown's Westminster constituency as well as being in the Central Fife constituency. Of course, none of the existing Labour councillors is standing for election in Levenmouth, as they have all taken the money and run, but one of the Labour candidates states: "Labour in Fife will conduct a root and branch review of all funding with the objective of cutting out waste and bureaucracy and getting more money to the front line, to teachers, to classrooms and ultimately to pupils". That says it all. Labour has been in power in Fife for more than 30 years; the Labour Executive has been in power since 1999; and we have had a Labour Government at Westminster since 1997, but despite that, teacher numbers in Fife have gone down and levels of attainment in our secondary schools continue to fall. I visited a school in Glenrothes recently, where the children were absolutely wonderful. They put on a debate for the MSPs who were present, the subject of which was whether school trips are necessary. Of course, most of us would say that school trips are necessary and that it is good for children to get out of their environment and visit places such as the Scottish Parliament. However, the two sets of children in the debate argued about whether school trips are necessary. The argument that was articulated against school trips was that they are too expensive and the money should be  used for books and other equipment. The money that they were talking about is money that schools and pupils raise in open days and jumble sales. That money should be used for school trips and other extras, but it is being siphoned off to pay for essentials, such as books. That is the record of Fife Council and the Labour Party in Fife in the past 30 years. If the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive is prepared to put up with that, that is disgraceful. Those parties have let down the pupils and parents of Fife through their refusal to get involved in the difficult situation in Fife Council's education service.

If such substantial progress has been made since the Labour-Liberal Executive came to power, can the minister explain why in 1997 there were 1,707 teachers in secondary schools in Fife but by 2005 that figure had fallen to 1,691?

Does the minister not find it most bizarre that although the Executive is prepared to give flexibility with regard to the provision of free breakfasts, free fruit and free snacks, it is simply not prepared to give any flexibility with regard to school meals?

I thank my colleagues on the Communities Committee, the clerks to the committee and the witnesses who came to the committee to give evidence, particularly the young people. I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate because I was one of the members of the committee who had serious doubts about whether we needed legislation to underpin some of the successes of the hungry for success scheme. As we considered the bill, however, I realised that that legislative underpinning was necessary. We have a huge problem in Scotland. Our health record is appalling and we will have to cope with an obesity time bomb. It is extremely important that we encourage children to get into healthy eating habits at the earliest possible stage. Having said that, I cannot see any possibility that I could ever eat raw spinach on a sandwich and I congratulate Fiona Hyslop's young one for being so adventurous—she is obviously like her mother. The bill represents only the first stage of our attempts to tackle the issues relating to health and obesity. For example, we need far greater sports facilities for our young people than we have at the  moment. In many areas, sports facilities are simply lacking. There is a particular issue in Fife that I hope that the minister will take up—although not today, as I realise that I am springing it on him. I understand that Fife Council is writing to some of the schools that offer breakfast clubs, as there is a threat to cut the number of staff that the council supplies to those breakfast clubs. Will the minister examine that? We do not want the work of the bill to be undermined by local authorities. On the subject of local authorities, I return to the question of flexibility. Throughout the passage of the bill, I have never had an answer to this question: why do local authorities have the flexibility to provide free breakfasts but not free lunches?

The SNP would provide funding centrally, so there would be no impact on the local council tax payers, who would get a far better deal under local income tax than under anything that the Executive is prepared to do. I will move on from flexibility, because we have never had an answer to the question that I asked and the minister is clearly not going to answer it now. Let me say to the Labour members, who I see are almost all absent from the chamber, to the Liberal Democrats—Jamie Stone is walking out of the chamber—and to the Conservatives that today every single one of them queued up to vote against extending free school meals to the poorest children in Scotland. Today, Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Tories voted against extending free school meals to the children of people who are in receipt of council tax benefits.

The Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats and the Tories voted against giving free school meals to the children of people in receipt of lone parent benefit.

Today, the Labour Party, the Liberals and the Tories voted against extending free meals to the children of those on housing benefits, those on local housing allowance and those on working tax credit. It is an appalling and shameful day for them.

Throughout the bill's passage, I have had concerns about biometrics and anonymised systems. The minister has not yet persuaded me that the serious issues that surround the collection of biometric information from children have been addressed. Patrick Harvie's amendment 27 would be a step toward achieving coherence among the very many systems that might be up and running in future. Before any systems get up and running, we need guidance or guidelines to be put in place. I urge the minister to respond positively to Patrick Harvie and to accept amendment 27, as it is necessary.

Will the minister give way?

One can always tell when Hugh Henry is rattled or saying something he does not quite believe in: he becomes more and more gratuitously insulting. That has happened today and it happened during the Communities Committee's stage 2 consideration of the bill when he was faced with exactly the same amendments and did not know how to handle them. Perhaps the fact that Jack McConnell ca'd the feet from under him two weeks later makes the point better than I can. The minister has said that the bill provides flexibility. Indeed it does; it gives local authorities the flexibility to provide free breakfasts, free fruit and free milk. But it does not give local authorities the flexibility to introduce pilot schemes in specific geographical or demographic areas and to evaluate for themselves the case for free school meals. That is the crux of the matter, and the minister has consistently failed to answer questions on that point from Patrick Harvie, from Frances Curran, from Donald Gorrie and from Elaine C—I am sorry, Elaine Smith. [ Laughter. ] I am sorry; I should not have used the C word in the chamber. The minister has refused to answer questions on this point at stage 1, at stage 2 and now at stage 3. Why will he not give local authorities the flexibility to introduce pilot schemes? He said that the bill does not need to set out the powers required to meet the intentions behind Christine Grahame's amendments, because ministers already have them. As Fiona Hyslop said, if ministers have had those powers all this time, why have they not suggested, before now, extending free school meal provision and bringing the very poorest children in Scotland within its ambit?

I cannot wholly accept Tommy Sheridan's premise. Labour is the majority party, so it is responsible for denying the very poorest children in Scotland that extension of free school meals. The SNP wants members to vote for Christine Grahame's amendments because they will make these matters clear in the bill. The SNP Government that will be in place after May will be quite happy to be locked into those provisions and  happy not to give ministers flexibility to decide whether to give the very poorest children free school meals. After all, what ministers can give, they can take away. That is why we need legislation on the matter, why these provisions need to be set out in the bill and why I urge every member who cares about the very poorest children in our society—

No. The member can sit down, because he does not care. I urge every member who actually cares about the very poorest children in our society to vote for the SNP amendments.

I have listened carefully to the member's argument. He said that parents who can afford to pay for their children's school lunches should do so. Does he also argue that parents who can afford to pay for breakfasts, snacks and fruit should pay for them?

Will the minister give way?

That is not my understanding. I accept what the member says, but it is clear that the experiment was to go no further and that the council was going to stop it, regardless of whether the evaluation confirmed the initial finding that the experiment was working well and having a positive impact on children's health. According to the Child Poverty Action Group, 38,000 children in Scotland live in poverty but are denied free school meals. My colleague Christine Grahame will say more about that, but her amendments at stage 2 were not supported by the Labour, Liberal Democrat or Conservative members of the Communities Committee, who argued that provision should not be extended. The Minister for Education and Young People said that ministers already have powers to extend eligibility for free school meals, and all committee members, except the SNP and Green members, voted against Christine Grahame's amendments. A week later, however, the First Minister told the Child Poverty Action Group that the group of children who were covered by the amendments that his colleagues voted against would now get free school meals. The SNP believes that the matter should be covered in the bill. My amendments would give local authorities the flexibility to determine what is right for their area, to decide whether pupils should pay for school meals and to run pilot schemes and evaluate the importance of free school meals. I move amendment 1.

Members of the Communities Committee will know that similar amendments were discussed during stage 2, but I make no apology for bringing amendments 1, 22, 3 and 4 to the chamber today. The bill will allow local authorities the flexibility either to provide free breakfasts, fruit and snacks or to charge for them, but it does not allow local authorities to decide whether to charge for school meals. The new section that the Executive has added to the bill says that an education authority can provide anything other than school lunches free of charge. However, as amended, section 53 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 will say that local authorities must charge pupils for lunches. I am not the only person to consider it bizarre that local authorities are allowed the flexibility to determine whether to provide free snacks and breakfasts but will not have the same flexibility to provide free school meals. If amendment 1 is not agreed to, the bill will provide less flexibility than exists in England. Free school meals have been piloted in Hull. Unfortunately, when the Liberal Democrats took over Hull City Council, they stopped that experiment, much to the annoyance of the Labour  members of the council, who wanted the experiment to continue. South of the border, in Hull, Labour MPs, Labour councillors and Labour activists argue for the flexibility to have a pilot in Hull, while in Scotland we are being denied that same flexibility. It is a matter of consistency.

The minister must be aware that last year saw the  lowest number of first-time buyers on record and that the average age of first-time buyers is now 37. Although the schemes to which he referred are welcome, they are doing nothing to address the real problems that first-time buyers face. Will he consider doing more?

The minister has spoken about manufacturers' right to approach the SMC to request reviews. What possibility is there for patient groups, such as the MS Society Scotland, to be part of that review process?

The letter that the minister's department sent to the MS Society Scotland stated in reference to the SMC that "It found that although the therapy provided some clinical benefit it did not provide sufficient benefit for it to be recommended for use." I wonder how much benefit there needs to be for therapy to pass such a test, given that in all the clinical trials that have taken place it has been clearly shown that the drug is "twice as effective in reducing MS relapses as previous MS drugs."  Previous MS drugs are still being prescribed, but the benefits are twice as good with Tysabri. I am afraid that I just do not understand why the proven clinical benefits are not sufficient for the SMC to approve the drug.

Does the member acknowledge that the cost that she cited includes the cost of existing drugs? If the patient is not on existing drugs, the cost of Tysabri comes down to about £7,000 a year.

I thank those members from all parties who signed the motion in my name and the two motions that were lodged by other members. MS affects almost 10,000 people in Scotland; we have the highest rate of MS per capita anywhere in the world. In the past, I have argued that that statistic should spur us on to ensure that Scotland becomes a centre of excellence for the treatment of MS. It is appropriate to record that, since the Scottish Parliament was opened in 1999, services for MS patients have improved. Most health board areas now have MS nurses, and beta interferon is widely prescribed rather than being available only on a postcode basis. Some of the credit for that goes to the Scottish Executive, but much more of it goes to the MS Society Scotland, its director Mark Hazelwood and its patron J K Rowling. Many of the improvements have come about only because of the financial support of the MS Society. I cannot begin to express the anger and frustration that were felt following the Scottish medicines consortium's decision in December not to recommend that Tysabri be made available on the national health service to people with MS in Scotland. A number of issues need to be put on the record. The drug has been licensed for use, so it is an approved product. It is being prescribed in the United States, Germany and Ireland. In total, 10,000 people worldwide are using Tysabri. Why is Tysabri important? For a very small number of people with aggressive and rapidly  progressing MS, who have recurring attacks, existing drugs are not working. Tysabri reduces the number of attacks. Every attack causes more damage, with the result that the patient gets progressively and rapidly worse. Given that many people in that category are young and economically active, it is vital that we use everything at our disposal to ensure that they have a better quality of life for longer. Tysabri is not a miracle drug or a cure for MS—there is none—but, as clinical trials have shown, it is twice as effective as any other licensed drug on the market in reducing recurring attacks.

I could not agree more. I will address later in my speech some of the points Brian Adam makes. From discussions with neurologists and the MS Society, I have learned that they estimate that between 40 and 50 people in Scotland will be prescribed Tysabri in any one year. It is not a drug for everyone. We are not talking about thousands of people beating a path to their general practitioner's surgery to demand the latest wonder drug; Tysabri is not another Viagra. It will be prescribed only to the very few people who, in the clinical judgment of neurologists, will benefit from it. The decision to deny the provision of Tysabri on the NHS to such a small group of people is mean spirited. The option exists for neurologists to make a case to health boards for the provision of Tysabri to named patients, but that will create unnecessary delay and lead to postcode prescribing, which I am sure we all wish to avoid. The SMC's decision is based on cost, not on whether the drug will bring benefits, although its acknowledgement of those benefits is grudging and flies in the face of the evidence that it has been shown. The MS Society is of the view that the SMC's decision was based on flawed evidence. It and the neurologists believe that the cost of prescribing Tysabri will be less than half what the SMC says it will be. The SMC's economic case for not prescribing is therefore quite different from the economic case that is claimed by the neurologists and the MS Society.  The difficulty is that there is no mechanism to appeal an SMC decision. As far as I am aware, it is not an organisation set up by statute; rather, it is a forum of representatives of health boards. The MS Society has asked ministers to intervene and to ask the SMC to revisit the estimates on which it based its decision. Ministers have said that it would be inappropriate for them to do so, but I do not agree. If there is no appeals mechanism, will the minister advise us how decisions can be revisited? Why cannot ministers write to the SMC to say that they have additional information and to invite the SMC to reconsider? No one is arguing that ministers should direct the SMC, but when there is a dispute about the evidence, it is not unreasonable for ministers to ask the SMC to look again at the evidence that is available. Dr Gavin Giovannoni of the National hospital for neurology and neurosurgery in London described Tysabri as the most significant advance in MS treatment in a decade. It is, but for it to be effective in Scotland it must be prescribed on the national health service. I urge ministers at least to write to the SMC to ask for the decision to be revisited.

Will the member take an intervention?

I was going to intervene, but I think that Mr Rumbles has finished.

I am interested in what the minister is now saying about the homelessness legislation. A few months ago, when he was a back bencher, he suggested that the  homelessness target should be dropped because it simply could not be met. What is he saying now that he is the housing minister?

I was not referring to the glory days; I was trying to make the point that the Government has fallen so far that it cannot meet even the targets that the Conservative Government set in 1995.

I confess to being astonished that the housing minister could present a debate on the Government's record in housing and could speak for 11 minutes without mentioning the Executive's flagship policy—wholesale stock transfer. Is wholesale stock transfer now the flagship policy that must not speak its name? There have been five housing ministers since 1999—Wendy Alexander, Jackie Baillie, Margaret Curran, Malcolm Chisholm and now Rhona Brankin. They come; they go. Ms Brankin is likely to have the shortest tenure of them all. The first line of the motion asks the Parliament to welcome "the importance that the Scottish Executive has placed on ensuring the provision of affordable housing". Did I blink and miss something over the past eight years of the Government? Is the minister not listening to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Shelter Scotland, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations or the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland? Is she not listening to councillors the length and breadth of Scotland? Is she not listening to her own back benchers and has she not read the Bramley report, which was commissioned by her immediate predecessor, Malcolm Chisholm, on the shortage of affordable homes in Scotland? Is the minister unique? Is she the only one among the 129 MSPs who does not see people desperate for housing at her surgeries? Young people and families are desperate for houses of their own or to leave behind overcrowded and damp conditions. It does not matter where we go in Scotland, the story is the same: in rural communities, cities and small towns, there is a desperate shortage of decent, affordable accommodation. The Scottish National Party amendment is a reality check for  the Government, which is so obsessed by spin and so desperate to pretend that all is well that it is in serious danger of undermining any good work that it has done, such as the homestake scheme to help first-time-buyers to get on to the property ladder or the raft of desperately needed housing legislation that it has passed. Let us examine the record of the Government's delivery on housing. The policy of wholesale stock transfer, which I have mentioned—although the minister did not—has failed. There has never been a plan B in place for when tenants say no, but the Government's greatest failure—no wonder she will not talk about it—is its failure to keep the promises that were made to the Glasgow tenants, who voted yes in the ballot in the belief that, as the Government told them, second-stage transfer to small-scale community housing associations would take place.

I have repeatedly said to the minister that all tenants have been more or less blackmailed into a yes vote. I have made it clear to ministers that they should have taken the time to work with the Treasury in London to ensure that the capital debt was written off for the tenants who voted no in the same way as it would have been had they voted yes. The legislation on stock transfer that was passed before the 2003 election has not resulted in a single house being transferred from Glasgow Housing Association to a local community housing association. Not a single house has been built and, for some tenants, housing conditions are as bad as anybody can remember—if not the worst that anybody can remember. I can hear Des McNulty saying that that is rubbish, but he obviously did not see the television news item a few weeks ago about the woman who was living in the most appalling, damp conditions. Is he trying to tell me that that is acceptable?

The tenants voted for small housing associations, as the deputy minister—

Wait a minute: the minister did not address the stock-transfer policy in her  speech, so Des McNulty is not going to waste time trying to defend it in mine. The SNP Government that we will have after the May election is determined that the promises that the Labour Executive made to the Glasgow tenants will be kept. When Professor Bramley reported to Malcolm Chisholm, he highlighted the fact that—

No I will not. Professor Bramley highlighted the fact that, as well as a need for new affordable housing to keep pace with demand, there was a backlog to be tackled. Why does that backlog exist? It is because the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive built fewer houses for rent between 1999 and 2004 than the Tories did in 1995.

No, I will not. That statistic shows one of the reasons why there is such pressure now. I find it hard to believe that the Bramley report did not take housing conditions into account when it assessed housing need, but the Executive asked Professor Bramley not to do so. In other words, provided a house was still standing, it counted towards the net surplus of housing, regardless of whether it was riddled with damp or had rats running under the floorboards. The Bramley report is but one part of the equation of what needs to be done in Scotland. As we are all well aware, local authorities and housing associations are required to meet the quality standard by 2015. Many believe that they will struggle to do so and many more are preparing to demolish structurally safe houses because they do not have the money to renovate them. We have record numbers of people on housing waiting lists, more people are presenting as homeless and Shelter Scotland claims in its briefing that 8,000 households are in temporary housing—double the number in 2001—because of the shortage of suitable permanent accommodation. The average age of first-time buyers is now 37. They are the ones who are being hit by the double whammy.

Most are not eligible for social housing, but they are being priced out of the housing market. I hope that you will give me a couple more minutes, given the interventions that I have taken, Presiding Officer.

Okay. Many of those people are precisely the kind of people that Scotland needs—young graduates and families who want to put down roots. I recommend that MSPs of all parties read the Hills report, "Ends and Means: The future roles of social housing in England", which was commissioned by Ruth Kelly. In effect, it says that people are going to have to be in real need to be able to get a social rented house in future. The mixed and sustainable communities that we want in Scotland will not be achieved by offering fixed lets for all in the public sector, then means testing people to see whether they are poor enough to stay in the houses or well off enough to have their tenancies terminated and be encouraged to go off and buy a home on their own. How is it possible that Ruth Kelly and new Labour so misunderstand the nature of communities and the fact that what people want most is a home that is safe and secure? The SNP values the social rented sector and we will work closely with local authorities, which we see as the strategic force in identifying housing need in their area, and with other housing providers in the private and public sectors to assist them in the provision of good quality, affordable homes for all our citizens. I move amendment S2M-5617.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes that between 1999 and 2004 fewer houses were built for social rent under the Labour/Liberal Democrat government than in 1995 under the Conservative government and that waiting lists and those presenting as homeless are at record levels; notes the failure of the Scottish government to keep the promises made to Glasgow tenants on second stage stock transfer, and considers that this Scottish government has failed to adequately address the housing crisis in Scotland."

Although I agree with everything that he has said, will the minister comment on Fife Council's announcement this week of the closure of libraries in Pitteuchar, Glenrothes, Thornton and throughout Fife?

One very good feature of the private bills process was that, with the support of parliamentary officials, objectors came to understand the process and found out how best to represent themselves at our meetings. Will the minister guarantee that, when the bill is passed, those who object to proposals receive a measure of support to ensure that they fully understand and engage in the new streamlined processes?

I am happy—actually, I am ecstatic—to speak in the debate after my experiences of the current private bill process. This morning, we had a debate in which I argued that bridge tolls are unfair to Fife. The fact that local members could not be involved in private bill committees has meant that members from Fife have had an onerous task because of the locations of many of the projects for which there have been private bills. The Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee included Ted Brocklebank, Christine May and me; Helen Eadie and Scott Barrie have also been on private bill committees. There is a belief that members were dragooned on to private bill committees. It is true that, once word got out that they were not good places to be, most members gave them a body swerve. However, I confess that, in my naivety, I volunteered myself to Bruce Crawford, who was the Scottish National Party's chief whip, for the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee. I told him that I had been most places in the Parliament—I had been a business manager, a whip and a committee member—so I would like to see how a private bill worked. I have never been known for making sound judgments and that was certainly not a sound judgment: the committee went on and on and on. The Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill showed the sheer complexity and technical nature of the long-running saga of the Borders railway. I am pleased that the system has been streamlined, because it is unfair to expect MSPs to involve themselves in the technicalities that we encountered. On one side were the promoters with their technical advisers, and on the other side was the committee with its technical advisers. Although I pay tribute to all members who have been on private bill committees in the past, I am sure that they would acknowledge that the process was extremely onerous, difficult and time consuming. I welcome the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill. I would have liked it to include some parliamentary involvement in the new process, but we are where we are. It is certainly a heck of a lot better than the previous system, and I have no hesitation in giving it my support.

Will the minister give way?

That just shows that the previous business manager and chief whip sometimes disagreed with the current business manager and chief whip on the issue—I will probably get a hard slap for it, too. Will the minister confirm that the national planning framework will be either wholly approved or wholly rejected by members after the parliamentary debate and that we will have no opportunity to lodge an amendment that would delete part of the document? If that is the case, the detailed scrutiny that we want will not take place, because members will not be able to reject a particular aspect of the framework without rejecting the whole thing.

In adding my support for Maureen Watt's amendment 16, I declare an interest as I was previously the convener of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee. Far be it from me to say that the Parliament needs more involvement than the bill provides, given the complaints of all the committee members in light of the fact that the process took almost three years and required us to go through a pile of evidence that was almost 3ft high. However, there is an important stage missing from the procedure that is outlined in the bill and I urge the minister to listen carefully to the comments that have been made by members throughout the chamber. It is not unreasonable to suggest that Parliament gets to consider a proposal at a preliminary stage to decide in principle whether we support it before it proceeds further. The process that is outlined in the bill is lacking in parliamentary scrutiny. I am not arguing for one minute that we should go back to the old system—heaven forfend—but I think that there is something missing. I urge the minister to listen carefully, reflect on what has been said and respond positively to Maureen Watt's amendment.

The minister talks a good game but, as I am sure she will confirm, the reality is that between 1999 and 2004 the Executive built fewer affordable houses for rent each year than the Tories did in 1995. This crisis has been a long time in the making. Is she not responsible to the Executive for the crisis?

Ah!

Will the minister take an intervention?

The timing of the statements is important. What changed was that tolls were taken off the Erskine bridge by the Executive. It was then totally unfair for tolls to be charged on the Forth road bridge and the Tay road bridge. Unlike the minister's position, our position has been consistent. Perhaps he will answer Shona Robison's question. Will there be a commitment to remove tolls from the Forth and Tay bridges in the Liberal Democrat manifesto?

rose—

Will the member explain where the £20 million is coming from to fund the  structural work that is needed on the Erskine bridge since the tolls were taken off?

Will the member take an intervention?

The minister should publish the responses.

Will the minister give way?

The debate is about fairness. Scotland has nearly 30 road crossings of tidal waters, but only two are tolled and both are in Fife. Why does no other part of Scotland have any tolls when we in Fife have two? Last year, the Minister for Transport removed the tolls from the Erskine bridge, which has no construction debt, but left them on the Forth bridge, which also has no construction debt. Before that, tolls were removed from the Skye bridge, which had a debt of £26 million, but the minister keeps tolls on the Tay bridge, which has a debt of £13 million. Last year, the minister claimed that keeping the tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges would help to reduce congestion, which ignores all the evidence that the toll regime itself causes congestion in the city of Dundee.

It is clear that the congestion in Dundee is caused by cars idling in that city because they cannot reach the Tay bridge. In the SNP debate on bridge tolls last year, the minister bought off the Labour and Liberal back benchers by promising a review of the review that had just been held. Helen Eadie, Scott Barrie, Christine May, Marlyn Glen and others were bought off or—should I say?—they were caught hook, line and sinker. Helen Eadie said that the review would be held urgently and she said: "I will press the minister on that with every ounce of urgency in my body."— [ Official Report , 30 March 2006; c 24560.]  Have she and her colleagues noticed that the Executive's amendment does not mention that review? I notice that Mrs Eadie is not here. The minister has the consultants' report but will not publish it. That review cost £80,000 of public money, but it is gathering dust on a shelf. Fife Council, Dundee City Council, the Federation of  Small Businesses and the chambers of commerce have all responded to the review of the review, but the minister has ignored all the evidence and has concluded that the tolls will stay anyway. There will be seething resentment in Fife and Tayside when people there see the Executive's amendment. The Executive's amendment links retaining the tolls with the case for a new Forth crossing—in other words, the minister wants the tolls on the bridge to pay for the new crossing. Tavish Scott is not the Minister for Transport, but the minister for shifting the goalposts. After two reviews and two debates, we are finally getting to the truth about the Executive's position on tolls. Toll money has since 1995 been the cash cow that funds transport projects that should be the Government's responsibility. It is surprising that the Executive amendment asks Parliament to call on the Cabinet immediately to start the preparatory work for the new crossing. Why should the Minister for Transport need Parliament to call on the Cabinet to do anything? Cannot he just ask his Cabinet colleagues? Does he need to come to Parliament because the First Minister still thinks "particularly stupid" idea to start the work," as he told me in November 2005? I do not doubt the sincerity of the Green Party's view. There may be a case for congestion charges on our roads and bridges, but that debate must be conducted on a level playing field. Just because the Forth and Tay bridges have debts for construction costs, their tolls should not be converted into congestion charges. The debate is about fairness. The people of Fife are entitled to be consulted first, to be part of the national debate and not to have the unfairness and discrimination continued. In any event, if the Greens were seriously concerned about congestion in Dundee, they would know that the tolls cause the congestion there.

I use public transport most of the time, but on the rare occasions when I use the tollbooths, I see queues stretching back. Have members ever seen them? The reality is that the tolls and cars that are idling at the tollbooths cause the congestion. If the cars were allowed to travel freely, the congestion would be much less. I am surprised that the Greens refuse to accept that. For months, Labour and Liberal members have told the media and everybody else that their manifestos will promise to abolish the tolls. Scott Barrie and Marilyn Livingstone have told us that they have conducted debates through Labour's  policy review and we are led to believe that the manifestos for the election in May will contain that promise when they are published.

The member puts his view most eloquently. If what the Labour Party and the Liberals have said about their manifestos is true, they will need to explain to the people and businesses of Fife and Tayside why they will vote in February against abolishing the tolls and yet expect people to trust them in May. That is Tavish's toll tax on the people of Fife and Tayside. I warn Labour and the Liberals that the cynical ploy to allow Fife MSPs to vote for my motion will not work. Labour and the Liberals have calculated that, with Green support, they will defeat another Scottish National Party motion to abolish the tolls on the Forth and the Tay road bridges, but no one will be fooled by such naked opportunism and self-preservation. If the Greens say that they will not go along with those games, we can be sure that the Fife Labour and Liberal MSPs will be whipped with greater urgency than is in Helen Eadie's body. The people of Fife know that an SNP Government will abolish the tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges and will develop the new Forth crossing that Labour and the Liberals have delayed for too long. I move, That the Parliament believes that the tolls should be removed from the Forth Road Bridge and the Tay Road Bridge.

I think I heard the minister say that it would be next summer before any second-stage transfers took place; perhaps she could confirm that. Does she accept that stock transfer has stalled because of the debacle surrounding the second-stage transfer from the Glasgow Housing Association to housing associations in Glasgow? Is not it about time the Executive kept its promises  to the people of Glasgow, who have been betrayed?

The member must have been delighted when Thatcher snatched the milk back from the school kids.

Initially, I was not convinced that the Schools  (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill was needed. The hungry for success campaign seemed to be working fairly well and I struggled to understand why statutory measures were required. The turkey twizzlers that were so hated by Jamie Oliver were never a feature of school meals in Scotland, thanks to the hungry for success campaign. However, the exchange, which has already been mentioned, between the committee and the Scottish Food and Drink Federation and the British Soft Drinks Association convinced me that the bill is needed. They suggested that they could meet the nutritional standards by reducing the size of their chocolate bars and that concerns about fizzy drinks in schools could be solved by providing straws. We were grateful for the British Dental Association's absolute rejection of the idea that straws can mitigate the effects of fizzy drinks on teeth. In the face of an obesity epidemic, appalling oral health and growing concern about the food that we shovel into ourselves and our children, the evidence from the food and drink associations was astonishing. It convinced me that culture change is not enough and that legislation is required. I hope that the food and drink associations and their member organisations will reflect on the evidence that was given to the committee and consider whether they served their cause and their membership well. I turn to the issues that divided the committee and are the subject of the amendments to the motion. The bill does not provide for free school meals. It affords local authorities the flexibility to provide free breakfasts and snacks but not the flexibility to introduce free school meals. As Patrick Harvie said, that is illogical. If local authorities are to be trusted to make decisions about breakfast and snacks, I do not see why we cannot trust them to make decisions about free school meals. As Charlie Gordon pointed out, we should give them the flexibility to do that. The Government at Westminster has given such flexibility to local authorities in England and Wales, but the Labour and Liberal Executive in Scotland will not provide similar flexibility here. The committee heard evidence from the Child Poverty Action Group and others on Hull City Council's pilot project to provide free school meals. That evidence was not sought by the committee and was not part of the Executive's consultation. The majority of the committee pointed out, rightly, that the pilot scheme in Hull has not been evaluated in Scotland. That is why they would not support my proposition that local authorities in Scotland should be able to introduce pilot schemes on free school meals. Today, in a statement on the project in Hull, the CPAG states:  "There has ... been a 'dramatic' increase in the take up of school meals, with 64% of pupils now taking a healthy school lunch." That is a figure that we can only dream about. The CPAG also quotes the director of the institute for learning at the University of Hull, who said: "There has been a significant impact in all areas of children's schooling: from behaviour, social relationships, health and learning, children were more relaxed, more alert, more calm and less irritable." I instinctively believe that a nutritious school meal at lunch time is a benefit to children. Even if there is no evidence to prove that, I instinctively believe it, as a parent who has brought up children. Labour and Liberal members might believe that there is no benefit to a nutritional school meal at lunch time, but they have no evidence to support that view. If they are convinced that they are correct, why do they not have the courage to allow local authorities to run pilot schemes in Scotland so that we can evaluate the health benefits and the costs to local authorities? However, the Executive has set its face against that. The Executive has also set its face against the committee's unanimous view that the provisions in the bill must be extended to independent schools. One of the minister's officials said: "Essentially, it is not normal practice for the Executive to impose legislative burdens on independent schools as, by their very nature, they are independent."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 24 October 2006; c 4148.] Frankly, I have never heard such nonsense in my life. That would mean that Disclosure Scotland would not apply and that no inspections would ever take place. Of course we place legislative burdens on independent schools. As I have said to the minister before, the issue is about all our children in Scotland, regardless of where they are educated. I suggest that the bill should be extended to cover the independent sector. Anonymous systems using palm prints and biometrics have been talked about. If the Government wants to introduce identification cards or palm-print and biometric technology, it should have the courage to come to the Parliament and debate it. What is not acceptable is that, by the back door, in a piece of legislation that has nothing to do with it, the Executive would introduce palm printing and biometrics to our schools. That is unacceptable behaviour. I am sorry that David Davidson is no longer in the chamber, because his speech was the silliest that I have heard for such a long time. It suggested to me that he has not read any of the evidence submitted to the committee. There will be no frisking of children bringing food into schools—

The conclusion at paragraph 27 of the committee's report makes it clear that there has never been any suggestion that children will be frisked. David Davidson was extremely silly, and I hope that he will reflect on that tonight.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The minister talks about the need for our children to be given the right start in life. Will he say why the Executive has set its face against extending the bill to cover the independent sector? The children in those schools are Scotland's children too.

Will the minister give way?

I am interested to hear about the innovation fund. Is there any money left in the fund so that, if other organisations have a good idea such as the home smart campaign, they can tap into the available funds, which might allow the widest possible distribution of their material?

I add my congratulations to those that have already been offered to Linda Fabiani on raising this important debate. I also congratulate the Scottish Council for Single Homeless on its home smart campaign. From a previous existence—many moons ago in 1988—I remember the I'm offski! campaign, which was, I think, the first attempt to get schools to engage young people in education on housing. In my time at Shelter, we tried hard to ensure that housing education was part of the curriculum. I look back on those days and wish that the Government of the day had taken Shelter, SCSH and other organisations up on that because there has been an explosion in youth homelessness since 1988. Advice such as was contained in I'm offski! and which is provided by the home smart campaign is just the sort of information that young people need so that they can avoid the pitfall of becoming homeless. Avoiding that pitfall is more difficult for them today than it was in 1988. There are greater pressures not just on young people, but on local authorities—which have to deal with more homelessness applications and longer general waiting lists for housing—than there were in 1988. I turn to the problem of the number of young people who leave care and become homeless. There are many reasons—some of which Linda Fabiani mentioned—why they might not be able to sustain tenancies once they are given them. For example, they might allow their house or flat to become a community centre. As well as wanting schools to take up the home smart campaign, I would like the Executive to commit to introducing it to young people who leave care, wherever they may be, as part of its programme of education for that group. It is a tool that the Executive should use. There is a need for part of the campaign to be targeted at young people in care because they are the most vulnerable young people. I want the home smart campaign to be rolled out throughout Scotland. At the moment, it is for  individual schools and teachers to decide whether to embrace the campaign, but it would be extremely useful if the minister and the Executive gave guidance to local authorities to the effect that it is an excellent example of a campaign that should be embraced. This week, the Executive has rightly agreed to the showing in schools throughout Scotland of the Al Gore film on climate change. That is an important move of which I am highly supportive, but the youngsters who become homeless on leaving school and home have great needs, so although I welcome the commitment to show the Al Gore film, I would like the minister to consider the possibility of issuing guidance to schools and local authorities to ensure that campaigns such as SCSH's home smart campaign are introduced. I will finish on a wee sour note. The home smart campaign has been funded by the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, which is a registered charity, and by Lovell House Developments Limited, but it would have been nice if such an important initiative had been supported with Executive money. The Executive has failed to provide money, so I would like the minister to offer some Executive muscle to ensure that the campaign is encouraged in schools—the future of our young people depends on its success.

I listened carefully to the minister's response to Scott Barrie on the Office of Rail Regulation. I welcome the fact that the decision will be made imminently. Given the importance of getting freight off the Fife circle line and the Forth rail bridge, has the minister made any representations to the ORR on the importance of not putting a premium on freight on the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line?

It is almost a year since the joint working team was set up to take forward second-stage transfer. Does the minister understand the anger and sense of betrayal that is felt by the tenants of Glasgow, who were promised second-stage transfer at the time of the ballots? Will she, even now, give those tenants some indication of when the first second-stage transfer will take place?

I know that, as the MSP for Ochil, Presiding Officer, you are rightly concerned about the flooding in Milnathort and Kinross over the past 24 hours. The whole Parliament will wish to express sympathy to those who have been flooded from their homes, particularly at this time of year. For them, there will be very little festive cheer. Will the First Minister join me in thanking the emergency, voluntary and council services, who are working tirelessly to assist? Will he give his assurance that there will be a review of the adequacy or otherwise of the flood defences, a matter that Mr Reid has been highlighting for the past few years? Will the First Minister give his assurance that sufficient resources are in place to deal with the current crisis and to prevent a recurrence?

Is the minister aware that the external auditor has said that Fife Council is in a precarious financial position? Can he tell us whether that is because of continual underfunding over the past eight years by the Labour-Liberal Executive or because of mismanagement by Fife's Labour councillors? Further, does that explain why nearly two thirds of Fife's Labour councillors are jumping ship before the next election, or is the reason for that the fact that they have read the writing on the wall and understand that there will be an SNP administration in Fife as well as an SNP Administration in the Scottish Parliament?

Will the member give way?

Citizens Advice Scotland gave us a stage 3 briefing, the first line of which says: "Without exemption of the primary dwelling house, land attachment will be a significant step backwards in modernising diligence." That is why the Scottish National Party will vote against the bill tonight. The arguments were rehearsed earlier, but the minister should be left in no doubt about the widespread anger and concern that the measures will bring. The minister asserted earlier that he was not wicked or immoral. He may not be, but setting up a system whereby somebody's home can be forcibly sold for a debt of £3,000 is both wicked and immoral. Land attachment will not be the diligence of last resort; it will be the diligence of first resort. Yesterday, the Executive performed a U-turn on the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill. I recognise that the Executive is not programmed for any more than one U-turn in a four-year period. Personally, I would have traded yesterday's U-turn for a U-turn today. The minister may bluster all he wants, and Labour members may be in denial, but the impact of the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Bill will be felt in communities that the minister knows well the length and breadth of Scotland. The Parliament removed the threat that poindings and warrant sales held over people, yet the Executive is hellbent on replacing that threat with another, which would arguably have a greater impact. It will drive people to borrow at even higher rates of interest and will cause even more indebtedness. I am indebted to Citizens Advice Scotland for making the point that land attachments are a far more coercive measure than poindings and warrant sales, as they involve the ultimate loss of a debtor's home. The Government has forced young families to buy a home rather than rent, because there are no affordable houses to rent. Often, they have to buy at prices that they cannot afford. Now the Government is prepared to allow homes to be sold from under those families if they run up a debt of £3,000. It is in the area of homelessness that the bill's impact will be felt most. The Executive has rightly received praise for its homelessness policy, but  the bill comes in marked contrast. It could, and I believe will, create homelessness. It is draconian. I urge members of the Executive parties to think again and, even at this late stage, to perform the U-turn that the minister opposes and vote against the bill.

The ministers have put forward their bill to do certain things, which they claim it will do, but the difficulty is that they have not listened to the evidence from Citizens Advice Scotland, money advice centres and the like. It is clear that any Executive that introduces legislation in this area of law would have to listen very carefully to what is said by organisations in that sector. It would have to strike the right balance between the creditor and the debtor. The bill patently fails to do that. I urge members of the Executive parties to think again and vote against the bill at 5 o'clock. It deserves no better.

Will the member take an intervention?

When the minister meets Scottish Gas, will he ask whether it is not about time that some sort of priority system was introduced? I have been contacted by a number of constituents, one of whom has chronic heart failure, diabetes and osteoarthritis. He and his wife, who are both 68 years old, have been given no date for a survey or for the installation of central heating. There needs to be—

Does the minister agree that there needs to be some sort of priority system and, if so, will he take the matter up with Scottish Gas when he meets the company?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce a timetable for the second-stage transfer of Glasgow housing stock. (S2O-11257)

I thank the minister for his reply, but I think that my question was more to do with when the second-stage transfers would start. As for the 10-year timetable that he mentioned, surely he is not suggesting that none of the second-stage transfers will take place before those 10 years are up. I repeat the question: when will second-stage transfers begin? Moreover, when will the minister acknowledge that the failure to start second-stage transfers in Glasgow is causing the no votes in housing stock transfer ballots throughout Scotland?

Yesterday, this Parliament did Scotland proud by voting for the St Andrew's day holiday. Today, on St Andrew's day, the Executive parties will make the shameful decision that a family home can be forcibly sold for a debt of £3,001. Without exception, the organisations that help people in debt are opposed to that draconian measure. Alex Neil's amendments will remove the family home from land attachment. As Citizens Advice Scotland said:  "Without exemption of the primary dwelling house, land attachment will be a significant step backwards in modernising diligence." If the Executive prevails today and the bill is passed, Scots law will prevent a debtor's furniture and cooker from being sold, but will simultaneously allow the sale of a family home, so that there would be no place to put the furniture or the cooker. The Executive's proposals are wicked and shameful, and they will lead to increased homelessness and threatened homelessness. The minister's late amendments will perhaps take effect in two years' time, but they are couched in maybes, mays and coulds. Whatever the minister says at this point is not worth the breath. Citizens Advice Scotland does not believe that the Executive amendments are sufficient, and the SNP agrees. I urge MSPs to think of their constituents, to examine their consciences and to support Alex Neil's amendments, which will protect the many thousands of people who are in debt every year from losing their homes for as little as £3,001. Forty years ago this week, a Labour Government was in power when the whole of the United Kingdom was shocked by "Cathy Come Home" and by the problems of debt and homelessness. Today, Scotland will be shocked that members of a Labour Government are prepared to countenance pushing people with small debts into homelessness by selling their homes from under them. Shame on them.

Amendments 149, 151 and 152 would increase from £3,000 to £5,000 the debt limit for granting a land attachment. As Christine May said earlier, land attachments are a far more coercive measure than poindings and warrant sales, as they involve the ultimate loss of a debtor's home. Christine May's amendments do not address the principle of land attachment of the family home, which will be discussed later. However, the amendments would make the situation marginally better than that which the Government proposes, so we will support them.

I will be brief. Christine May's amendment 148 would introduce a hierarchy of diligence and ensure that the creditor used other means to try to recover their money before they attempted to sell the debtor's house. It would not prevent the attachment and sale of a family home, which we will discuss in the debate on group 17, but in the meantime, a hierarchy of diligence is better than what is in the bill at the moment. The introduction of a hierarchy would bring the bill into line with previous legislation. We will support the amendment.

No.

I can confirm that we are considering exactly the same bill—there have been no amendments to it whatever. The bill that Mr Smith voted against on that occasion is the bill that he will vote in favour of tonight.

I must have misheard the member; he said that he was a long-standing supporter of a St Andrew's day holiday. I seem to remember him speaking against such a holiday the last time the subject was debated.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish the regulations on the operation of next year's local government elections. (S2O-11190)

Is the minister aware that there is great concern among returning officers and other interested parties at the delay in publishing the regulations? Is he satisfied that sufficient time will be available for the administrative tasks that must be performed? Is it too much to hope that the delays mean that common sense has finally prevailed in the Executive and that he is really paving the way for an announcement that the local government and Scottish Parliament elections will not take place on the same day? If so, he will have my total support.

Does the member accept that, as recently as the 1960s, Christmas day was not a public holiday in Scotland?

I thank the Communities Committee's clerks for their sterling work in the past months and all my Communities Committee colleagues for their work. This stage has been a long time coming, and I am thinking as I look at the clock that we are going to be free soon. Everybody accepts that the current planning system is inadequate. Nobody is satisfied with it. Ministers believe that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill will deal with those concerns. In that context, they have invested a lot of hope in pre-application consultation. The bill will go a long way to solving the current problems, but I regret that Sandra White's proposals on a very limited TPRA in specific circumstances have not been accepted. Of course, legislation can do only so much. Changing the cultures of local authorities, developers and communities will be much harder than passing the bill, but it is required to make the legislation work. Furthermore, the shortage of qualified planners must be addressed urgently. The Executive must ensure that adequate resources are made available, or the legislation will not do what all members hope it will do. Mr McLetchie and Fergus Ewing exposed the Executive's compulsory double tax on businesses. Ministers should have listened to the FSB on that issue. I am not convinced that the position of Fife, which will be included within the overlapping boundaries of two strategic development plan areas, has been sufficiently addressed. I am still concerned that the wishes of Fife will be overruled by the needs of the larger partner authorities. However, the bill has the potential to change the existing planning system for the better. Many of the organisations, businesses and individuals who gave evidence believe that it will do so, and the Scottish National Party will support the bill tonight, as we did at stage 1.  I will spend a few moments talking about the legislative process, as most members have already done. After almost two sessions of this Parliament, we are not getting it right. Unlike Westminster, we have only one opportunity to get legislation right. Stages 1 and 2 work adequately, but for a complex piece of legislation such as the bill, stage 3 leaves me profoundly dissatisfied. I do not think that there is unwillingness to change, nor am I blaming the Executive. Rather, there is an inability to see how we can change. I have a couple of suggestions. We faced an avalanche of amendments at stage 3, some of which—Pauline McNeill's amendments on houses in multiple occupation, for example—had never been considered at stage 2 and on which no evidence had been led at stage 1. As it always does, the Executive lodged many stage 3 amendments, some of which were substantial. It would be helpful if we had a system whereby stage 3 amendments were accompanied by an explanatory paragraph from the member or minister. That might have gone some way to dealing with the briefings that we received on Pauline McNeill's HMO amendments. The Presiding Officers also have a responsibility to be less flexible in what they accept as stage 3 amendments. For example, they should reject stage 3 amendments that could have been but were not lodged at stage 2. That would free up some time at stage 3 and force members to address issues earlier in the process, instead of looking at an issue two weeks before a stage 3 debate and then deciding to lodge an amendment, which I suspect is what is happening on some occasions. We have a lot to do. We need to address those issues before next year. Finally, I wish Johann Lamont well in her new role, although I warn her that it is only going to last until May.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. We are considering stage 3 of a bill, which will no doubt go into law today, so it is important that, when members have questions about it, we have a minister present who can put the answer on record. The Executive's practice is simply not acceptable, so I hope that you will make a ruling on that.

I support Robin Harper's amendments 142 to 145, as I supported the equivalent amendments at stage 2. I should record that I received a special tree when we were being lobbied in the Parliament some months ago. I am happy to report that, despite my tender mercies, it is still alive. Robin Harper makes an eloquent case. Most of us who live in urban areas particularly appreciate the trees that surround us. It is important that they are protected. In addition, we need a register of the many special trees in Scotland. The register could bring visitors to areas if they know where the trees are and can find out about their significance. I am happy to support Robin Harper's amendments.

I say to Cathie Craigie, who regretted the amount of time that has been spent on discussing community issues such as TPRA, that this is a democracy and we have a right to talk about these matters. The amendments in the name of Sandra White, which seek to introduce a very limited third-party right of appeal, are sensible. With the bill, the Executive is expecting communities to make a leap of faith, undergo a culture change and simply accept that the new system will somehow make everything all right. If the minister is right, the consultation with communities will work effectively. However, Sandra White's proposal seeks to deal with situations in which, for example, a local development plan that has been agreed in the consultation process is simply overturned for a particular planning application. Surely, in such circumstances, a community has the right to appeal. After all, it has engaged in the consultation at the beginning of the process; if its views are then set aside by the planning authority, it has a perfect right to be heard. Amendments 130, 131 and 132 seek to introduce a very limited third-party right of appeal and I ask members to support them.

Will the minister give way?

The SNP will not support amendment 69, in the name of Donald Gorrie. It is not that we do not have sympathy with amendment—we do. However, there is a problem with proposed new subsection (3C) of section 26 of the 1997 act, in which Donald Gorrie defines a temporary place of residence as a place that is "occupied for less than 26 weeks in a year." The problem with that definition is that if somebody is taken into hospital or goes abroad to work, it is possible that their house might be designated as a second home. That is an example of the law of unintended consequences. The proposal has not been thought out, so the SNP will not support amendment 69. We also have great sympathy with amendment 22. I know about the work on affordable housing that John Home Robertson and other members of the Communities Committee have done. We have an acute housing shortage because of a lack of affordable accommodation. There must be strategic use of land. We must ensure that any land that is available is available first of all to local authorities. Another issue that we must address is the compulsion on local authorities to sell off land to the highest bidder. We must ensure that, when local authorities draw up their housing plans, they are allowed to keep back some land for their own use or for the use of others who are building affordable accommodation. We must ensure that PAN 74 is implemented as quickly as possible to allow developments to take place.

I have a great deal of sympathy with the amendments in Pauline McNeill's name. On a number of occasions, Pauline McNeill has tried, as have other members, to get the Executive to deal  with the issues around houses in multiple occupation. During the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, the Executive's response was that they were a planning matter. When we came to the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, the minister said that the issues might have something to do with planning, that the Executive was in dialogue with local authorities and that it would report back on the matter at a later stage. Of course, the minister failed to do so, despite the undertaking to the Communities Committee to report back to us by stage 2. We did not get that report. According to the Executive neither the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill nor the Housing (Scotland) Bill was the appropriate mechanism. Ministers must now tell us what they intend to do about HMOs. My regret about Pauline McNeill's amendments—I am not blaming her for this—is that we have had no opportunity to scrutinise them, nor did the Communities Committee take any evidence on the matter, and I am not convinced that the amendments would do as Pauline McNeill hopes.

I understand the frustrations that have led to Pauline McNeill's amendments. We look to the minister—

We look to the minister to respond and say how he intends to take the issue forward. It is simply not acceptable to go no further than where we are now. If the minister is saying that legislation is not required, does he intend to issue guidelines to local authorities, which currently all have different policies for their areas? We are looking for a timescale for action on the matter.

The Executive has dragged its feet for long enough on the matter. Communities are crying out for action, and it is simply unacceptable that the Scottish Executive has so far taken none.

Is the minister saying that, if members in Fife believe passionately that they should vote against an issue on the strategic authority, and do so, they could not be outvoted on it?

I welcome the visitors to the gallery and the people in Markinch who are viewing the debate on a webcam. I pay tribute to Christine May for bringing the debate to Parliament and for the eloquent way in which she spoke about her constituency. I have worked out that during this very short debate, we have been to Edinburgh, Orkney, the Cowal peninsula, Midlothian and Denmark. It is therefore quite appropriate that I bring the debate back to the glorious kingdom of Fife. I want to pick up on a couple of issues such as the bronze age burial cist at Sillerhole. It is  important that some of our artefacts be retained locally and that the National Museum of Scotland does not always get to cherry pick the best—after all, it is our heritage and it is important to make sure that as much as possible of it remains in the care of local people. That is why I support the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland's recommendation that local authorities and other agencies should have a statutory duty to conserve and care for the historical environment. We have seen cultural vandalism in Fife in the not-too-distant past. Christine May mentioned the henge at Balfarg, which was moved by the then Glenrothes Development Corporation to another site. That is cultural vandalism, in my view and in the view of others. If there had been a statutory duty on public bodies such as that corporation, that could not have happened. I also want to mention the Wemyss caves, which are close to my heart and to the hearts of many in Fife. They contain some of the best ancient cave drawings, but are under threat from coastal erosion. We have already lost too much of the Wemyss caves. I know that it will cost a great deal of money to protect them, but I cannot believe that any other country in Europe would allow such a valuable piece of heritage to disappear completely. Some of the world's most fabulous caves, particularly those in France, have been preserved, so I do not believe that it is beyond our wit or will as politicians and individuals to find a way to preserve one of the most spectacular examples of our heritage and past. I urge the minister to say something about the Wemyss caves in her winding up speech. When she is finishing the debate, could she also address the points that Christine May made about how best to preserve our heritage for the future? I acknowledge the work that Christine May has done, particularly on the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. Although her amendments have been withdrawn, I know that she has had discussions with the minister and with others. I believe that we need some sort of resolution of the issue, so I hope the minister will say something about where those discussions are going. I close by paying tribute to Christine May and to all those who have spoken in the debate, and I extend to Christine my warmest thanks for giving us the opportunity to discuss the matter.

In 2000, a minority report from the SNP members of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee had this to say about the Government's proposals on stock transfer: "The minority felt that the Government's stock transfer proposals were clearly driven by Treasury policy, and that tenant involvement and participation is a secondary concern due to the repeated failure of the Minister to disclose other plans were there to be a 'No' vote by tenants." Let us move on six years. The Executive still has no plan B in place now that Edinburgh, Stirling and Renfrewshire have rejected wholesale stock transfer. As the Minister for Communities told me two weeks ago at the Communities Committee, "Where community ownership takes place, new borrowing is not public expenditure, so it makes perfect sense from the Treasury's point of view to write off debt for community ownership but not for councils that retain their own stock ... The debt is there and will remain there until people vote for community ownership. That is just a fact of life".—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 24 October 2006; c 4127.] Johann Lamont gave powerful support to housing associations in her speech, and I acknowledge fully that transfer to housing associations is not privatisation, that housing associations contribute a great deal to their communities and that, in many places, people believe in them passionately. However, the point is that the Government's flagship policy of whole stock transfer was never driven by the tenants' aspirations; it was driven by no more than Treasury policy. At the Communities Committee, the minister rejected my suggestion that he get in touch with the Treasury and ask it to write off the capital debt on Scottish housing stock. If he genuinely cared about the conditions in which people live, he would recognise that it is unfair to expect current local authority housing tenants to pay out of their rent for the historical capital debt on houses that have been sold or demolished and to take responsibility for bringing housing stock up to the quality standard that the Government has set. Rents cannot keep going up. That would be neither fair nor sustainable. Malcolm Chisholm said last week at question time that the debacle over Glasgow's second-stage stock transfer had no bearing on the no votes in Edinburgh and Stirling. In fact, it was central to those votes. To put it simply, the people of Glasgow were promised the second-stage transfer of their housing to the housing  associations about which Johann Lamont spoke so passionately, but it has not been delivered. Even now, the minister is unable and unwilling to say when or if any of those transfers will take place. That is a debacle in anyone's language. It is a matter of trust, and tenants in communities that are now faced with a ballot simply do not believe the minister when he promises them anything because he has let down the Glasgow tenants. That is well known throughout Scotland and explains why he gets the results that he is getting. Since the Government came to power, the communities budget, which includes housing, has risen in real terms by 5.9 per cent while the whole Scottish budget has increased by 17.1 per cent. The minister must explain to members why the housing budget has risen much more slowly than any other Scottish Executive budget. The impact of that underfunding is clear: in every year from 1999 to 2004, the Government built fewer houses in the social rented sector than the Tories built in 1995. We have a crisis in housing. The Government has had nine years to do something about it and it has failed. I move amendment S2M-5104.2, to leave out from the first "calls on" to end and insert: "recognises the failure of the Scottish Executive to adequately fund Scottish housing and its refusal to consider any other funding options than large-scale voluntary transfer; deplores the lack of real choice offered to Scottish tenants; condemns the Executive's failure to deliver the promise of second-stage transfer to the tenants of Glasgow Housing Association, and calls on the Minister for Communities to make immediate representations to the UK Treasury for the write-off of local authorities' capital housing debt without preconditions."

Does Mr Scott recall that almost a year ago, the First Minister told me that it would be particularly stupid to carry out the work that he has just announced? Does the minister agree that if that work had been carried out a year ago, the decision could have been made this summer instead of next summer? Will he give a commitment that, regardless of which design is chosen, the Executive agrees in principle to the building of a new Forth crossing, thereby ending once and for all the uncertainty for businesses in Fife and the north?

Is it not the case that everybody but the minister knows that the Government's flagship policy of wholesale stock transfer is dead in the water? The minister, once again, blames misinformation campaigns. Does he not accept that the debacle of the Glasgow housing stock transfer and the Government's failure to deliver second-stage transfer to Glasgow tenants has led to other tenants who are faced with a ballot not trusting the minister and the Government to deliver on their promises? Even Margaret Curran recognises that. Will the minister take the opportunity today to give a timescale for the second-stage stock transfer in Glasgow?

The minister must be aware of the great concern throughout housing associations and local authorities in Scotland that the 2012 target to house all those who are homeless is under threat because they simply do not have the resources. What can the minister tell us about additional resources that might go towards housing and homelessness to ensure that the 2012 target is met?

It is regrettable that the report was released to housing organisations but withheld from MSPs, despite a promise to members of the Communities Committee that we would get it at half past 11 today. It is quite unacceptable that such a detailed document was not made available to members until it appeared at the back of the chamber when the minister first stood up to make his statement. The report is not a comprehensive examination of the effect of the right to buy, despite the minister's claims. The report says that people who have bought through the right to buy view the policy positively. However, no one asked the people who have lost out through a lack of choice of housing type or who are now waiting longer to be housed whether they view the policy favourably. When will the minister take their views and needs into account, or do they not matter? The minister claims that many younger people consider that owner occupation is a realistic option for them. Will he not acknowledge the truth, which everybody in the chamber and outside it knows, which is that many of them are buying because they have no choice and because they cannot get a house for rent? They are buying at prices that  are more than they can afford, and mortgage arrears are increasing.

Just this week, it was revealed that homelessness due to repossession is at an all-time high. Nearly 500,000 houses have been sold under the right-to-buy policy, which means that the number of homes that are available has been reduced, yet this Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition—

I am coming to it. Three thousand four hundred—

In 2004, the Executive built only 3,483 socially rented houses, which is less than were built by the Tories in 1995. Will the minister tell us what increase in money for housing he has made a bid for in the next spending review?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it gives for the provision of sports facilities. (S2O-10406)

The minister is aware from the "National Audit of Scotland's Sports Facilities" of upgrade and maintenance costs of £306 million a year for the next 25 years. Given the Labour-Liberal Democrat Government's stated aim of improving the fitness and health of Scots, what additional measures does it intend to introduce to plug the funding gap? What financial assistance will be given to Fife Council to upgrade and renew Fife institute and the Carnegie leisure centre and to provide a new swimming pool for Kirkcaldy?

Does the member think that it is a great pity that, although the Executive has accepted many proposals, it did not accept the proposal that local government and Scottish Parliament elections should not take place on the same day?

It is an enormous pleasure to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee. I draw members' attention to a book that was handed to me today, "The Borders' Last Days of Steam". It was written a few years ago and says: "The run down of the system"— that is, the railways in our Borders— "intensified during the Beeching era, culminating in the devastating closure of the Waverley Route on 6 January, 1969. This closure showed only too well the indifference of government, any government, to the future of the country's railways, closure procedures having been initiated by a Conservative administration and implemented by a Labour administration. Today, politicians promise a railway renaissance and there is even talk of restoring a service between Edinburgh and Galashiels, but the current railway fiasco, along with a lack of any meaningful financing for what remains of our railway network, does little to inspire confidence in the future." Today, we have a wonderful opportunity to right the wrongs of years ago and to inspire confidence in the writer and others in the Borders that the Parliament will deliver the Waverley line. The bill has taken 33 months to get to this stage, and I believe that no other bill has taken as long to go through the Parliament. I am not particularly pleased about that record. However, I thank most sincerely all the committee clerks, including Fergus Cochrane, who has been a star throughout the process. The committee travelled to Galashiels and Newtongrange on cold, windy and wet Mondays in February and sat together through evidence-taking meetings. We now know more about noise decibel levels than we perhaps ever wanted to know. I will speak about some of the main issues that arise from our consideration stage report. We have debated Stow station and the railway's proceeding all the way to Tweedbank, so I will focus on other issues. In his closing speech, Ted Brocklebank will speak about appropriate assessment and respond to points that were raised during the debate.  I pay tribute to the objectors who engaged with us during our consideration of their objections. We sought to create a process and an atmosphere that allowed them to engage and openly question the railway's impact on them. The clarity and professionalism of their written and oral evidence were a credit to them. We realise that some of them, particularly those on whom land take will have an impact, will be disappointed at the conclusions that we reached in our report, but we had to make difficult decisions. I hope that everyone recognises the care and time that we took and the substantial improvements and safeguards that we introduced to the bill, many of which emerged from objectors' concerns. We had to balance the promoter's desire for the scheme and its preferred route against the impact on individuals. Our overall conclusion is that an appropriate balance has been struck between the rights of those individuals who will be adversely affected by the railway and the project's wider community benefits. In addressing some of the objectors' most common concerns, we secured an assurance from the promoter that minimal land will be acquired—it will be restricted to the land that is required for the purposes of the railway. We have amended the bill to remove land plots that are no longer required. We have further amended the bill to ensure that the environmental impact of the railway is no worse than the residual impacts that were identified in the various environmental documents and to ensure that pledges that the promoter made on the provision of environmental mitigation are delivered—for example, the promoter undertook to install a noise barrier at a property. We have also amended the bill to ensure that the code of construction practice, which sets out how contractors will mitigate impacts during the construction phase of the railway, and the noise and vibration policy, which sets the threshold levels above which noise and vibration mitigation will be provided during the railway's operation, are legally enforced. If the promoter breaches the requirements of those documents, the local planning authority will have the power to enforce compliance to the extent that it could stop the project. In our report, we were critical of the Scottish Executive over its lack of a decision on whether a voluntary purchase scheme would be supported and over the unacceptable time that it took to make a decision on whether it would support an advance purchase scheme. Objectors contacted the committee to describe the impact that the delay was having on them, yet that appears to have had little effect on the Executive in progressing the matter with due urgency. However, a positive decision has now been made  on APS, and I understand that discussions are now under way with affected property owners, albeit very late in the day. I look forward to hearing what the Minister for Transport has to say to those people—some of whom are in the gallery—in his speech. On voluntary purchase, in our view, the Executive has paid little regard to people whose property could be bought because of the severe adverse impact of the railway on them. I wrote to the minister on 5 June, asking for a decision. I have received no reply whatever to that letter. I will give way to the Minister for Transport now if he is willing to give a straight yes or no answer on whether there will be a voluntary purchase scheme.

I am grateful to the minister for his assurance. I ask him to move the matter on as quickly as possible. Before it takes a decision on whether to pass the bill, I should inform the Parliament that, in accordance with the habitats directive, the Parliament must satisfy itself that the works proposed in the bill will not adversely affect the integrity of the River Tweed special area of conservation. Ted Brocklebank will elaborate on the background to that in his speech, but I advise the Parliament that the committee has explored the matter in some detail and has reported to the Parliament accordingly. On the basis of the evidence provided and, in particular, of the recommendations of Scottish Natural Heritage, our conclusion is that sufficient measures are in place to deliver the mitigation required, thereby ensuring that the works that the bill proposes will not adversely affect the integrity of the River Tweed SAC. This is an historic day. The Waverley line, which was butchered by the Beeching cuts, will at least be partly restored. This is a good day for the Parliament and a good day for the Borders. Let us make the vote at 5 o'clock today unanimous. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I will be brief. Amendment 4 is a technical amendment that removes from the bill a power for the authorised undertaker to demolish the listed footbridge at the former Eskbank and Dalkeith station without obtaining listed building consent. Following representations by Historic Scotland that the listed structure ought to be retained, the promoter has satisfied itself that the demolition is not necessary for the purposes of the construction of the railway.  Amendment 4 moved—[Tricia Marwick]—and agreed to.

The bill has taken almost three years to go through the scrutiny process, but that was not the fault of the committee. Before that, the Scottish Borders railway feasibility study, which was commissioned by the former Scottish Office, was published in October 2000. The Executive then allocated funding for a further study into the resurrection of the Borders railway. We are talking about a period of almost six years. Ted Brocklebank referred to the objectors who came before the committee, some of whom were in great distress. For almost six years, they have been wondering whether the railway will affect their homes.

I accept what the member says; these things are hugely complex. However, in fairness to the objectors, we have to give them some sort of timescale. They need clarity on the timescale within which they will know whether or not their properties will be bought. That is the least that we can do for them. Many people who will suffer personally because of the project also support a Borders railway; they know that it is needed. The committee heard about the state that some of these people are in. In our consideration stage amendments, we struck the appropriate balance between the needs of the objector and the promoter. On behalf of the people who will be directly affected by the railway, I ask the Parliament to reject amendments 2 and 3 in the name of the minister. I ask the Parliament to support amendment 1 in my name, which will allow some clarity to be brought into the process.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

Will the member give way?

Amendment 1, which seeks to reduce the time period set out in section 26(2) from seven to five years, is consequential to and in line with the amendment that was made to section 26(1) at consideration stage. I oppose amendments 2 and 3, in the name of the minister, which seek to overturn amendments to sections 26 and 35 that were agreed by the committee at consideration stage. It might assist the chamber if I clarify the purpose of those two sections and why we amended them. Section 26 confers a power on the authorised undertaker—initially Scottish Borders Council—to acquire land compulsorily. On receipt of that power, it shall kick-start the compulsory acquisition process by serving notices to treat or general vesting declarations on affected landowners stating precisely what land is required. The consideration stage amendment made by the committee reduced from seven to five years the time period during which those notices must be served. That means not that the land must be acquired within five years—desirable though that might be—but that the process of acquisition must begin within five years. In our view, there will be a  question mark over the competent management of the project if within five years the authorised undertaker is not able to firm up precisely the railway's design, identify exactly what land it requires and secure the necessary funding to pay for it. Members will be well aware of the history of errors made in identifying land and landowners who might be affected by the railway and in failing to notify them. Those errors prolonged the passage of the bill, and such delay cannot go on. Surely, after everything that has happened, the promoter now has all the necessary arrangements in hand to move forward quickly to firm up the identification of land and to negotiate its purchase to allow construction to commence. Amendment 2, in the name of the minister, would allow the Scottish ministers to extend by order the period for the compulsory acquisition of land from five years to a period not in excess of 10 years. The minister is seeking to insert a provision into the bill that will confer delegated powers on ministers—a provision that will not be scrutinised by the Parliament's Subordinate Legislation Committee within the time available. I note that the minister has chosen not to use the affirmative resolution procedure, which would have required any order to be approved by the Parliament. Where is the evidence for that approach? Why has the minister never made representations to us about those matters? He had nearly three years to do so. The committee reduced the time period from seven years to five with no scope for extension, but now the minister wants to take it perhaps to 10 years. Why? Had the committee not reduced it to five, would the seven years still have been sufficient? Would the minister have sought to amend the seven years? Why is a period of 10 years needed, how did the Executive reach that figure, and why did it not do so at the outset, when it expected the railway to be built two years earlier than it does now? I turn to amendment 3. Section 35 confers permitted development powers on the authorised undertaker. It grants planning permission for works subject to the condition that development must be begun—not completed, but begun—within eight years of royal assent. That means that digging excavation trenches might be all the authorised undertaker need do. Desirable as it is for all concerned that the project is completed by 2011, development is taken to be initiated when operations are begun. The amendment made by the committee at consideration stage gives the authorised undertaker until 2014 to exercise those powers—eight years from now, and three years beyond when the authorised undertaker and the Executive  have repeatedly stated that the railway should be constructed and operational. Members may draw comparisons with the time limits provided for in other railway or tram bills, but those are different schemes, with different bills promoted by different promoters, scrutinised by different committees and with different histories and backgrounds. I reiterate that people need clarity about the project. The minister's amendments do not provide clarity, but extend the suffering and uncertainty. I urge members to support amendment 1 and to reject amendments 2 and 3. I move amendment 1.

Will the member give way?

Amendments 6 to 8 and 13 to 15, which are in my name, are technical. They will correct land referencing and plot references in the bill and provide an interpretation to the Stow station maps, plans and sections, which form one of the bill's accompanying documents. The Stow maps, plans and sections identify land plots that have been revised as a result of new Ordnance Survey mapping of the area and provide an update of the details that are shown in the maps, plans and sections for the entire scheme that were lodged with the bill on introduction. I urge members to support my amendments. I oppose the amendments that Bristow Muldoon lodged. He seeks to overturn the amendment that the committee unanimously agreed—that there should be a station at Stow. The committee made it clear at the preliminary and consideration stages that there should be a station at Stow. Of course, Mr Muldoon made no representations on that matter or any other in the preliminary stage debate in Parliament or to the committee. He should have made much of the case that he has made today at the preliminary stage, but he chose not to. The promoter gave evidence that it had taken a hard-hearted economic business view of Stow. My committee looked beyond the business case and focused on maximising the social benefits that the railway can bring to the wider Borders community. If those benefits are to be maximised, the railway must serve a wider catchment area than just that around Galashiels. The railway cannot be called a Borders railway if it has only two stations at the bottom end of the line and then 20-plus miles of track until it reaches Midlothian, which will have five stations. I hope that the Local Government and Transport Committee, which Bristow Muldoon convenes, does not make all its decisions based purely on the financial case. If we do that, we might as well close every railway in Scotland and not build another. As I recall, the evidence from the Strategic Rail Authority remarked on the difficulty of finding viable railways in Britain. Broadly speaking, railways are not profitable in London or Glasgow and are unlikely to be profitable in the Borders or, dare I say it, between Airdrie and Bathgate. The creation of a station at Stow will provide scope to draw additional passengers to the railway from commuters and travellers from towns such as Lauder and Clovenfords. Widening the social and  economic opportunities and improving the area's accessibility to the capital are the prime reasons why the committee amended the bill to provide for an additional stop at Stow. Bristow Muldoon suggested that timetabling would be a difficulty for the proposed station. However, I can assure him that the committee was told that time had been saved on the line. As a committee, we reckoned that the time that had been saved was more than adequate to serve the station at Stow. In its evidence the promoter, which did not support a station at Stow on purely economic grounds, suggested that such a station could be added at a later stage. The committee's decision to include provision in the bill at consideration stage for a station at Stow was not inconsistent with that position. The bill as it stands does not require a station at Stow—although that is what we want—but enables the creation of such a station by providing for all the powers and permissions that would be necessary for such a station to be built. The amendments in the name of Bristow Muldoon would remove those powers and permissions. It is clear that he has no intention of ever providing a station at Stow. The opportunity to build a railway comes very rarely. If the railway is to be built without a station at Stow, does anyone seriously believe that the station will be built at some time in the future? I do not, and I doubt that many other members believe that. That is why the Parliament should oppose the amendments in the name of Bristow Muldoon.

I do not think so, but it was up to the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee to make its own decisions on that. It was open to that committee to insert in the bill a requirement that the line would not be built in phases, as the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee has done. I have no doubt that a railway from Gorebridge to Edinburgh is desirable, but the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill is not a bill to construct such a railway; it is a bill to construct a railway to and from the Borders. It should not be converted by one member's amendments into a bill that excludes the Borders. The bill at it stands, as amended by the committee, provides clarity and purpose to all parties, particularly people who will lose their land or property to make way for the railway. I urge members to listen to some of those people, who have been blighted by the prospect of a railway. They cannot be left for another five, 10 or 15 years with the uncertainty that the line might or might not go from Gorebridge to the Borders. They need to know whether they have a future, according to what we do. We have waited far too long to give those people the reassurance that they want. It is time to make the decision. I urge the Parliament to reject amendment 5 in the name of Bristow Muldoon.

The remit that the Parliament established for the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee was: "to consider and report to the Parliament on the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill". That the committee has done, fully and thoroughly, producing two reports that set out its conclusions and recommendations on what it viewed to be the main issues. The process has taken three years. Ted Brocklebank mentioned the 108 witnesses and the 4ft high pile of written evidence and associated paperwork, which we considered carefully. On the basis of that lengthy, detailed scrutiny of the issues, the committee concluded unanimously that the railway, if constructed, must go all the way to Tweedbank and serve the Borders community. Now, an amendment has been lodged by a Labour back bencher. He made no representations to the committee at any stage. He does not represent any of the areas that are affected. He did not even speak in the preliminary stage debate, when it was made clear by the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee, and  agreed by the Parliament, that we expected the line to be built in its entirety. Being the convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee does not convey any authority on transport matters; it is a position that is given by the Labour Party.

My contention is that Bristow Muldoon has got that completely wrong. His amendment 5 is supported by Christine May, the deputy convener of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee. Others have said this, but it is worth saying again. Just a few short weeks ago, Christine May said: "Amendment 1 is extremely important and reflects the committee's view in our final discussion and our report that if the railway is to be put in place it must, as well as serving the Edinburgh conurbation, serve the Borders and that therefore a station at Stow is required and the line should go to Tweedbank."—[ Official Report, Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee , 24 May 2006; c 934.] The bill is too important to the people of the Borders for the debate to degenerate at this stage into an infantile squabble by Labour and the Liberal Democrats about who holds more sway in the coalition. They are supposed to be the Government of Scotland. On the basis of our detailed scrutiny of the issues behind the case for the Borders railway, we concluded that it must go all the way to Tweedbank. To cite the long title of the bill as introduced, its purpose is "to authorise the reconstruction of a railway from ... Newcraighall ... to Tweedbank". Parliament supported that aim when it agreed to the general principles of the bill, which no member voted against. A phased approach to constructing the railway, as Bristow Muldoon proposes, would be more expensive; it would also be against the will of the Parliament. It would call into question the function and purpose of a committee that spent nearly three years considering and reporting on the issues.

No, I will not. The committee, like successive ministers and the promoter, has repeatedly stressed the point about the costs being robust, and we have repeatedly been assured that they are.  Bristow Muldoon argues that his amendment 5 brings flexibility to the project so that it can be built in stages. It does not. It brings uncertainty. Bristow Muldoon's proposal would wreck the project and would allow for a railway to be built no further than Gorebridge. That is what the member wants, and he should have the honesty to say so in the chamber instead of pretending that he is helping the bill to progress. I have no doubt that a railway—[ Interruption. ] Please excuse me while I clear my throat.

indicated agreement  .

I appreciate that not everyone may be completely behind the proposal at the moment, but the idea is a good one. The proposal has great merit and it needs to be driven forward. Surely Iain Smith is not suggesting that, because there are 18 sites on the UK tentative list or 1,325 throughout the world, we should sit back and wait until all those sites are dealt with before we go forward with St Andrews.

I thank Ted Brocklebank for bringing the motion before Parliament, and I truly congratulate him on the motion and on the debate. Where would one find a town with one of the oldest universities in Europe, a cradle of Christianity and of our own nation of Scotland, and the home of golf? If only one of those three elements were present, St Andrews would be a very special place indeed. The fact that all three elements are in place makes St Andrews unique. That is why I am happy to support the call to obtain UNESCO world heritage site status for St Andrews, or at least for part of it. I agree that there are parts of St Andrews that should be preserved and protected, and they would have a better chance of being preserved and protected if UNESCO world heritage site status were to be granted. However, St Andrews is a living and working town too, and if we want our businesses, hotels and restaurants to be staffed, our golf courses to be manicured and the visitor services to be in place, we must ensure that there are places for people to live. I do not think that there should be unfettered development, but nor do I believe that world heritage site status should be granted to St Andrews and all its environs to the exclusion of any other development, because that would be the death knell for St Andrews. If St Andrews has prospered over the years, it has prospered because of the people who inhabit the town. If one looks at the range of organisations that are committed to securing world heritage site status for St Andrews, one sees that they are made up of people who live in and contribute to the town, and we must ensure that the next generation has an opportunity to do the same for the town. Although I support the mediaeval part of St Andrews having world heritage site status, and although I also support the protection of the wonderful links, I do  not believe that the whole of St Andrews and all its borders should be preserved in aspic. Ted Brocklebank said that, too. I call on the Executive and on Fife Council to back the proposals, as outlined in Ted Brocklebank's speech, which I thought was extremely measured and which addressed some of the points that concern me. Attaining world heritage site status will not happen quickly, but while the application is being processed the infrastructure surrounding St Andrews must be put in place. I am thinking, in particular, of transport infrastructure. When the open golf championship is being held in St Andrews, it is almost impossible for people to find their way through the town. The only people who are lucky are the ones who can afford to bring their private planes into Leuchars. The Ministry of Defence is quite happy to take private business into Leuchars to ferry the elite into St Andrews itself, but the rest of us who are in cars, vans, lorries and buses find it extremely difficult to find our way along the roads. That is not to say that I do not support the reinstatement of the railway—I do—but we desperately need adequate road links to and from St Andrews. While the proposals for the world heritage site are being processed, the Scottish Executive and Fife Council will have the opportunity to consider what is needed in St Andrews to ensure that the volume of visitors to the town can be delivered there safely, have a wonderful time and leave again.

Will the member give way?

Indeed—I have moved back to the right side of the chamber. Does the member agree that one of the successes of new towns was the introduction of town art? For example, Glenrothes had a town artist who made public sculptures of hippopotamuses and an old couple on a bench. Does she think that other towns should acquire such artists in order to beautify them?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the debate initiated by Andrew Arbuckle. It is on days such as today that I know that I live in God's kingdom. The train journey through Aberdour, Burntisland and Kinghorn is quite stunning and, on the nice sunny mornings that we get on occasion, it really does look like an impressionist painting as I look over the Forth to Edinburgh. Sadly, after Kirkcaldy, the east cost line cuts into the countryside, so our beautiful east neuk coastline is not seen. That might be an argument for reopening some of our disused railways. Andrew Arbuckle was right to draw attention to the improvements that have been made to our coastline and beaches. The Fife coastal path has indeed opened up the area to tourism and the blue flags that we now see flying over some beaches are testament to the work that the Executive, Fife Council and others have done to improve the quality of our beaches and bathing waters. As I sat watching the media coverage from Cellardyke a few months ago, two things occurred to me. The first was the good sense of the people and poultry producers of the area compared with the mass hysteria of the media. The second was that the beautiful coastal village of Cellardyke was being seen all over the world. I hope that that will translate into an increase in tourism. I turn to the ship-to-ship transfer of oil, which is where Andrew Arbuckle started. There have been debates in the Parliament about the proposals and many questions have been asked of the minister, who has kindly met members who are interested in the issue. Although it is true that the consultation process that is being gone through at the moment leaves most of the decision making to Westminster, I am not as pessimistic as Andrew Arbuckle is that nothing can be done here. In all our communities, both those along the Fife coast and those along the East Lothian coast, all MSPs, regardless of political party, have argued that such transfers must not be allowed to happen. Ship-to-ship oil transfers would be a disaster simply waiting to happen. The idea that we have little influence over the outcome of the consultation does not appeal to me. I believe that ministers still have a duty under the EU habitats directive to ensure that our coastlines and wild areas are protected. Therefore, I urge the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development to redouble her efforts to ensure that she can find a way through the issue for the benefit both of our communities and of our stunning coastal scenery. Quite frankly, I do not believe that the people and communities of Fife are prepared to accept that a  lack of clarity over whether Westminster or Holyrood is responsible means that the proposed transfers will simply be allowed to happen. People do not want ship-to-ship transfers to happen and the political will is against the proposal. I urge the minister to embrace the political opposition to the proposal that exists among all parties. She must do all in her power to ensure that we do not have ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Firth of Forth.

It might surprise members who remember my role in the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill to hear that I support the amendments that would exempt working dogs from the ban on tail docking. I grew up in a family that kept working dogs. My father had springer spaniels, which went to the gun. He used to cut off the puppies' tails when they were only hours old. The procedure was necessary then and it is necessary now, to prevent future injuries. The minister has told the Parliament that the issue will be considered at some time in the future and dealt with through regulations. However, the minister well knows that, when the Parliament considers regulations, we cannot amend them. Even if the minister decided not to include tail docking in the regulations, members would not have the opportunity to amend them. The minister has a duty, in summing up, to say whether she is for or against tail docking. Executive amendment 30, which would make it an offence to take an animal out of Scotland for tail docking, is totally illogical, for the reasons that other members have outlined. The minister has a duty to answer John Swinney's question about whether an animal that is sold could be sold back once its tail had been docked. It is important that the Parliament legislates on animal welfare matters—that is not, as Ted Brocklebank said, a waste of time. We all have a duty to consider animal welfare. The bill is a good one, but it could be better. I ask members to think carefully about how they vote on the amendments.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions have taken place with Glasgow Housing Association regarding the second-stage transfer of its housing stock. (S2O-9976)

The GHA claims that a financial black hole is preventing second-stage transfer. Has the minister seen any evidence to support that claim or does she believe that GHA is stalling for its own reasons? Does the minister share the frustration and anger of tenants that the promises that were made to them before the ballot have not been kept? Will she indicate when she expects the first transfer to take place?

I agree with David Davidson that this has been a good, useful debate. A wide range of issues—not just third-party right of appeal—has been raised by members. One issue that most if not all of us in the Parliament and throughout Scotland can agree on is that the present planning legislation is not fit for purpose.  CBI Scotland produced a policy paper a few years ago that showed that the difficulties and challenges facing the present planning system were costing the Scottish economy £600 million a year. Few communities are satisfied that their views are taken into account and they are at a disadvantage in terms of how the present system works. Will the bill meet the needs of planners, communities, business and local authorities? Will it restore confidence and trust? Those are big questions and they are difficult to answer because so much of the detail of the bill will be left to secondary legislation. As the Communities Committee's report says, that absence of detail has restricted its ability to scrutinise certain provisions in the bill. Witnesses, too, felt that there were many aspects of the bill on which they were unable to comment. The Royal Town Planning Institute said: "The success of this bill will depend ... on secondary legislation." It went on to say that "the devil remains in the detail which has yet to come." Frankly, ministers, that is no way in which to legislate. I think that I echo the views of Christine Grahame, David Davidson, Donald Gorrie and others when I say that. The Communities Committee has recommended that most of the secondary legislation—I counted 10 areas—be subject to the affirmative procedure, which will allow the committee to consider that legislation in greater detail, but not to amend it. That is the major problem with the way in which the Executive deals with legislation. The areas in which the committee has asked for secondary legislation under the affirmative procedure include neighbour notification, development plans, pre-application consultations, appeals, good neighbour agreements and planning obligations. Those areas are the nub of the bill, but we do not have the details on them. I would welcome the minister's confirmation when she sums up that she accepts the need for secondary legislation in those areas to be subject to the affirmative procedure. It is a matter of regret to me and to other members of my party that the Executive and a majority of the committee do not agree that there should be a limited third-party right of appeal. Scottish Environment LINK said to the committee: "We are asking for a limited right of appeal and only in specific circumstances. It will not be a free-for-all."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 8 February 2006; c 3067.]

I did not hear what Jim Mather said, so I will not comment on what Karen Whitefield says he said. I make it clear that a limited third-party right of appeal is SNP policy. The committee acknowledged that the present system is not working for communities and recognised that there is a strong feeling that the planning system is unfairly balanced in favour of applicants. My colleague Sandra White will lodge amendments at stage 2 on a third-party right of appeal. As Stewart Stevenson said, the financial resolution is simply not good enough. There are resource implications that have not been identified and, if the bill is to work, the Executive must be honest and transparent about where those costs will lie. The bill will place new burdens on local authorities and it is vital that they be fully resourced to carry out their work. Like Christine Grahame, I have concerns about the planning gain supplement; we need clarity from the ministers on that. I remain unconvinced about the Executive's proposals to include Fife in the overlapping boundaries of two strategic development planning authorities. I know that other Fife members share that concern. The Executive has already said that it will amend those proposals but, as a Fife MSP, I want to be reassured that the larger city authorities will not ride roughshod over Fife's needs. We have plenty evidence of that happening with the Forth Estuary Transport Authority on bridge tolls. I turn to the aspects of the bill that have the potential to make the planning system better. Neighbour notification of development plans will play a key part in ensuring that communities are involved at the earliest stage. I welcome the transfer of responsibility for notifying neighbours from the applicant to the local authority. I also welcome pre-application consultation, but I urge the Executive to ensure that notification of it is as wide as possible. There should also be greater access to information on how applications are dealt with. Good neighbour agreements are positive, but the Executive needs to do more work on them before introducing the necessary secondary legislation. The requirement on key agencies to co-operate with planning authorities is of great importance. Many members have mentioned Scottish Water, and I am struck by the evidence that COSLA gave the committee: "It is Scottish Water that is delivering our development plans at the moment, because there are large areas of Scotland where local authorities cannot do development because of Scottish Water, whether it is in the development plan or not."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 22 March 2006; c 3307.]  Scottish Water needs to be sorted out, and I urge the ministers to take that on board, because many of us are concerned about it. The development plans can be as good as we can make them and we can enter into discussions and decision making but, unless we can get Scottish Water to provide for what we believe is needed, the bill is useless.

I am sorry, but I am really short of time. Temporary stop notices will be an effective means of taking immediate action against breaches of planning control, but I would like the Executive to go further and insist that, for major developments, there should be a code of construction practice that sets out in detail what operations will take place, how they will take place, whether the public can complain and how they can complain. I commend the approach that the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee took on that and suggest that the Executive should consider whether it can be developed further. The national planning framework is vital. That is why, like Christine Grahame and Patrick Harvie, I believe that the Parliamentary Bureau should be left to decide on the timing of the parliamentary consideration of the framework, as it does on the consideration of bills. We should not have in the bill a commitment to 40 or 60 days' consideration; it should be left more open than that. I will highlight two other issues. One is the minister's commitment that a development's impact on human health will be taken into account as part of the environmental impact assessment. I look forward to guidance on that being submitted to the committee for examination. I also look forward to the Greens' input on that issue when the guidance is submitted, as they made good points about it. However, the minister's commitment, as far as it goes, is to be welcomed. I welcome the minister's support for the committee's view that a duty should be placed on local authorities to address the issue of affordable housing when drawing up development plans. Many members have made that point. John Home Robertson mentioned the need for land to be made available for houses to rent. That is probably one of the most pressing problems that is currently experienced by our communities. If the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill cannot enable housing need to be met through the planning system, it will be valueless. I said that the bill has the potential to improve the planning system. It is certainly not perfect, and many improvements are needed at stages 2 and 3. All the legislation in the world will not bring about the culture change that must take place among communities, individuals, local authorities  and developers if we are all to have confidence in the system. I urge ministers to listen and react to the comments that have been made today and to come back to us in the Communities Committee at stage 2 with amendments. I hope that they will consider in a neutral way the amendments that are lodged by those of us who are desperately seeking to make the bill better than it is now. I hope that they will engage with the committee at stages 2 and 3 as they have done at stage 1.

Will Iain Smith give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it can give a further update on when the examination of the economic, social and environmental impact and cost of retaining or removing tolls from the Tay and Forth bridges is likely to be concluded. (S2O-9759)

It is certainly a comfort to know that, after seven weeks, the minister can tell MSPs more about when the review is taking place than that it is taking place "as soon as possible". Can he now tell the chamber when he expects the review to conclude and when ministers will take a decision? Will he also announce today that, until the review is concluded, work on relocating tollbooths will be halted?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to make public the findings of the consultation that was undertaken by Julius Lang into the possibility of introducing community courts in Scotland. (S2O-9711)

The minister will be aware that petty crime in Fife increased from 8,050 incidents in 2000 to 13,251 in 2004. That is quite a staggering increase. Given the success of community courts in Red Hook in New York and in midtown Manhattan, will the minister consider piloting community courts in Scotland? I take the opportunity to suggest that parts of Fife might be suitable for such a pilot.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has responded to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency's public consultation on the revised oil spill contingency plan and the environmental impact of ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Firth of Forth. (S2O-9654)

I thank the minister for her answer and for agreeing to meet me and other MSPs representing Fife and the Lothians who have raised the matter with her in past months. Does she accept that, under article 6(4) of the European Union habitats directive and regulation 49 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Regulations 1994, if a project is likely to have an adverse impact on a European wildlife site, it may be consented to only if there is no alternative and there are "imperative reasons of overriding public interest"? Does she accept that she has a duty in that regard under the habitats directive and will she make that clear in the response to the consultation document?

What consideration has the minister given to examining whether the tollbooths themselves cause congestion in Dundee, Fife and the Lothians?

I welcome the opportunity that Brian Adam has given the Parliament by lodging the amendments and allowing us to hold this debate. We need to put in context how we got here. In 1999, there was a new Labour Government, we had come through the Tory years of corruption and sleaze, this Parliament was brand new and we were aware that we wanted to do things differently from the way in which they had been done at Westminster. I was on the Standards Committee at the time. Like other members, I now believe that declarations of non-pecuniary interests should not  be part of the bill. I genuinely and sincerely believed then that, given that the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc (Scotland) Act 2000 put an onus on councillors to make a declaration vis-à-vis organisations, it was right and proper that as the Parliament had so legislated on behalf of councillors it should legislate in the same way on its own behalf. As Alasdair Morgan said, the 2000 act referred to councillors declaring interests with regard to organisations, but the amendments go much further than that, which is what gives me the greatest concern. MSPs are being invited to declare non-financial interests that meet the prejudice test, which is that the interests could give the appearance that we would be influenced by them. As other members have said, if we do not make a declaration someone could make a complaint against us in the future—with hindsight—to the standards commissioner. The test would not be whether we believed at that point that we should have made a declaration. It would be open to interpretation by an individual—the standards commissioner—who could decide that we should have registered the interest. If we had not done so, we would be deemed to have committed an offence.

I am sure that members welcome the measure of comfort that Mr Adam has given us. Nonetheless, as Mr Adam acknowledges, an offence would be created. We are talking about putting the provision into statute and must consider the issue carefully before we go down that road. The amendments are too widely drawn. It would be almost impossible to capture every interest that we might have and we would leave ourselves open to an interpretation by others of what we should have declared previously. We should now say that we have gone this far on the train and it is time to reverse.

Does the minister agree that that exchange illustrates the sheep-like stupidity of Labour and the Liberal Democrats, who voted for a review of a review instead of voting to abolish the tolls on the Tay road bridge? As a gesture of good faith, will the minister advise the Forth Estuary Transport Authority and the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board that improvements by means of relocating the tollbooths on both bridges should cease until the review is concluded, thus saving millions of pounds?

The minister will be aware that Labour and SNP councillors from Fife voted to ask him to rescind the Forth Road Bridge (Toll Period) Extension Order 1997, but they were defeated by the Liberal Democrat councillor from Fife and, of course, the Labour councillors from Lothian. The minister has rejected FETA's £4 toll proposal, so how does he propose to fund transport infrastructure? In particular, what plans does he have to fund the rebuilding of the A8000?

What an interesting debate we have had. Labour and Liberal Democrat MSPs say in public that they oppose tolls, but when they have the opportunity to put their money where their mouth is in the Parliament, they bottle it. The minister announced the result of the review of tolled bridges last month. He said that he favoured the retention of tolls on the Tay and Forth bridges because of debt and congestion, but in subsequent weeks those reasons changed according to what he thought he could get away with on any given day. I pick up on the minister's point about the SNP's commitment to the abolition of tolling. When the Parliament debated the Erskine bridge tolls in 2001, the SNP lodged an amendment asking for the whole issue of bridge tolls to be reviewed, but every Labour and Liberal Democrat member voted against it.

No. The SNP introduced today's debate because of the lack of time to discuss the minister's statement last month. We now have a decision to review a review. The minister was well warned about what a decision to keep tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges but remove them from the Erskine bridge would mean to the people of Fife and Tayside, but he chose to ignore that. With the campaign by The Courier , he might now appreciate the anger that is felt in those areas. The Executive's amendment promises to review the tolled bridges review, but in every word that the minister said today he showed that he is steadfast in his view that the original review was correct. There is no timescale for the review. Helen Eadie said that it is urgent and somebody else said that we need it immediately, but we did not hear those words from the minister. What a fudge! What cynicism! What opportunism! What folly, if ministers think that the people of Fife and Tayside will fall for what is being offered today. I will paraphrase the Executive's amendment. It says, "We, the Labour and Liberal parties, are the Government of Scotland. We have the power now  to remove the Tay and Forth tolls, but we have decided not to do so. However, there is an election next year and in our manifestos, we will promise to remove the tolls. If you vote for us, the Tay bridge tolls will be abolished." The Labour and Liberal parties will not get away with that. They will have to explain to motorists on the Tay bridge why they will have to pay tolls for an additional year, then vote in the same Government that kept the tolls in the first place so that that new Government can abolish the tolls in a year's time. Just how stupid do the Labour and Liberal parties think that the people of Fife and Tayside are?

No, I will not. I will come to Helen Eadie in a minute. I turn to those MSPs who have publicly supported the removal of tolls from the Tay and Forth bridges. Labour and Liberal members from north of the Forth will have to make a choice tonight at 5 o'clock. They can vote with the SNP to force ministers to remove the tolls in the next month or so, or they can vote to kick the issue beyond the next election. They know that their vote can make the difference. Some Fife Labour MSPs claim that they are concerned about the lack of reference to the Forth bridge tolls in the SNP's motion. There was unanimous support in the Parliament for the removal of the tolls from the Erskine bridge. The SNP's motion is to remove the tolls from the Tay bridge and I expect and hope that Fife and Tayside members will give it similar support. If those members want the tolls to be removed from the Forth bridge, they must vote for the SNP's motion because they know that if the tolls are removed from the Tay bridge, they will go from the Forth bridge. That is what we want and that is what those members' constituents want. One thing is sure: the SNP will vote to scrap the tolls on the Tay bridge. If we are defeated, the campaign will continue. An SNP Government will scrap the tolls on the Tay and Forth bridges next year. We will accept the Conservative's amendment tonight. I understand precisely where the Green party is coming from, but we will not support its amendment. There is a debate to be had about climate change and congestion, but I say to the Greens with all sincerity that their policies cannot discriminate against the people of Fife and Tayside.

The status quo is that there are tolls on the Tay and Forth road bridges. The minister proposes to have a review of a review. If the Labour and Liberal members do not vote for our motion tonight, there will still be tolls on the Tay and Forth road bridges. Those members have to make that choice tonight. We are determined that the people and businesses in Fife and Tayside will no longer be discriminated against. We will not accept a situation in which they alone in Scotland have to pay to use the only roads that are available to them, while people in every other part of Scotland can travel toll free over bridges and roads. The vote tonight is about fairness to Fife and Tayside.

As Shona Robison said, the ministers can make an order to abolish the tolls on the Erskine bridge within a month. Similar issues to do with the bridge operators must be considered with respect to the Tay road bridge. If a month can be the timescale for the Erskine bridge, surely it can be the timescale for the Tay bridge.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

As other members have done, I congratulate team Scotland on being an inspiration to us all. I recall the Tokyo Olympics of 1964—a long time ago—which my dad let me stay up to watch. I still remember the theme music even now, but I was just blown away by the performance of Lynn Davies—the first time I saw a man flying. I have, therefore, been committed to television sport in particular for some time. Those who know me will appreciate that I do not take an active role in sport, but sport fascinates and inspires me; team Scotland is an inspiration to the whole of Scotland. On Monday evening, I attended in Glenrothes a public meeting that attracted more than 400 people. The subject of the meeting was the threat from Fife Council to the future of the Fife institute—to give its proper name, the Fife Institute of Physical and Recreational Education. While the Executive has been rightly concerned about obesity and lack of fitness in young people, for the past five years Fife Council has by stealth been working up proposals to engineer a situation whereby that institute will be closed and a new joint facility for Glenrothes and Kirkcaldy will be situated elsewhere. Thanks to the work of the community action group and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, the people of Glenrothes are now aware of a facility that is renowned both locally and nationally—in Glenrothes, Fife and throughout Scotland. Since the brief for a joint facility was drawn up secretly in 2001, the amount of money that Fife institute receives from Fife Council has declined steadily, such that its funding is now one third of its 2001 level. As a consequence, the institute is in need of refurbishment. Although Fife Council submitted an application for funding to sportscotland last year, the application was turned down on the grounds that Fife Council had not provided sufficient information and lacked a long-term commitment to Fife institute. Tomorrow, Fife Council's adult services committee will consider the future of the Fife institute. At a time when more leisure and sports facilities are needed, Fife Council wants fewer. It would substitute a centre of excellence with mediocrity. Every school in the area uses Fife institute for swimming lessons. That is why schools in the town have no swimming pools.

I accept that there is now no proposal to reduce the number of facilities, but that is only because Fife Council's plans were exposed by the working group. Christine May will acknowledge that one proposal for consultation would have the inevitable consequence, unless action were taken, of diminishing the wonderful facilities that are currently available in Glenrothes, which would be to the detriment of the people of the town. I would have thought that, as the local MSP, Christine May would put all her weight behind the community action group's aspirations to retain the level of service in the facility in Glenrothes.

No, Christine May has had her opportunity. Sportscotland's "Research Report no. 77; Research Digest no. 57" used Fife institute as an example of best practice for its rehabilitation and social inclusion programmes. The institute's extensive social inclusion activities include programmes that deal with national health service referrals, one of the most modern rehabilitation programmes in Scotland and programmes that cater for multi-disability athletes who compete at Paralympic level. Fife institute also hosts several major swimming meets. The number of those will increase during refurbishment of the Commonwealth pool, which was built as the same time as the facility in Glenrothes. As one who came to live in Glenrothes in 1975 and whose children learned to swim there, I thought that I knew all that there was to know about Fife institute. However, on Monday I learned something new—it appears that the institute's infrastructure and foundations were built to accommodate a 50m pool, although the final build was only a 25m pool. Of course the 25m pool is adequate, but it is tantalising to know that we have the infrastructure for a 50m pool in Fife. The institute needs only the refurbishment that it deserves to provide us with a fifth 50m pool in Scotland. What a wonderful facility that would be for swimmers throughout Scotland. I invite the minister to study the situation in Fife carefully and to explore with Fife Council and sportscotland what can be done to secure Fife institute's future, and what money can be made available to ensure that the institute remains the centre of excellence that it has been since it was built those many years ago.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is quite unacceptable that, on such an important appointment, members do not have the opportunity either to express their view or to receive an answer to points that they make. I wanted to make the point, which I hope Mr Scott will confirm, that we are not barred from extending the contract beyond 31 March—

rose—

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that one of the other problems that we have at stage 2 and stage 3 is that the Executive tends to lodge substantive amendments that have not been consulted on at stage 1 and which can radically change the bill?

I have no doubt that the minister recognises her environmental responsibilities, but does she also accept that she has a duty, under the EU directive, to ensure that account is taken of the environment?

I welcome the opportunity that Robin Harper's motion presents to debate ship-to-ship transfers of oil in the Forth, which is a matter that has been raised many times in the Parliament by me and the other Fife MSPs. The Maritime and Coastguard Agency's consultation is bogus. The MCA is not consulting on the principle of ship-to-ship transfers in the Forth but only on whether the contingency plans will be adequate if there is a spill of oil. Local MSPs, local authorities, community councils and individuals who live around the Forth are all clear that we oppose ship-to-ship oil transfer in principle because of the risk to our marine and natural habitats. The only way to ensure that there are no oil spills is to refuse to allow ship-to-ship transfers of oil in the Forth. We believe that no contingency plan will be sufficient to protect our environment and special places in the Firth of Forth. The proposal from Melbourne Marine Services and Forth Ports must be rejected. Both organisations stand to make a lot of money if the proposal goes ahead, but the oil clean-up costs  will have to be met by the public authorities and the cost to our marine and natural heritage will be incalculable. I understand that ship-to-ship transfer is a matter that is reserved to Westminster, but Scottish ministers have a duty to have regard to the European Union habitats directive. That directive empowers Scottish ministers to make it clear to the MCA that, in the words of Scottish Natural Heritage, the effect of the proposal on the designated areas is "likely to be significant" and to rule it out on that ground. Now is the time for the Executive to stand with the communities of the Forth. It is time for the Executive to take responsibility and to make it clear to the MCA that ship-to-ship transfers should not be approved. Members have been asking ministers to do that for months. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development will take the opportunity that is afforded to her this evening to do so.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I gave notice of my intention to raise a point of order on the Glasgow housing stock transfer. On Tuesday, at the Chartered Institute of Housing conference, the Minister for Communities announced: "The fact that there will not be 63 second stage transfers is widely recognised, including among Glasgow's local housing associations." That was news to me. It was also news to the chair of the CIH, which is the body that represents housing professionals. Today, the chair of the CIH said: "The minister's announcement on Tuesday came as a surprise. We knew there were challenges ... but I do not think that anyone was expecting to be told that the 63 second stage transfers will not be going ahead." The minister's speech represents a departure from the position that ministers have repeated in the chamber. In November, the First Minister said: "we did not encourage the establishment of the Glasgow Housing Association, support enthusiastically the transfer of ownership and put so much money into the venture simply to see one large organisation replaced by another ... We want local housing organisations to own and manage houses and have responsibility for them so that people have maximum control".— [ Official Report , 3 November 2005; c 20338.]  Also in November, the Minister for Communities, who has responsibility for housing, said: "Our commitment to second-stage transfer and to devolving power to local communities remain absolute."—[ Official Report , 24 November 2005; c 21157.] Presiding Officer, do you agree that the minister's speech represents a substantial change in policy by the Scottish Executive and that it breaches the Parliament's protocol on when statements should be made in this place? Do you also agree that any announcement should have been made first to the Parliament to allow members to question the minister on the issues that surround second-stage transfer in Glasgow? Do you agree that it was discourteous in the extreme for the minister not to come first to the chamber?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to address the shortfall in the number of dentists in Scotland. (S2O-9244)

I am sure that all that will be a comfort to the Presiding Officer this week. The Executive must be aware that a third of all graduate dentists leave Scotland to take up their first posts. Although the Polish dentists are welcome, they will provide treatment for only 80,000 patients. Given that more than 1 million under-16s and over-65s are not registered with an NHS dentist and that, from 1 April 2006, free dental checks will be available to all, how will the shortfall be met?

Either the minister's statement was one of the most illogical that a member of the Liberal-Labour Executive in the Scottish Parliament has ever made, or the Executive thinks that the people of Fife are stupid. Nicola Sturgeon has made her position quite clear in her comments to ministers. If tolls are to be removed from the Erskine bridge, they should also be removed from the Forth and Tay bridges. Will the minister explain the logic behind the decision to abolish tolls on the Erskine bridge because there are road alternatives in that location, while retaining tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges where there are no road alternatives? Will he explain how the A8000 upgrade will be funded and completed by 2008, given that he made it clear to FETA that an offer of Executive grant for 2006-07 and 2007-08 would depend on a road user charging scheme being in place? No such scheme is in place. Finally, the Markinch interchange was promised to the commuters of Markinch—including me—in 2000. What guarantee can he give us that the work will start this year?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many local authorities have applied for, and been granted, the right to suspend the right-to-buy policy in pressured areas. (S2O-9094)

Given that a recent survey showed that 77 per cent of councillors support action in pressured areas, will the minister simplify the application process for pressured area status and take steps to speed up the decision-making process in the Scottish Executive? Can he give an update on when he expects to make a statement on the right-to-buy consultation?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there have been any further developments in its plans to publish the tolled bridges review and when it will make a decision on whether to support the Forth Estuary Transport Authority's proposal for a £4 toll on the Forth road bridge. (S2O-8836)

There have been further developments since I lodged the question, not least a by-election in Dunfermline and West Fife. This morning, the minister refused to rule out the possibility of an increase in tolls. Will he take the opportunity that I am giving him now to assure the people of Fife that there will be no increase in tolls on the Forth road bridge?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Bruce Crawford rightly said that it was outrageous that neither the Tories in their motion nor the Executive in its amendment referred to the devastating news of the Lexmark closure. They should be ashamed of themselves. This debate has shown the splits between Labour and the Liberal Democrats and between Labour MPs and MSPs, with Liberal back benchers attacking Labour ministers. It has shown the absolute confusion and hypocrisy at the heart of the supposed coalition Government. The Forth bridge is a vital part of the infrastructure, so we cannot simply wait until planning for a new crossing begins. The Executive has been in possession of the facts on the condition of the bridge since November 2005. Put starkly, if repairs cannot be made, heavy goods vehicles will be banned from 2013 and total closure will take place in 2019. That is the stark reality that we face. Even if the bridge can be repaired, which is in doubt, we face months of closure while the works are carried out. Equally, even if repairs are possible, the bridge will have to be replaced at some point by a new crossing. The level of uncertainty that has been created by the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive will have a detrimental impact on Fife's economic prospects, which are reeling from the Lexmark closure announcement.

The SNP has not ruled out any option. We will consider plans for a tunnel crossing in the same light as a bridge crossing. What is certain, however, is that the Executive needs to consider plans for a new crossing. If a company was seeking to invest in Scotland, would it choose to locate itself north of the Forth bridge—which may be closed to its HGVs by 2013—where it would be forced to pay a £4 toll for every crossing, or south of the bridge? There is really no contest. Helen Eadie claimed that there would be a decision on a new bridge in March. That is not true. In November 2005, the First Minister told me that it would be particularly stupid to begin planning a new crossing and that he intends to wait until further analyses are completed in 2007. Either the First Minister lied to me then or he has changed his position since. He has a duty to inform us of his position. Instead, what is particularly stupid is that the Labour-Liberal Executive ostrich continues to bury its head in the sand when faced by the facts on the bridge. The minister has not ruled out an increase in the toll to £4. The Greens will support the Executive on that, as they believe that a £4 toll is possible and that there will be an increase in tolls. Although the Tories claim that they would build a new bridge under PFI, they have not said how much the tolls under such a scheme would be. In 1985, Gordon Brown informed the Forth Road Bridge Joint Board inquiry into proposed increases in bridge tolls: "The unjust treatment of bridge users is exemplified by the fact that they effectively pay several times over for the facilities they use—as taxpayers, rate payers, road-tax payers and as toll payers. Consequently, the increase in tolls proposed by the Secretary of State represents an unreasonable addition to an already unfair burden. In equity, pending financial review, the tolls on the bridge should be at their existing levels." The Labour Party has been in Government since 1997, but we still have the tolls. If the Labour-Liberal Executive has its way, the tolls will soon increase to £4.

The member is bound to be aware that we have lost 805 jobs in Fife since 2000, including 100 at ABB in Glenrothes and 185 at Canon Manufacturing UK. In 2002, we lost 75 jobs at BBR Systems in Glenrothes and 90 jobs at Brand-Rex in Glenrothes. What will she say about the success of industry now?

The estimated cost of a new bridge would be in the order of £700 million to £1 billion, but a bridge  costing £1 billion would cost about £2.5 billion under a private finance initiative. Will the member tell us how much he would charge in tolls?

rose—

I am grateful to Iain Smith for securing this members' business debate. It is true that cancer patients in Fife wait longer for treatment than patients in almost every other part of Scotland. The figures released by the Scottish Executive show that, despite Executive promises that all  cancer patients will receive treatment within two months of being diagnosed, only 61 per cent of cancer patients in Fife are treated within two months. That is the third worst treatment rate of any health board in the country. The figures indicate that only the Western Isles NHS Board and the extinct Argyll and Clyde NHS Board areas have worse treatment rates. Fife is also well behind the national average rate of 74 per cent. Although there may be individual problems within Fife, it is clear that comparing like with like—health board with health board—Fife NHS Board is failing the patients of Fife. Patients with colorectal cancer are particularly badly served, as a mere 20 per cent receive treatment within two months of diagnosis. Only 55 per cent of lung cancer patients in Fife are treated within the Executive's target period of two months. As Iain Smith rightly says, at Queen Margaret hospital the median wait is 57 days compared to a median wait of 31 days throughout Scotland. The increase in waiting times in the second quarter of 2005 is extremely worrying because the issue of cancer treatment is one that members of the Scottish Parliament have raised with Fife NHS Board. We sought and were given assurances that the health board was well aware of the issue and was taking steps to address it. The people of Fife are losing out in the Executive's postcode lottery—it is difficult to define it in any other way—for cancer treatment. Early diagnosis and treatment of cancer are crucial to maximise the chances of survival, yet patients in every other part of Scotland receive treatment quicker than patients in Fife. The Labour and Liberal party Executive has manifestly failed to fulfil the promise that it made in 2001 that all cancer patients would receive treatment within two months of diagnosis. Cancer patients in Fife are paying the price for that failure to deliver. For only one in five colorectal cancer patients to receive treatment within two months for a potentially fatal illness is nothing short of a scandal. Cancer patients in Fife cannot wait any longer. There can be no more excuses. The Executive has a moral duty to ensure that all cancer patients in Fife receive treatment as quickly as patients in other parts of Scotland. Like Iain Smith, I will be interested to hear the minister's response. Given that the figures that we are discussing are the Executive's figures, I would like to know what representations it has made to Fife NHS Board about its appalling cancer treatment rate to date, what action it has asked Fife NHS Board to take and, if Fife NHS Board has failed to react to Executive pressure, what the minister intends to do about that. Having cancer is distressing; it is particularly distressing that people in Fife who have cancer  have to wait so long for treatment. For a moment, I will hark back to the previous debate and tell the story of a young woman and a young man who lived together. He was diagnosed with cancer. Although they were not married and he was not working, because she was working and bringing an income into the house, they had to pay for all their prescriptions. As if it is not bad enough that someone has a potentially fatal illness, the Executive condemns them to the serious financial difficulty of trying to pay for their prescriptions. I repeat that Fife NHS Board's record on cancer treatment is simply not acceptable to me or the people of Fife. I want to know from the minister what he has done about that record and what he intends to do about it in future.

I congratulate Christine May on securing the debate. The motion is a timely reminder of the work that is being carried out by police and community safety partnerships not only in Fife but throughout Scotland. A lot of good work is being done. Most of my remarks will concentrate on Fife. As Christine May highlighted, some of Fife's success stories need to be rolled out not just to the rest of Scotland but to other communities in Fife that have yet to benefit from them. In particular, many communities in Fife ask why they cannot be given CCTV. Its success in other communities has encouraged people to seek for their own community the same level of protection. Perhaps one of our biggest challenges in Fife is to meet the aspirations of all those who want CCTV in their area. The time2act safer neighbourhoods campaign is trying to improve the quality of life in the kingdom by drawing attention to the on-going community partnership working in which Fife constabulary is involved and by using the period of the campaign to focus attention on causes for concern such as vandalism, antisocial behaviour, drink, drugs, drunk driving, drunk pedestrians and, as Christine May mentioned, women's safety. My only difficulty with the time2act campaign is its length, as it is due to end in January 2006. It would have been better if the campaign had been rolled out for a longer period so that those who need to know what Fife constabulary and community safety partnership are doing could have benefited from the extra time for local press coverage on the various aspects of the campaign. I, too, congratulate all those who have come together in the community safety partnership. Only through such partnership working, involving the communities, the agencies and the police, will we be able to provide safer communities and neighbourhoods. However, without wishing to disappoint Christine May too much, I feel that it would be remiss of me not to mention that, despite the money that the Executive has provided, Fife still has fewer police than its population requires. Much can be done through initiatives and partnership schemes but, frankly, there is no substitute for having sufficient police on the beat. That would help our communities to do even better. Christine May is absolutely right that a lot of good work is taking place, but that work is being done despite the fact  that we have insufficient policing in our Fife communities. When the minister responds to the debate, I would like to hear how he will ensure that we make Fife an even better and safer place in the future.

I am glad that the minister has taken the opportunity to clarify the situation. As he well knows, Irene Oldfather lodged stage 3 amendments to the bill that sought to extend the ban to outside areas. I spoke against those amendments. Indeed, the minister said: "The bill reflects the Executive's intention to protect members of the public in wholly or substantially enclosed premises ... It is extremely important that the legislation is consistent, fair and easily enforceable by proprietors of establishments and environmental health officers. Any legislation for outdoor areas would need to be carefully defined to provide the same clarity. The bill does not provide for that."— [ Official Report , 30 June 2005; c 18634.]  Does the minister agree that new legislation would be needed to allow for an extension of the no-smoking policy to public open spaces? Does he accept that, if the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005 is seen to be used to introduce a ban on smoking in public open spaces, that will undermine all the good will that there has been towards the legislation so far?

One of the greatest concerns about the case is that social workers failed to ensure that all the available information was placed before the children's hearing before Colyn Evans was discharged from supervision. The social workers' report appeared to understate any difficulties in relation to Colyn Evans's inappropriate sexual behaviour. Does the minister agree with the report's statement that professional staff should recognise their individual responsibilities for such matters? In the light of the catastrophic failures of judgment and action, is the minister concerned that no disciplinary action is being taken by Fife Council? If so, will the minister tell us what action he thinks the Executive should take so that, in the future, professional staff will be held to account for their failure to act in cases involving children and young people?

It is a pity that the statement on priority need, which is required by the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003, is being delivered at the 11 th hour and in a form that makes it well-nigh impossible for Opposition members to study its detail in the available timeframe. Like Shelter Scotland, we welcome the Executive's continuing commitment to abolish priority need by 2012. However, it was highlighted in 2003 that the key to abolishing priority need is providing the necessary resources for affordable housing. Therefore, will the minister confirm that the resources that local authorities need will be made available? Is the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities satisfied with the amount that is on offer? Will he advise what impact the loss of £310 million from the Treasury following the Edinburgh stock transfer ballot will have on the City of Edinburgh Council's ability to meet the target? Will he confirm that representations will be made to the Treasury to free up that money to meet the housing needs of the people of Edinburgh? The minister talked about the importance of support in preventing homelessness, in particular the supporting people fund. Will he explain why the supporting people fund has been cut from £408 million this year to £384 million in 2007-08? Does he recognise that the cuts in that service are already impacting on vulnerable people? What does he intend to do about that? Finally, the minister said that today is the beginning of a process. Like many members, I thought that the process of abolishing priority need by 2012 began with the passing of the 2003 act. Why does he think that today is the beginning of the process? Why has he not done anything until now?

I associate myself with Marilyn Livingstone's comments. The minister recognises that the proposals are for a back-door congestion charge and that they have been bludgeoned through on the casting vote of an Edinburgh councillor. Does the minister agree that, before he decides whether to approve the increased toll tax, he should consult, perhaps by referendum, the businesses and commuters that use the bridge? Will he accept that it would be unacceptable to the east of Scotland if the conclusion of the tolled bridges review was to remove tolls from every bridge apart from the Forth and Tay bridges, and he then allowed increased tolls on the Forth bridge?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to respond to Her Majesty's Government's consultation on ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Firth of Forth. (S2O-8250)

Will the minister confirm that the consultation is about the adequacy of a plan to deal with potential oil spills and not about whether the proposals should proceed in the first place? Will the Executive's response to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency include advice from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Natural Heritage? Will the Executive stand with the local authorities and communities around the Forth to make it clear that protecting the sensitive natural habitats in the Forth, including two designated special protection areas, is of such importance that ship-to-ship oil transfers should be refused?

I thank my fellow members of the Communities  Committee, which I joined just as it was starting stage 2 consideration of the bill. I also thank the clerks and, in particular, I thank my colleague, Linda Fabiani, who was the SNP's housing spokesperson immediately before me, for all the work that she has done on this and previous housing bills. I am extremely grateful to her. I also acknowledge that ministers have moved on a great number of issues as the bill has been debated, and that they have quite rightly paid credit to the Communities Committee and its members. The bill will provide greater rights for people who rent privately. It will improve standards of repair and it will create a new body—the private rented housing panel—to adjudicate when landlords fail in their duty to keep repairs up to standard. We have had debates today and in the preceding months, about the single seller survey in particular. I am grateful that Johann Lamont has said that she will bring draft regulations before the Communities Committee. I urge her to take on board some of the genuine concerns that have been expressed in the chamber and to ensure that, when we consider the draft regulations, they are as good as they can be. All of us who believe in a single seller survey and who congratulate the Executive on introducing such a proposal in the first place will examine the draft regulations closely because we all hope that they and the survey will do the job that we want them to do. I turn to another issue. In last night's Edinburgh Evening News , the minister said: "In the past five years, we've come a long way in addressing Scotland's housing needs, including improvements in the quality of homes in the social rented sector. Now it is time to focus on the private sector as well." I have not been concerned about the range of bills that have dealt with housing because we all acknowledge that very little was done about housing during the years of the last Conservative Government—there was very little legislation on the subject during that time. When the Executive came to power, it was right and proper that it should address many of the needs that existed. I congratulate the Executive on doing that. We have supported its legislation. However, housing in Scotland is now dealt with by a huge amount of legislation in several different acts and the Housing (Scotland) Bill seeks to amend a number of acts that Parliament has passed since 1999. This week the Communities Committee considered a set of antisocial behaviour regulations to do with private landlords. The bill that we have been considering today also deals with private landlords. In my view, it is time for the Executive to take stock, to reflect on where we are on housing and to consider introducing a  consolidation housing bill to bring together all the legislation that we have passed since 1999. That would mean that there would be a single piece of legislation to which practitioners—whether local authorities, voluntary organisations or individuals—could go. I am not making a party-political point; I am simply looking at the issue from the perspective of people who need to understand the legislation and how it all works together. The Executive must examine the body of housing legislation that we have—which the SNP largely supports and has welcomed—and produce proposals for a consolidated housing bill. The SNP will support the Executive in that.

I thank the minister for accepting that to date there has been a failure to tackle the question of empty housing, and I accept that local housing strategies will now contain a requirement on local authorities to consider empty housing. I am glad that, following my amendments at stages 2 and 3, ministers have moved on this issue. I therefore seek leave to withdraw amendment 66.  Amendment 66, by agreement, withdrawn.

There are 48,000 empty homes in the private sector in Scotland. That is a considerable number of homes that could be brought back into use. [ Interruption. ]

Previous efforts have been made to reduce the number of empty private sector properties in Scotland. The empty homes initiative, which was launched by the Scottish Executive, ran until 2003 and had an impact on the number of houses that came into use. If that initiative were to be rolled out throughout Scotland, more affordable houses would become available. Amendment 66 seeks a statement from the Executive that specifies the measures that it believes should be taken to deal with homes that are empty for longer than six months and requires local authorities to look at their areas and propose strategies to deal with the problem. Houses lie empty in the private sector for a number of reasons. Amendment 66 is about not bringing back into use granny's Hieland hame—property that people use because granny has always had it—but ensuring that empty houses are identified and, where possible, giving support to the owners of those houses and local authorities to bring them back into use. The highest numbers of private sector empty homes, by local authority area, are found in the areas with the highest demand for rented housing. There are 4,900 empty homes in Edinburgh; 4,240 in Aberdeen; Fife has 3,500 empty homes; and there are 3,500 such homes in Glasgow. The authorities with the highest number of empty homes as a proportion of the local dwelling stock are the Western Isles, Orkney, Aberdeen and Moray. The Executive believes that the problem of empty houses can be addressed through the local housing strategies that local authorities are required to promote. That will go some way towards dealing with the situation, but we have a problem in Scotland. That is why the bill should state the Parliament's intention to tackle the problem by putting in place the mechanisms to focus on empty homes and to bring into use houses that are presently not in use. That would make other houses available to people who  struggle to find a home because they can neither buy nor get a council house. I urge everyone to support amendment 66 because empty homes in Scotland are a genuine problem that needs much more of focus than it has had in the past. I move amendment 66.

On a point of information, Presiding Officer. If amendment 85 is agreed to, does amendment 1 fall?

Energy efficiency is extremely important, which is why the SNP was happy to support Patrick Harvie's stage 2 amendment. We will also support his stage 3 amendment when we vote. Karen Whitefield's amendment 85 would go some way towards meeting needs, but it is a pity that it was not lodged at stage 2. One is left with the feeling that it has been lodged simply to try to stop Patrick Harvie's amendment being agreed to and to allow the Labour and Liberal parties to vote on something. I do not understand Euan Robson's comments about statutory targets not being appropriate. If statutory targets are appropriate for legislation in England and Wales, I fail to see why they are not appropriate in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. There are huge energy inefficiency issues in the private rented sector. Warm houses and proper insulation are needed. Lots of heat goes through the walls and roofs of houses in Scotland; sometimes only the pigeons that sit on the roofs are warm. We will support Karen Whitefield's amendment 85 for the reasons that I have given, but we also urge members to go a bit further and support Patrick Harvie's amendment to ensure that there are statutory targets.

The SNP will support amendment 64, as it will tighten any legal loophole—real or perceived—that is being used to  stop the devolving of management agreements to local housing organisations in Glasgow by Glenrothes housing association—that is a Freudian slip; I mean Glasgow Housing Association, but the issue is the same. I welcome the minister's firm statement, but I also seek a number of assurances from the minister on the role of the GHA, the future functions of the local housing organisations and the timetable for second-stage transfer. Amendment 64 is permissive—it will allow the minister to take action but will not require him to do so. Does the Executive intend to introduce or to impose an arrangement, or will the minister be content to allow the GHA and the local housing organisations to negotiate the next steps? Will any new agreement between the GHA and the local housing organisations be binding on all parties? Some interim arrangements expire in December and the bill will not receive royal assent until January. What action does the minister expect the GHA to take in the meantime? The GHA has a meeting tomorrow. Does the minister expect the GHA to rescind the decision of 28 October, which charged staff with making preparations for direct management? Is he considering whether Communities Scotland should take responsibility for the second-stage transfers, given the Executive's commitment that progress must be made and local communities' genuine frustration at the failure of the second-stage transfer process to date? The GHA wanted the new, post-December agreements to limit the LHO committees to dealing with consultation matters. Does the minister agree that the new arrangements should make the local housing organisations the responsible bodies?

The GHA has a meeting tomorrow. Does the minister expect, or will he direct, the GHA to rescind the decision that was made on 28 October that charged staff with making preparations for direct management? That is the key question. If we expect the bill to become law in early January, we must ensure that provision is made to replace the interim arrangements that expire in December. The minister has a duty both to the GHA and to the local housing organisations in Glasgow to make the position clear. The minister must say what, as of this moment in time, he expects the GHA to do tomorrow.

At stage 2, the Deputy Minister for Communities came to the Communities Committee and introduced tenancy deposit schemes, which are supported by all the committee's members—their introduction is very welcome. The schemes are necessary because of the problems that people have had in getting their money back at the end of tenancies. In too many cases, landlords have held on to the money; that has caused great problems, particularly for people who do not have the wherewithal to go to law to get their money back. I am thinking in particular about students and people who live in short-term accommodation. On too many occasions, landlords believe that the money belongs to them. Although I wholly welcome the scheme that ministers have introduced, and I acknowledge that they will introduce regulations to give effect to it, one thing is missing from the scheme, and that is interest on deposits. Especially with longer tenancies, interest is bound to accrue. There is an argument about where it goes, but if any interest accrues on a tenant's deposit, and if we all accept that the money belongs to the tenant at all times, the interest should be given if the deposit is returned. If the Executive does not accept amendment 47, I would like ministers to say clearly who the interest belongs to, because that  question has not been answered. I welcome the proposals for tenancy deposit schemes, but the question of tenancy deposit interest must be addressed. I look forward to the minister's comments. I move amendment 47.

I was minded not to press amendment 47, depending on what the minister said, but what he said did not make sense. Tenants do expect to get back their whole deposit at the end of their tenancy and there is no reason to suggest that they should not get their own money back. Ministers have already accepted that deposits belong to tenants, but are now saying that a third party will hold the interest to pay for a scheme that should be self-financing, when in fact they mean that tenants will finance it and landlords will have no input. Ministers need to be up front about the matter. If it is expected that interest will be held by third parties on behalf of a number of people, a lot of interest will be floating around among those third parties. That is cause for concern. Regulations will, of course, cover many matters, but I do not think that it is unreasonable—on such a fundamental matter as this, concerning tenants' money—for Parliament to say that the regulations should contain a scheme whereby tenants may get the interest on their own money back at the end of their tenancy. It is not unreasonable for Parliament to say that, nor is it unreasonable for ministers to ensure that the matter will be covered in the regulations when they are made.

As Christine Grahame rightly said, the SNP supports the principle of single seller surveys. Although we will oppose the amendments in the name of Mary Scanlon and support the minister when we come to the vote, Christine Grahame is right that many concerns have been expressed. Jim Wallace referred to some of the concerns about how the single seller survey will work in practice. When the minister appeared before the Communities Committee, I was grateful that she gave an undertaking that the draft regulations would be submitted to the committee for its consideration. That will enable us to ensure that the concerns that we have raised at stages 1, 2 and 3 have been addressed. I urge the minister to take on board some of those concerns. For the reasons that Scott Barrie and others outlined, I believe that the single seller survey is a good thing. It is not right that young people who  are desperate to enter the housing market must obtain multiple surveys. To admit that there are good reasons why we should have single seller surveys is not to deny that there were problems with the pilot scheme. Of course, some of those problems—not least the hostility of those professionals who, frankly, did not want the survey to work in the first place—could never have been overcome. For those of us who want the survey to work, it is vital that the draft regulations that the minister puts before the Communities Committee are capable of being amended and that full consultation has been done. When the regulations are produced, those of us who believe that a single seller survey is a good thing must be confident that all—or, at least, most—of the concerns that have been expressed during consideration of the bill have been addressed by ministers.

During stage 2, the Deputy Minister for Communities said: "The Office of the Deputy Prime Minister is currently reviewing the DFG,"— that is, the disabled facilities grant— "but as we do not know the outcome of that review, the DFG is a moving target for comparison."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 28 September 2005; c 2476.] We now know the results of that review and we are concerned that, unless action is taken, Scotland will fall considerably behind England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the support that is given to disabled people. The bill as amended at stage 2 proposes that a local authority must give a grant only for toileting or washing facilities for a disabled person. Assistance must be given for adaptations such a ramp, lift or hoist to get into and out of bed, but it can be in the form of advice or other help in the place of a grant. The Deputy Prime Minister has announced that, in England and Wales, the means test will not be applied when the disabled facilities grant is for a child. We are asking the Minister for Communities to review disabled adaptations, to make grants a priority and to set a timescale for action. The minister has made a general commitment to consider further the means test as it affects disabled people; he has also agreed to consult further on making regulations to place a duty on  local authorities to make grants for more adaptations than just those for toileting and washing facilities. However, we are concerned that the issues that affect disabled people will cease to be a priority once the bill leaves the Parliament. As the Communities Committee observed in its stage 1 report, Scottish disabled people should not be disadvantaged in comparison with those in the rest of the United Kingdom. That is why I lodged amendment 23, which asks the minister to review the operation of section 70(1)(b) and to lay before the Scottish Parliament a report on the results of that review within two years of the date on which section 70 comes into force. It is a question of monitoring what is happening in Scotland and ensuring that disabled people are not disadvantaged. I hope that the minister will accept the amendment in the spirit in which it is moved. I move amendment 23.

I thank the minister for his comments and for his clear commitment, which is now on the record, to ensuring that people in Scotland who are disabled are not disadvantaged in comparison with disabled people in England and Wales. I am not minded to press my amendment; rather, I will seek members' agreement to withdraw it, because of what the minister said about the period of change and the period in which the regulations will come into force. I believe that all members of the Communities Committee and all other members will look closely at what the minister does in the next period, to ensure that his deeds echo the words that he has spoken today. I seek the Parliament's agreement to withdraw amendment 23.  Amendment 23, by agreement, withdrawn.

As the minister said, it is a question of balance. I believe that the thrust of the bill is to give tenants greater protection than they have at the moment. As the bill stands, the balance is shifted towards the landlord at the expense of the tenant. For that reason, I intend to push the amendment to a vote.  The minister said that section 28(5) gives some form of protection, in that the landlord commits an offence if they enter into a tenancy or occupancy arrangement at any time during which the repairing standard enforcement order has effect. That is true and I do not dispute it. On the other hand, there is nothing to stop a tenant being evicted as soon as they make an application to the panel. All that the provision does is prevent the landlord from reletting. The minister might think that there is a balance there, but I do not agree. The minister raised the issue of antisocial behaviour at stage 2. It is not the intention of amendment 12 to prevent landlords from evicting someone because of antisocial behaviour and, indeed, it would not do so. There would still be recourse to the sheriff court to evict on that ground. The amendment would simply prevent the landlord from evicting without going to the sheriff court in the first place. The balance has not been struck by the ministers and I will press amendment 12.

We do have good cop and good cop today. I am delighted with the minister's amendments in response to the amendments that I lodged at stage 2. I was concerned that there are many elderly and vulnerable people in the private rented sector in particular and was particularly concerned that people who act on behalf of elderly or vulnerable people are simply not covered. As the minister said, the proposals will help to speed up the process and will ensure that the advocate or the person who is acting for the elderly or vulnerable person is kept informed about the process. The Scottish National Party happily supports the amendments in the minister's name.

Amendment 12 is similar to an amendment that I moved at stage 2. I am concerned about the process and about when protection is given to tenants. Amendment 12 would resolve two issues, the first of which relates to the form of protection that is afforded to the tenant. As it stands, the bill will make it an offence for the landlord to enter into a new tenancy agreement where an enforcement order is in effect. That will not prevent the landlord from evicting the tenant, but will simply ensure that he cannot enter into an agreement with a new tenant in any property. For the private rented housing panel to work, it is important that tenants have confidence in its ability to protect them when they apply to it. However, as the bill stands, tenants will be given minimum protection when they apply to the panel.  There will be nothing to prevent a landlord from evicting a tenant for most of the time during which the landlord is being investigated. The protection for tenants should be strengthened to prevent their eviction during that period and to bolster the panel's effectiveness. Amendment 12 would suspend the landlord's right to evict without grounds by referring to the Housing (Scotland) Act 1988 and the grounds that are needed to terminate a short assured tenancy. In effect, a landlord would not be able to bring a short assured tenancy to an end if the panel decided that a case that had been brought by a tenant should be heard. However, if need be, the landlord could still evict the tenant because of their antisocial behaviour by making an application to the court. Amendment 12 would also change the point at which protection would kick in. Under the bill as it stands, the landlord will not be banned from letting the property to someone else until the panel has investigated and made an enforcement order. Nothing in the bill will prevent the landlord from evicting the tenant as soon as a private rented housing committee investigates. That is a critical point and could seriously undermine the operation of the panel and tenants' confidence in it—the likelihood is that tenants will fail to use it to gain legal redress. The amendment would ensure that the landlord's power to evict was suspended for the period during which the committee was investigating the landlord and that protection for the tenant would kick in as soon as the referral had been made to the committee—that is, as soon as the investigation begins, rather than when an enforcement order is granted. I move amendment 12.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. At First Minister's question time today, I asked the First Minister about work that needs to get under way in response to the Forth Estuary Transport Authority's survey for a new Forth road bridge. The First Minister said that it would be stupid of us to carry out such work in the absence of information. In the public domain this afternoon, there is a paper that suggests that, by 2019, the bridge will close to all traffic. Is it acceptable that the First Minister knew of that and refused to refer to it in the chamber today?

To ask the First Minister what the timescale is for the Scottish Executive to make a decision on the case for a new Forth road bridge, in light of the Forth Estuary Transport Authority's  appraisal of the condition of the existing bridge and its future use. (S2F-1922)

Does the First Minister recognise or even acknowledge the strategic importance of the Forth road bridge for the whole of Scotland? Does he understand that, at the very least, the bridge is facing frequent closure for repair, that heavy goods vehicles are likely to banned from it from 2013 and that the Executive needs to have a plan B in place? Will he therefore give an undertaking that the work on the case for a new Forth crossing will begin now?

While I do not wish to anticipate the results of the review, I advise the minister that there will be widespread anger in Fife if the only bridges that will continue to have tolls are on the Forth and the Tay, particularly when the capital cost of the Forth and Tay bridges was paid off many years ago.

When I read the first line of the motion, which says: "That the Parliament notes the widespread concern about loss of access to NHS dentists", I thought about the words "widespread concern". In Fife, there is more than widespread concern; there is anger, fury and bewilderment that so many people have been deregistered in the past year. Other members have referred to the figures that I extracted from the Executive, which show that 10,500 patients in Fife were deregistered last year. That is a third of the total who were deregistered in Scotland. Fife NHS Board can offer only an emergency service to a 77-year-old woman in Kirkcaldy who simply cannot access a dentist. The deputy minister's response to my asking what advice I could give her was to complain about the dentist who deregistered her. The crisis has been a long time in the making. I fully accept that the closure of the Edinburgh  dental school created problems, but I say to Labour and Liberal Democrat members that the Executive has been in power since 1999. This crisis has not appeared suddenly. It is the result not just of the fact that not enough dentists are coming through, but of the fact that we are losing the dentists that we have. We are in this situation because the NHS cannot retain them. In Fife, there is no doubt about the fact that we are in crisis.

I accept that totally. However, the minister is responsible for the NHS in Scotland and has a duty to ensure that NHS treatment is available to those who want and need it. No one can need it more than a 77-year-old woman who does not have access to the kind of money that would allow her to have private care. It is for the sake of such 77-year-old women that we need to have this debate and to continue to push the Executive on the issue. When I first read the Executive's action plan, I thought that it meant that from 2005 onwards all old-age pensioners would be entitled to a free oral health examination. I want the minister to listen to this point, because I expect a response to it when he sums up. At the time, I thought that I would ask the minister what he would say to the 77-year-old woman whom I have mentioned. However, during today's debate I read the action plan more closely. It says that from 2005 onwards NHS adult patients aged 60 and over will be offered a free oral health examination. That means that people must be patients in the first place in order to be eligible. The 77-year-old woman who has been deregistered has no dentist to carry out the examination for her. I turn to the problem of recruitment. I have been contacted by a number of dentists in Fife. One obstacle to recruiting people as dentists is the entrance criteria. I understand that dental schools require five As at first sitting in fifth year. Most pupils who achieve such results do not come from our state schools. We must increase the number of people who have the opportunity to become dentists, because I am sure that, after they qualify, the commitment of such people to the NHS will be greater than that of others. Shona Robison referred to the "foghorn diplomacy" that we have seen recently. The minister will have received the same e-mail that I picked up this morning. It is addressed to Mr Macdonald and is from an extremely hard-working dentist in Fife. She has 1,700 NHS patients and is absolutely furious about the misconceptions and  misinterpretations that have appeared in the press over the past few days. She writes: "I was told that you held a press conference and that the information they were given was misleading ... I feel that you have an obligation to TELL THE TRUTH and to correct this misinformation that has been printed as many of the public will take it as being gospel and factual. I am not going to put up with people coming in every day now saying that I am loaded, when I work hard for what I earn and this is the surest way of many more of us going PRIVATE and reducing our patient base which may perhaps be what you actually want us to do? Today is the closest I have come to saying that I have had enough!!!" That dentist has 1,700 NHS patients, is treating them, is working hard and is sick to death of the misinformation that is being put into the public domain by ministers. It is about time that we recognised the hard work of NHS dentists and did everything we can to retain them.

The member should correct me if I am wrong, but has he not been a member of a party that has been part of the Executive since 1999? If his party has a manifesto commitment to open a dental school in Aberdeen, it is taking a gey long time to get round to meeting that commitment.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Colin Fox on bringing this important debate to the Parliament. The first part of the motion states: "That the Parliament recognises that affordable social housing is in short supply across Scotland in both rural and urban areas and welcomes all efforts to ensure that everyone gets the opportunity to live in a decent home fit for the 21st century". That encapsulates what the debate should be about. There is a shortage of supply and we must make every effort to ensure that in the 21 st century everybody has a decent home that is fit to live in. Many houses in Scotland are simply not fit for anyone to live in. The big difficulty with Colin Fox's motion and with knowing what we mean by affordable housing is that there is no definition of affordable housing. We all have a shorthand for what we understand affordable housing to be. We need to be clear and the minister must take the lead. The definition of affordable housing changes depending on who one talks to at any given time. A definition of affordable housing would help all of us when we are having debates in the chamber or elsewhere. Measuring what affordable housing  is cannot be too difficult. We have a measure for fuel poverty, which involves comparing income and fuel costs, so I cannot see why having a measure for affordable housing that involves measuring income against the cost of rented or owner-occupied housing should be too difficult. The reality is that many people simply cannot afford to buy and cannot access a council house because they are on a waiting list. Therefore, we have a huge problem. Fiona Hyslop talked about the pressures on Edinburgh, but there are also pressures in Fife, for example. People are moving to Fife because houses there are more affordable—young families and children are moving there from the centre of Edinburgh. In turn, that puts pressure on Fife's house prices, which keep going up. We must recognise that what happens in one area of Scotland will have knock-on effects on other parts of Scotland. Last year, the lowest number of social rented houses, council houses and housing association houses was built in Scotland since the final full year of the previous Conservative Government. That is simply unacceptable. Therefore, I welcome Midlothian Council's commitment to build 1,000 new homes, although that commitment is overdue, as Midlothian is a pressured area. I also welcome the recognition that the Highland Council area is a pressured area and the stopping there of the right to buy. Mary Scanlon talked about 47p in every pound being used to pay the capital debt in the Highland region. That figure would not have been nearly as high if there had been no right to buy in the first place. The debt was left behind when the houses were sold off; the few tenants who are there are paying the capital debt for houses that are long gone. Murray Tosh made a good point about why we should not use people's housing situation as a way of getting across our ideological points of view. As Colin Fox's motion suggests, it is essential that we find a way to ensure that everybody in Scotland in the 21 st century has a decent house to live in. If the Parliament ensures that everyone does, it will have made the people of Scotland proud. However, all of us must work hard. The minister will have to work hard, but it is recognised that the rest of us must work equally hard to ensure that that becomes a reality, and there is a commitment to do so.

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to the First Minister for confirming that there is legal advice that EU procurement rules do not necessitate the GHA clawing back local management. He must be aware that a condition of GHA registration with Communities Scotland was that local management agreements were in place—local management was part of the commitment that was given to Glasgow tenants at the time of the stock transfer ballot. What will be the effect on GHA registration if local management agreements are set aside? Is he prepared to take action to ensure that second-stage transfers take place?

No one would deny that we should take the time to get it right, but does the minister acknowledge that we need to start the planning now?

I would not promise it either. I genuinely thank Scott Barrie for bringing the debate to the chamber. Members' business debates are usually extremely supportive of the motion, but the remarks by Margaret Smith and Mark Ruskell in the past few minutes suggest to me that they need to get into the real world instead of the fantasy land that they are in at the moment. We have a road bridge that had a capacity when it was built of 30,000 vehicles a day. The number of vehicles is 65,000 a day and growing—that is already twice the original capacity and, quite frankly, the bridge cannot take it. Without talking about an increase, the current levels alone mean that we need to do something about the crossings on the Forth. When I hear Mark Ruskell say that building a new bridge will somehow adversely affect businesses in Fife, I have to tell him that congestion and a bridge that cannot cope with it are already affecting our industry and businesses in Fife. [ Interruption. ] I ask members to stop heckling me from a sedentary position.

The Forth road bridge is absolutely vital for the whole of Scotland. At the moment—Margaret Smith did not even refer to this—many people live in Dunfermline because Edinburgh's housing market simply cannot cope.

I want to finish my point. People already go to live in Dunfermline and commute to Edinburgh. The inescapable fact is that vehicle numbers and capacity on the bridge will increase. Doing nothing is not an option. The bridge is under severe stress at the moment. We  simply cannot have a situation in which, over the next 15 years and beyond, the bridge closes regularly for work to be done. However, that will be the reality.

In my three minutes, I am making the point that, because Dunfermline is expanding, the number of commuters will increase. I am surprised that Margaret Smith does not think that there is a problem on the bridge because of that. Other issues must be considered. I believe that, as Bruce Crawford said, the national transport authority should be charged with the responsibility for examining all the options to plan for the future. It simply cannot be the responsibility of FETA to do that. In the meantime, we need to improve the appalling rail service from Fife to Edinburgh. Of course, we need a cross-Forth ferry service—from Burntisland to Granton, I hope—and we must have car sharing and park-and-ride schemes. However, even if we have all those things, we still need some sort of replacement for the bridge. For example, we could consider the possibility of keeping the existing bridge, building another one and allowing westbound traffic to go over one and eastbound traffic to go over the other. A number of options are on offer, but the one option that is not available to us is that of doing nothing. We might have disagreements and debates about what sort of bridge we should have, but we need further capacity and we need a new bridge from Fife.

In fact I said that the legislation was extremely worthy but that unless the Executive gets to grips with it, the target of 2012 is merely an aspiration. That target must be met.

rose—

The Scottish National Party whole-heartedly supported the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill, which the Scottish Executive introduced. The legislation that was passed is the most far-reaching homelessness legislation in Europe and has been widely praised—the Executive has rightly received accolades for it. By 2012, it will sweep away the artificial distinction between people who are homeless and people who are homeless and in priority need. However, as Linda Fabiani said at the time, the Labour-Liberal Executive must deliver: it must put in place the resources and structures that will allow the legislation to be fully implemented, otherwise the legislation will remain a worthy aspiration, but worthless and a betrayal of the many people who could have benefited from it.  I had expected the minister to make a statement today—the legislation requires the minister to make a statement by the end of the year—on how he expects the target to be met by 2012. That no such statement will be given today illustrates the difficulties the Executive is in.

I fully accept that there will be a statement by the end of this year, but I point out that the legislation requires the minister to come to Parliament by the end of the year to make such a statement. Many warnings were given throughout the passage of the bill. The Executive must make it clear in its statement how the legislation will be implemented in full because we are a long way from ensuring that everyone has decent and affordable accommodation in which to live. The Government does not have a responsibility to build every house, but it has a responsibility to ensure that the resources and structures are in place to ensure that houses are built. The Labour Party has been in power since 1997 and the Labour-Liberal Executive has had responsibility for housing in Scotland since 1999, but people are still sleeping on streets and on friends' settees and are still spending nights in hostels for the homeless in Scotland in the 21 st century. Young people and families are living in overcrowded conditions with relatives because they cannot afford to buy a house and cannot get a council house, while council houses are lying empty because councils cannot afford to renovate them. I have had many discussions with housing organisations, individuals and councillors in the past few weeks and I must tell the ministers that few people to whom I have spoken believe that the target of housing all the people who are homeless can be met by 2012 unless the Executive gets to grips with the situation now. Those who think that the target can be met believe that it will be met only at the expense of people who are not homeless. In other words, those who are homeless and in acute housing need will be set against those who are not homeless but still need a home of their own, and those who need a home of their own will in turn present as homeless because their circumstances will change and their need for a home of their own will result in acute housing need. Councils and other social landlords will not be able to deliver. Time is starting to run out. Homelessness is not caused by people being inadequate or feckless; homelessness is a direct  result of a failure to deliver housing that meets need. Unless the affordability, the supply and the condition of housing in Scotland are tackled, we will always have homelessness. We need to build more houses, for which the land must be made available; however, we have a planning white paper that barely acknowledges the need for housing. Scottish Water is currently putting a stop on new housing development because it cannot or will not supply the infrastructure. Where is the ministerial direction? Councils are demolishing structurally sound houses because they cannot afford to renovate them and are then selling the ground to private developers to build houses that cost more than £100,000, which people who are on the minimum or an average wage, or who are on council waiting lists, cannot afford to buy. The supporting people fund, which supports vulnerable people in the community and helps them to sustain tenancies, has been cut in real terms by 12 per cent this year. There will be a further cut in the years to come, as the minister acknowledged at the Communities Committee yesterday. The target of ensuring that we do not have repeat homelessness will not be met and the Executive will fail in its objective. I would like the minister to say something more about the supporting people fund, which is absolutely crucial in giving the housing support and advice that the minister has said is needed to prevent people from becoming homeless in the first place. Malcolm Chisholm's first ministerial duty in 1997 was to attend a Shelter conference that I organised. There was great anticipation in the housing world, and there was great hope that at long last housing would be given priority. In 2004, not one local authority house in Scotland was built. Last year, fewer houses for social rent were built than under the Conservative Government in 1997. Yes—we have had a raft of housing legislation, which has found SNP support; however, passing legislation is the easy part. The role of Government is to deliver, and the Executive must by the end of the year set out clearly how it intends to do so and how it intends to meet the target for 2012. It must make absolutely sure that it will not fail to meet the targets that it has set because of its inaction so far.

What advice can the minister give to a 77-year-old constituent from Kirkcaldy who last week found that she had been deregistered from her dental practice and was refused reregistration by three dentists? When I spoke to Fife NHS Board yesterday, all that it could offer me was the number of a dental helpline that she could phone in an emergency. Is he not ashamed that that is how our old-age pensioners are being treated?  What advice can he give me that I can pass on to her so that she can receive regular dental treatment in Fife?

I confess that I am totally confused about the Executive amendment. If the Executive opposes a bank holiday for St Andrew's day, the bill cannot be amended to remove such a provision. Other provisions might be added, but that provision cannot be removed, because to do so would destroy the bill. An amendment to do that would not be accepted, so what is the point of referring the bill back to the committee?

Will Christine May why somebody who was brought up in Dublin and celebrated St Andrew's day is going to vote today to deny the people of Central Fife the right to celebrate their national day?

Can the member explain why we should expect anybody internationally to celebrate St Andrew's day when we cannot celebrate it in Scotland by means of a holiday?

Will the minister take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Fife Council regarding  the reopening of the Leven to Thornton rail link. (S2O-7698)

After the debacle at Haymarket this morning, I am not sure that advocating rail travel is a particularly good idea today. However, is the minister aware that Levenmouth is the largest urban conurbation in Scotland that is without access to a rail link? The line exists, so for a modest amount Levenmouth could be reconnected with the rest of Fife. Will he instruct his officials to work with Fife Council to find out how, for a very modest sum, the line could be brought back into use as quickly as possible?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister confirm that, when his predecessor announced funding of £115 million, he attached four criteria to that funding, two of which are that "the assumptions that underpin the business case (patronage forecasts, housing growth assumptions, project cost containment, risk management) must hold",  and that "a clear, comprehensive risk management strategy must be developed and delivered". Doe the minister also believe in those four funding criteria? Will he monitor carefully their delivery?

Before I talk about some of the key aspects of the committee's report, it might be useful for me to set out some background to the bill. For me and the other members of the committee, today's debate has been a long time coming. It is more than 24 months since the bill was introduced by its promoter, Scottish Borders Council. It is only right that I thank my fellow committee members—Christine May, Gordon Jackson, Ted Brocklebank and Margaret Smith—who have shared the past two years with me. I thank the private bills unit and, in particular, the committee's clerk, Fergus Cochrane, who has given us great assistance and is a great credit to the Parliament. The main purpose of the bill is to give the promoter statutory authority to construct a railway between Newcraighall and Tweedbank, with stations at Shawfair, Eskbank, Newtongrange, Gorebridge, Galashiels and Tweedbank. The passenger service railway will follow much of the former Waverley route, which was closed following the Beeching report. The promoter considers the railway to be the best way of improving accessibility to and from Edinburgh, opening up new housing markets, retaining the population, providing an incentive for inward investment and increasing local spend and business opportunities. I thank all those who engaged in the process and assisted in broadening our understanding of the scheme. We approached the task with an open mind and sought throughout to ensure balance, fair representation and participation. I turn to the detail of the report's recommendations, starting with tourism, an industry that is particularly important to the Borders economy. The tourism sector has sought to diversify and invest in recent years and to attract more high-spending, short-break and niche-activity markets. However, evidence indicated that the area was not attracting a high enough share of tourists and visitors. The Scottish Borders Tourist Board feels that significant potential exists to improve the area's share of the Scottish and world  tourism markets. The railway could open up the Borders as part of Edinburgh's special and important role in the tourism market, as visitors to the capital would be able to travel more easily to the Borders. At present, 96 per cent of visitors to the area travel by car, while the number of overseas visitors is relatively small. The spin-offs for tourism-related businesses are obvious: new jobs could be created, and almost £2 million would be generated for the local economy. Access and connectivity were common themes, as was the sense of isolation and exclusion felt in the Borders. Borders residents felt that there was an imbalance in opportunity. That, more than other issues, goes to the heart of the case for a railway as a way of tackling social exclusion. Midlothian and the Borders have faced the challenges of low-wage economies and the closure of traditional industries, whereas Edinburgh has enjoyed a stronger economic performance, with buoyant labour and housing markets. That success, however, has led to difficulties, not least in attracting skilled labour and in providing housing—particularly affordable housing—as there is a shortage of suitable development sites. For the capital's economic performance to continue, the promoter argues the need for improved, clean, efficient transport links into the city. That would open up Midlothian and the Borders to meet Edinburgh's need for additional housing, as well as opening up the capital's job market to Midlothian and the Borders. The promoter estimates that a railway would, over 30 years and, generate £257 million, or, if one factors in new housing, almost £310 million across the three areas, although Midlothian and the Borders would account for 96 per cent of that. In addition, more than 500 new jobs could be created in Midlothian and the Borders. An important point is that the railway could assist in removing the feeling of disconnection in the Borders. That is consistent with the Executive's objective under its transport spending priorities of promoting social inclusion by connecting remote and disadvantaged communities and by increasing access to the transport network. However, if the railway is to open up communities and access to the transport network, we felt that it was essential that a Borders railway should have more than one stop in the Borders. Therefore, we have indicated support for a station at Stow. It is difficult to understand how it is that a Borders railway has only two stations at the start, or the end, of the line in the Borders, despite two thirds of the track being in the Borders. The report also makes it clear that we do not support the termination of the railway at  Gorebridge, nor its phased introduction to Tweedbank. The bill is for a railway to the Borders, not to Midlothian only. If the plan was to have a railway only to Gorebridge, the promoter should have made that clear when introducing the bill. Our report makes clear our concerns about the proposed housebuilding programme: those houses must be built. It is forecast that by 2030, 27,500 new houses will have to be built in Midlothian to cope with the anticipated population expansion along the A7 corridor from Edinburgh. In the immediate future, local authorities are aiming at the completion of more than 10,000 houses by 2011. Of concern to the committee were the low house completion rates in both areas over recent years. That concern was echoed by Homes for Scotland, whose member companies build 94 per cent of new houses in Scotland each year. It was clear that the process was too slow and that the statutory development plan process was failing. As part of the Executive's watching brief, perhaps the new Minister for Transport and Telecommunications could explain what specific action the Executive has since taken to assist in delivering those houses. It would also be helpful if he could indicate what discussions he has had with ministerial colleagues on the matter. We examined both councils' plans to increase house completion rates. Although both council leaders offered a degree of reassurance, they are under no illusion as to what is required to meet the targets. A further worry was the installation of water and drainage services. Again, on such an important issue, our impression was that the level of active and constructive communication between key stakeholders left a lot to be desired. It appears that agreements between developers and Scottish Water are now being reached to allow services to be installed, but are enough being reached to meet targets? Both council leaders appear confident that difficulties can be resolved through partnership working, and Scottish Water indicated that it has a good relationship with both councils. However, in our view, that is not enough. There remains a lack of commitment, or a guarantee, from Scottish Water to include those housing programmes in its business plan to 2010. The developments may be given priority for investment consideration but, until March 2006, when Scottish Water finalises its investment programme to 2010, there will be uncertainty. I am sure that both authorities are doing all that they can to ensure the inclusion of their housing programmes in Scottish Water's development plans, but we cannot safely sign off on that until the commitments are given, which is why we must return to the issue before the final stage.  The importance of the issue cannot be overestimated. Success in meeting the housing targets is fundamental to the railway's success. The promoter might argue that meeting the 2011 completion target five years later in 2016 would have minimal impact on the net present value, but we do not agree. Not meeting the targets by 2011 will have a detrimental effect on the project's viability. Put simply, the houses will bring people, who will become passengers. Let me turn to project costs. At 2005-06 prices, the project's capital cost is estimated at £151 million, of which the Executive is providing nearly £124 million, or around 85 per cent. I appreciate that costs are of concern not just to the committee and to members of this Parliament, but to the council tax payers of Midlothian and the Borders. Members will have noted with disquiet the recent increase in costs associated with the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway, for which the Executive is providing the bulk of the funding. With that in mind, I again emphasise the Executive's responsibility properly to monitor and evaluate the Waverley project to ensure that it comes in on time and on budget. While the attachment by the Executive of four funding conditions is to be supported, there must be more assurances on whether, given past experience and the performance of the promoter to date, project costs are on target even this early on. We appreciated the direct "yes" from the previous Minister for Transport on 22 June, in response to Christine May's question on whether the estimated cost was still £151 million. The minister indicated that the Executive was seeking to learn lessons from previous capital projects. Perhaps the present Minister for Transport and Communications could outline what those lessons are and how they will be taken into account with Waverley. The previous minister stated that a clear risk management strategy must be developed and delivered. It would be useful if the present minister could set out what progress has been made on that over the past six months. Before I move to my closing remarks I will say a few words about patronage forecasts. I repeat our concerns that the business case assumptions are just that—assumptions and aspirations, rather than conclusions and realities. While the Executive believes that the business case stacks up in terms of overall value for money, we were not convinced—and neither was the Strategic Rail Authority—by the conclusion that the railway will operate free from subsidy and that it will make an operating profit within six years of opening. As the report makes clear, the promoter and the Executive must update us before the conclusion of consideration stage on whether they both still support the business case assumptions. It will be for the chamber to reflect on that at final stage.  Our report recommends that the bill should proceed as a private bill and that the general principles be agreed to. However, as paragraph 312 makes clear, we are critical of the performance so far of the promoter and its consultants on the project, and we call on the Executive to reflect on that and to take whatever action is needed. The report sets out serious concerns about the standard of communication on key issues and highlights delays to the bill's progress, much to the frustration and disappointment of the committee, the objectors and others. Even if the motion is agreed to today, the promoter and the Executive need to carry out a lot of work on many issues before the Parliament can make a final decision on the bill. The Executive has based its decision to fund the railway on its support for the business case and the housebuilding projections. Although it has indicated that it is fully satisfied that the required water and drainage infrastructure will be in place, we must have firmer guarantees. Despite the Executive's belief in the accuracy of the revenue yield, the railway's operating costs and subsidies require further consideration. Although the Executive believes that the patronage forecasts are appropriate, agreed and accurate, both parties must maximise passenger uptake—

The committee recommends that the bill proceed beyond the preliminary stage as a private bill and that its general principles be agreed to. There will be opportunities to make a final decision at consideration stage and at final stage, when the bill will come back to Parliament. I hope that, during that time, the Parliament will reflect on some of the committee's concerns and that the promoter and the Executive will have answers to our questions. The Executive has indicated that it is happy to support the promoter in seeking other sources of funding. That approach must be encouraged. Work must also continue on integrating the railway and local bus services and maximising the railway's role in the tourism sector. The report is not so much a "Yes" to the railway as a "Yes, but". I will leave it to Gordon Jackson to set out in his closing speech how we see things  moving forward should the bill proceed to the consideration stage. In the meantime, on behalf of the committee, I move motion S2M-3329, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill and that the Bill should proceed as a Private Bill.

I, too, congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on securing tonight's debate, on the work that she has done on the cross-party group on survivors of childhood sexual abuse and on the support that she has given to the Kingdom Abuse Survivors Project. To mark its 10 th birthday this year, KASP will host a series of events throughout October and November. In marking the 10 years of its existence, the project is trying to raise awareness, which is very important. It will hold events in both Glenrothes and Kirkcaldy. Too many youngsters  who have been abused grow into adults without the issues being resolved. That is central to the debate. It is important that organisations such as KASP are at the front line and that people who have been abused can go to them. For many people, it is a traumatic journey. These are abused, abandoned and damaged individuals, and organisations such as the project need to give the kind of support that most of us simply could not provide. Many of the people who have been abused and damaged have come from children's homes—institutional care—as well as from a family setting. We owe those people a colossal debt. The apology that Jack McConnell, the First Minister, made last year to victims of childhood sexual abuse in institutional care was welcome, but we need to do much more than that. Many people who have been abused, damaged and abandoned feel lacking in worth. The work of the short-life working group and the strategy that has been established must be followed through, because we need to ensure that survivors of abuse recognise how valuable they are to society. We must try to repair some of the damage. We wish that it had not happened and, as Marilyn Livingstone said, we need to take steps to ensure that such things do not happen in the future, but we must grasp the opportunity to ensure that those who have been damaged get some sort of healing so that they can feel part of society once again. I thank Marilyn Livingstone for all the work that she has done. I know how much that work is appreciated in the Fife area. I also commend the minister for the work that he has done and the interest that he has taken in this subject, which we all recognise. We must take steps to ensure that the kind of support mechanisms to which the motion refers are put in place as quickly as possible, especially in the areas where no effective voluntary organisations are carrying out the healing work that is done elsewhere.

rose—

I welcome the opportunity to take part in this brief debate. With the committee report and this debate, the commissioner has fulfilled her duty under the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Act 2003 to consult the Parliament on the code of practice. The committee's remit has been extended and there is now a mechanism for reporting to the Parliament any serious breach of the code. The committee states that it favours the anonymisation of applications. That is a welcome change from the interim code of practice whereby applicants' details are known throughout the appointments process and it will go some way to ensuring that appointments are made on merit. As Brian Adam has pointed out, it is in the interests of all of us to make it clear that appointments to public bodies in Scotland will be made on merit and not according to any other criteria. I turn to the vexed question of cronyism and public patronage in the public appointments system. The committee recognises that  "there is a public perception that 'cronyism' and political patronage is prevalent in the public appointments system". If there is such a public perception, it is hardly surprising, when we consider the evidence of the number of members of the Labour Party in particular who have been appointed to public bodies. That perception in turn prevents others from even applying for appointments, as many believe that it is pointless and that they will not get appointed anyway. That is what I believe the code of practice and the appointment of the commissioner are about. Like the committee, I believe that the commissioner, Karen Carlton, is genuine in her endeavours to ensure that the perception and the reality of the situation are overcome. I look forward to her further work on the equalities strategy. The public appointments system needs to be opened up. It must be open, transparent and fair. That is the only way in which public bodies will genuinely reflect the diversity and reality of 21 st century Scotland. In her response to the committee, Karen Carlton acknowledged that "More work must be done to encourage a wider variety of people to apply for positions and this will be addressed by the Equal Opportunities Strategy", which she is now working on. The evidence continued: "The Commissioner is charged with preparing and publishing a strategy for ensuring that appointments, and recommendations for appointment, are made by the Scottish Ministers in a manner which encourages equal opportunities." It is important that the commissioner monitors how effective the public appointments process is at the moment, and whether or not the code of practice is leading to the changes that I think all of us believe are needed. The commissioner said that she has "written to the Permanent Secretary to request access to information provided by applicants in their application and monitoring forms during the period 1 April 2003 to 31 March 2005, to determine applicants' gender, ethnic origin, ability, declared political activity, age, educational background and where they live." That is important, but there is a flaw here. I do not think that the permanent secretary should keep that information once an appointment has been made. It is not right that the Executive, having made the appointment, hangs on to all the data. I would like the commissioner and the Executive to work together so that, when an appointment is made, such information is passed into the safe keeping of the commissioner for public appointments. I hope that she and the Executive will consider that. I would like the commissioner to return to the Parliament at the earliest opportunity once she has carried out the assessment and monitoring of  political appointments from the start of the Parliament until 31 March 2005. We need that information. If we do not have that information, which precedes the code of practice, it will be impossible to work out whether the code of practice, once it has been adopted, has made a difference. I hope that the information on past public appointments will be placed in the public domain, and certainly in the Parliament's domain, so that MSPs may see whether the changes that have been made have indeed led to a wider field of people being appointed to public bodies in Scotland. I congratulate the Standards and Public Appointments Committee on its examination of the draft code and I congratulate the commissioner, who has done a very fine job.

Throughout the progress of the bill, we have been told that it is a public health measure. Although we all now accept the facts about the effect of tobacco smoke in enclosed public spaces, there is, to my mind, no evidence at all to support the view that tobacco smoke is harmful in outside public spaces. There has been much discussion of the Irish experience of which I have had great experience over the past three or four months. In response to Brian Monteith's point, I can say that it is true that publicans in Ireland have been extremely creative in creating outside spaces with awnings and the like for smokers. However, by moving the argument, at stage 3, from one of public health to an attack on people who smoke serves only to undermine the bill. Frankly, that argument will lose  public support for the bill.

Does the member recognise that a problem with the previous housing repair grants scheme was that the moneys that it provided were siphoned off by many local authorities into other capital projects? The reason why many local authorities had practically no grant scheme was not that the money was not available but that housing repair grants were not a priority for some local authorities.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review the policy of placing children with special needs in mainstream schools. (S2O-7222)

Has the minister noted the comments made recently by Baroness Warnock on the idea that the policy of mainstreaming should now be revisited? Does he agree that, as people who support the principle behind mainstreaming, we should have the courage to examine how the policy is working in practice? Will he make a commitment to begin doing so?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive intends to order an independent inquiry following the publication of the internal Fife Council and Fife constabulary report, "Review of Management Arrangements of Colyn Evans". (S2F-1725)

I welcome the decision to set up an independent inquiry. That news and the First Minister's words will bring some comfort to Karen Dewar's family, who feel badly let down by Fife Council and Fife constabulary. Will the First Minister give an assurance that the inquiry will also examine the period that Colyn Evans spent in Geilsland School as well as his release from supervision? Will he also give an assurance that the independent report will be published in full?

Does the minister agree that it is a bit strange that although Ted Brocklebank—a member for Mid Scotland and Fife—is as concerned as I am about the Karen Dewar case, the Conservatives cannot understand the need for a statutory obligation for the police and local authorities to work together? If Ted Brocklebank was here, I am sure that he would recognise that if there was such working together we might not be in the situation that we are in.

The bill allows for the establishment of community justice authorities; seeks to place an obligation on ministers, local authorities and community justice authorities to co-operate; provides powers to intervene where there is a failure on behalf of the local authority; and at sections 9 and 10 seeks to establish joint arrangements for the assessment and management of sex offenders. To the outside observer, it seems to be a dry and technical bill that is mostly concerned with process, but it has the potential to put in place mechanisms that could prevent a repeat of the tragic circumstances that occurred in Tayport in January. Last week, Colyn Evans was sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of Karen Dewar, who was 16 years old. She was strangled, mutilated, and her body dumped in a rubbish skip and set on fire. Colyn Evans is now 18 years old. He came to the attention of social work, the police and the children's reporter when he was 10. Between the ages of 10 and 16 he committed 14 offences, six of which were sexual offences. Of the sexual offences, five related to shameless or indecent exposure. He was never placed on the sex offenders register. Fife Council and Fife constabulary produced their own internal report on the day that Colyn Evans was sentenced. They examined their involvement with Colyn Evans and admitted that there were shortcomings in communications and written procedures, but concluded that the murder of Karen Dewar could not have been predicted. What could have been predicted, because there were two psychiatric reports to say so, was that Colyn Evans was at high risk of reoffending. In October 2002, Colyn Evans was reported for an attack on a young boy, and in November 2002 he was reported for indecent exposure to a 31-year-old woman. In April 2002, he was placed in Geilsland residential school, where he was expected to take part in an intensive programme but did not co-operate. Before he was returned home, a report concluded that he was still at high risk of offending. That report was never submitted to the hearing in April 2004, when he was discharged from his supervision requirement. He  was given a flat in Tayport, round the corner from Karen Dewar. The police were never formally advised that Evans was in Tayport. Social work asked the police to carry out an assessment. That assessment was never done, but no one asked why. There were two further incidents in Tayport before Karen's murder, but despite police involvement they were not linked to Evans's previous offences. Fife Council and Fife constabulary's internal report reveals a catalogue of failure—failure to communicate within authorities, failure to communicate between authorities and, most important, failure to protect a young woman and a community. I often say how lucky we are in Fife to have a local authority, a police force and a health board that all share the same boundaries. Margaret Mitchell says that what we need is flexibility. Flexibility does not work. That flexibility failed Karen Dewar. If communication and joint working cannot happen naturally in Fife, which has those huge advantages, it cannot happen anywhere in Scotland, unless there are statutory obligations on authorities to work jointly. On Friday, I wrote to the Minister for Justice asking for a full, independent inquiry into the Colyn Evans case.

I very much welcome the minister's short statement, and I thank her and the Minister for Education and Young People for agreeing that an independent inquiry should be set up. That will bring comfort to Karen Dewar's family, who felt dissatisfied with the conclusions of the report from Fife Council and Fife constabulary. There must be the fullest inquiry, and I hope that the inquiry will look at the whole history of Colyn Evans, including the period when he was at Geilsland residential school and his failure to co-operate. If the inquiry is conducted quickly but fully, the lessons that are learned from it could inform the bill at stage 2 and stage 3, and the bill will be better for that. For the sake of a community and a family, the lessons must be learned quickly, so that other communities and families will be protected.

No one suggests that the bill has taken up a great deal of parliamentary time, but the time that it took was worth while. Thanks are due to the committee convener, Andrew Arbuckle, the committee itself, and, of course, the clerks for their diligence in working on the bill. The bill will allow the Baird Trust to get itself into shape for the 21 st century. Since it was set up in 1873 and formally incorporated by an act of Parliament in 1937, the world has changed. The bill will change the Baird Trust into a charitable company limited by guarantee. The objectives of the trust have been updated and the changes mean that a further act of Parliament will not be required if further changes to the constitution are to be made at some time in future. I note that James Baird's original trust said that its object was "'to assist in providing the means of meeting, or at least as far as possible promoting the mitigation of, spiritual destitution among the population of Scotland, through the efforts of securing the godly upbringing of the young, the establishing of Parochial Pastoral Work, and the stimulating of ministers and all agencies of the ... [Established] Church of Scotland'". I am sure that that object is still applicable today. The bill widens the trust's membership and powers of investment so that it will be able to support the work of churches other than the Church of Scotland. The changes will bring greater transparency through the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator and the Inland Revenue and the trust's accounts will be lodged with Companies House. All that will bring greater scrutiny and accountability than exists at present. This is a small, but beautifully formed bill. It has not taken up a great deal of parliamentary time but the time that it has taken has been worth while because the Baird Trust will now step confidently into the 21 st century instead of staying put in the past.

It is a great pleasure to speak in the debate. My interest in charities legislation and the need for it predates my election to Parliament in 1999. I know that many other members have also striven over the years to keep the subject on the agenda. The bill is essential in order that we can restore public confidence in charities and the people who operate them. The generous people of Scotland have the right to expect that their hard-earned money is spent wisely and not misused, and that the people who operate charities are fit to carry out such duties. The bill will achieve all those things. It is long overdue, very welcome and will go a long way towards restoring public confidence in Scottish charities.  This Scottish Parliament has done Scotland proud with the bill. I plead with the Conservatives to set aside their narrow interests, to embrace the legislation as a good thing and to allow the Scottish Parliament to give unanimous support for charities in Scotland.

I thank the member for his point of order. I point out that the Minister for Parliamentary Business, who criticised me yesterday, said in her defence that it was the fault of her officials that she was late in moving an important motion this morning. I point out that the minister's job is hardly onerous. She is required to be here on time and she is required to say, "Formally moved." It is a bit much that she blamed her officials for her failure to get here on time.

Although I acknowledge that there has been a small increase in the number of operational police officers in Fife over the past year, it is nonetheless true that Fife has a much smaller number of police officers than the population deserves. Does the minister agree that we need police on the beat, that Fife needs its due share and that that approach is the best way of tackling antisocial  behaviour and petty crime?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. You will recall that my point of order focused exclusively on the behaviour of the First Minister and on his discourtesy to the chamber. With regard to the press articles that I quoted, I invite the Minister for Parliamentary Business and yourself, Presiding Officer, to examine the press coverage, all of which suggested a figure of £50 million. If that figure was not given by Executive  sources, perhaps the Minister for Parliamentary Business will tell us where it came from.

At the Parliamentary Bureau yesterday, Opposition members indicated that we believed that 45 minutes was insufficient for the ministerial statement and questions on the Kerr report. We requested more time. One of the reasons that the Executive members gave for refusing to extend the time for the ministerial statement was that the Parliament would also have an opportunity for a debate on the Kerr report. When the Executive members were pressed on when that debate would take place, they would not give a date, so I reserved my right to oppose the business motion today. However, few members of the bureau could have expected the astonishing news from Andy Kerr today that the proposed debate will not take place until after the summer recess. It is unacceptable that the debate will not take place until at least three months after the publication of the report. Mr Andy Kerr said that he wishes in the intervening period to listen to views. It is obvious that he does not wish to listen to the views of members of the Parliament. Members of the public, some of whom have been involved in local campaigns to protect local services and who were instrumental in forcing the Executive to conduct the review in the first place, will be astonished that MSPs are not being given the opportunity to express a view. Before the Minister for Parliamentary Business raises the red herring of Scottish National Party time tomorrow, I remind her that if we had wanted to have a debate on the Kerr report, we would have had to lodge a motion on Tuesday, a day before we saw the report.

I concur fully with the Conservative business manager on that point. Mr Andy Kerr also said that the timing of the debate was a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau. It is not—it is a matter for the Parliament. Members should oppose the business motion because that will send a message to Executive ministers that we need and should have an interim debate on the Kerr report before the summer recess.

It gives me great pleasure to open for the Scottish National Party in this debate. My party welcomes the world youth congress, which is holding its third meeting here in Scotland this July and August. It is often said that young people today are disengaged  from politics. All too often the picture painted of today's youth is of an apathetic generation that is uninterested in the wider world and lacking in the desire—associated with previous generations—to change society. As we well know, nothing could be further from the truth. The minister has mentioned the young Scots who are involved in the change 05 initiative; they are an inspiration to people in Scotland and throughout the world. The world youth congress is just one example of young people refusing to conform to an ill-informed stereotype. A glance at the programme of this year's congress demonstrates a commitment among its 600 delegates to the major issues that confront our world in the 21 st century: sustainable development, eco-friendly lifestyles, global citizenship, eradicating poverty and meeting the UN's millennium development goals. Those are the concerns not of a disengaged and selfish generation, but of a generation that is committed to changing our world for the better. They also reflect the failure of our generation to do the things that we hoped to do. The world youth congress proves that young people today are engaged with the important issues that face society and that they are prepared to take action to improve the world around them. It is vital that we in the Parliament—and, indeed, all politicians—give our support to those young people. If proof is required of the commitment of the world youth congress to those themes, we need look only to a new development at this year's event. The Scottish summit is the first time that delegates will not be restricted simply to discussing the issues that I have mentioned but will actively participate in projects that encourage sustainable development. Those projects will take place throughout Scotland. In my constituency of Fife, for example, up to 15 delegates will take part in a regeneration project at Lochore meadows country park. I remember when the park did not exist but was the site of pit bings. Some regeneration has been done, but I look forward to the work that the young people will do. Such projects show that the delegates of the world youth congress are not afraid of getting their hands dirty. The aims of the congress go beyond sustainable development to encompass a commitment to the fulfilment of all the UN millennium development goals. The SNP whole-heartedly supports that aim. The congress will debate some of the most important challenges that we face in the 21 st century, including the eradication of poverty, the reduction of child mortality and the fight against the scourge of HIV/AIDS in Africa. Young people have an important role to play in the debate that is taking place on those issues. After all, it is largely on their generation that the huge task of ending injustice in the world will fall.  It is only right that we genuinely listen to the thoughts and views of those who are involved in the world youth congress. Those views will be contained in a strategy paper that will be prepared by delegates and presented to the UN General Assembly. The paper will describe the work that the young people have done to support the millennium development goals and suggest practical policy initiatives to encourage more young people to become involved in the effort. The Parliament has discussed before how best we can encourage young people to become actively involved in what we call civic society. The report from the world youth congress will contain ideas and suggestions from the very people whose participation we are trying to encourage. It is vital for each of us to learn from what the congress has to say and to do all that we can to put its recommendations into practice in our communities. Finally, it would be remiss of me to give a speech about the world youth congress without mentioning the other summit that is taking place in Scotland this year. It is worth while noting the similarity in the programmes that will be discussed at the summits in Stirling and Perth. We can only hope that the leaders of the world's richest countries show the same level of commitment as the delegates of the world youth congress to tackling the global challenges of the 21 st century. If they do, we can all look forward to the achievement of the millennium development goals becoming a reality.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Questions on the statement are due to last for only two more minutes, but 15 members are waiting to ask questions of the minister, given the importance of the statement. Could you use your discretion to allocate an extra 10 or 15 minutes in order to allow as many members as possible to ask questions of the minister?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have given you notice of my intention to make this point of order. At First Minister's question time last week, in response to a question from Nicola Sturgeon, the First Minister refused to give the Parliament the estimated policing costs for the G8 summit. After FMQs, the First Minister's official spokesperson suggested to the media that the costs would be around £50 million but could be higher. Every newspaper has highlighted the figure of £50 million. Do you agree that, if the First Minister's spokesperson can brief the media on likely costs, the First Minister's refusal to give the same information to Parliament is a discourtesy to the Parliament and its members?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During health and community care questions, we reached only question 4 before the time was up. That was due in no small part to the fact that the first two questions took 14 and a half minutes and in large part to the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care's lengthy answers. Will you remind the minister that this is question time, not answer time? Question time is members' one opportunity to hold ministers to account. We are clearly being prevented from doing so if we reach only question 4.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The document to inform the debate has not yet been delivered to members. I understand that there is a hold-up at the printers. Advance copies were eventually given to the Scottish National Party spokesperson and the other spokespeople yesterday afternoon, but no other member has had the opportunity to see the document. I would like the Executive to explain why it has failed to provide the appropriate documentation to allow a debate that was scheduled three weeks ago to take place. Given that the debate is supposed to be about the review document, I wonder whether you think it appropriate for us to continue.

I am grateful to the Procedures Committee for its inquiry and the report that it has now published. Do the procedures under which the Parliament currently operates help, or get in the way of, the delivery of the transport infrastructure that we all want and that Scotland needs? I think that they get in the way. As the convener of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee and as the Scottish National Party chief whip, I am involved in all parts of the process. I know how difficult it is to get MSPs to go on to a private bill committee. I have served on the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee for a year and a bit. I was promised that it would only last a year, but there is probably another year and a bit to go before we are finished. After long trials, jury members can be given exemptions for life. Some MSPs have served a long time on private bill committees. The committees are extremely time consuming and difficult, and work done by MSPs on such committees is in addition to their work in the Parliament and on other committees. I welcome the Procedures Committee's report and the scrutiny that the committee has given to the system for private bills. I welcome the proposal for a statutory system; that is a sensible way forward. The way that we operate at the moment is not helpful—either to the proposers of the bills or to the MSPs on the private bill committees. It was not anticipated that there would be many works bills, but we now have two tram committees and the Waverley committee, as well as a smaller committee that is not considering a works bill.  Many MSPs are involved on those committees. Most of the bills are to do with the same area, and the local MSPs are precluded from being on the committees. The Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee, the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee, the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill Committee and the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee have involved an inordinate—and I would say unfair—number of MSPs from Fife. We are close enough to the action but not actually involved in it. Because it would be unfair to bring somebody down from Aberdeen or Inverness on a Monday to serve on the committees, some other MSPs are being distinctly put upon. I include myself in that category. All business managers should be a bit fairer to the folk of Fife in future. This Parliament and its processes are evolving. At the beginning, we were not sure what would be involved. We sucked it and we saw, and it is not to anybody's advantage to continue as we are. The Procedures Committee has taken the Parliament and its processes a big step forward. As Susan Deacon said, the challenge is to translate that into real infrastructure. Although I welcome the proposal for the Executive to introduce legislation, I urge that such legislation should be introduced as soon as possible. A number of private bills are already waiting in the wings and my biggest concern is that they will go through our present process, with all the difficulties that that would entail. The Executive should find a way to bring forward the legislation so that proposals that are in the pipeline can be brought into the system as quickly as possible. That will allow Scotland's transport system to move forward.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Fife Council regarding teacher staffing levels. (S2O-6573)

Is the Minister for Education and Young People aware that, since 1999, there has been a 2.7 per cent drop in the number of secondary school teachers in Fife and that Fife is now 29 th out of 32 local authorities in terms of attainment? Will the minister explain to parents in Fife how a further cut of 127 teachers over the next three years will help to achieve the improvements that are needed in pupil attainment?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you confirm that last week and again this week the Parliamentary Bureau made it absolutely clear that the revised guidance was part of a planned programme and was not a response to any comments that were made by Cardinal O'Brien or any other person?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Andrew Arbuckle on securing the debate. I am grateful to Diageo for its briefing and to the National Farmers Union of Scotland, which helped me to understand some of the complex issues involved. Although I support the aspiration that only Scottish grain should be used in our national drink, I believe that the motion is short sighted and could harm our Scottish whisky industry. I share the concerns of Diageo, which has plants throughout Mid Scotland and Fife, the region that Mr Arbuckle and I both represent. Diageo supports many jobs in the Leven area, where there is high unemployment. Scottish whisky has had protected geographical designation under European Union law for 15 years. It also benefits from worldwide protection through the World Trade Organisation. I understand from Diageo that 90 per cent of the grain that it purchases originates in Scotland. That was not always the case. Until a few years ago, most of the grain used in whisky production was sourced from elsewhere, particularly from England. The percentage of Scottish grain that is now being used is probably the highest ever. I do not think that there is an argument for using only Scottish grain. I am persuaded by the argument about what might happen if the crop fails in any one year. If Andrew Arbuckle knows things that we do not about what might happen in the future, he must have another career as a seer. To rely entirely on Scottish grain is certainly not a risk that we should be taking.

It is relevant. The Scotch whisky industry—our major national industry—is telling us that 90 per cent of the grain that it uses originates in Scotland, so I do not think that we  have a problem yet. However, if in future the percentage of Scottish grain that was being purchased fell by a lot, the issue should be revisited. I congratulate Andrew Arbuckle on securing the debate, but I believe that he should have thought a bit more about the subject. He should have listened to what he was being told by the major employers in the constituency that he represents, as well as to the NFUS and Diageo.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. Talking of courtesy in the chamber, it would have been extremely helpful if a member who was going to be named in a point of order had been so informed. It is clear that the minister's point of order has been made in response to the fact that the Executive has got it wrong and has covered up the figures that are there. It is trying to create a smokescreen because it does not want the information to be out there.

The number of jobs in the defence industry has been reduced because of the jobs that have been lost since Labour came to power in 1997.

In the member's youth, the cold war posed a threat. At that time, he was a member of CND and did not believe in nuclear weapons. However, the member is older and there is no longer a cold war. Why does he believe in nuclear weapons now that no threat exists?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Can I tell the member what happened with Scotland's housing before this place was set up? One debate on the housing support grant was scheduled every year at Westminster. It lasted for an hour, and it was the sole debate on housing in Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you can do anything about the heat in the chamber this morning, which is excruciating.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Today's debate is on charity legislation. Mr Sheridan quite rightly opposes private schools but, frankly, that is not the issue, and Mr Rumbles's intervention has not helped. Presiding Officer, could you possibly encourage Mr Sheridan to get back on track?

I am pleased to have the chance, at long last, to participate in a stage 1 debate in the Scottish Parliament on charities legislation. Members will be aware that charities legislation is close to my heart—that was the case before I became an MSP in 1999—as a result of my past employment with Shelter Scotland, which is a homelessness charity. When I worked for Shelter Scotland, it was frustrating that an organisation called the Homeless Aid Trust went round various communities to raise money by selling scratch cards. I remember the sheer inability of the Inland  Revenue and the Scottish Charities Office to deal with that organisation, which clearly did not put the money to the purpose to which it should have been put. Things were extremely difficult and fraught. At that time, I believed that bad charities and organisations that were there to con and defraud should be driven out and that—more important—genuine organisations and charities that worked hard should not be brought into disrepute by bad charities and organisations. That is why I have been so frustrated that it has taken six years for legislation to come to the Parliament. I am sure that all members acknowledge the huge contribution that charities make to Scottish society, especially in supporting our most vulnerable people. However, if charities are to perform their roles as effectively as possible, it is crucial that they have public confidence in their actions. Unfortunately, as a result of the well-documented activities of a tiny minority of people who are involved in charity work, confidence has been eroded over the years. That is why the bill is important; by creating a robust regulatory framework, the bill will go a long way towards re-establishing public confidence and allowing charities to flourish. I disagree with the committee on a number of matters. Given what I have said previously, I disagree with what the committee says in paragraph 16 of its report: "The Committee commends the Executive for conducting an extensive and inclusive consultation exercise". The consultation on the bill was absolutely right, but I still regret that reaching this point has taken us so long. I turn to some vital provisions in the bill that have not been mentioned and, in particular, to chapter 4 on the supervision of charities. The chapter will give OSCR the power to obtain information, to hold inquiries and to remove and suspend people from office. It will allow the putting in place of the monitoring and supervisory framework that is needed to restore and keep public confidence in our charitable sector, which has been absent for many years. Independence, too, is close to my heart and I want to talk about the independence of charities and protecting them from local and national Government interference. That is absolutely imperative. Some of us will remember something called the Third Age Group, which an independent review found to be a creature of Fife social work services. That is an example of interference in a charity. In fact, that charity was set up by Fife social work services—that has never been, and should never be, the purpose of a charity. The independence of charities has to be protected  from interference from national Government and local authorities. I welcome the publicly accessible register of all bodies that are eligible to operate as charities. The Inland Revenue, which was responsible for registering Scottish charities, failed to monitor the charities and there are now a number of non-functioning, dormant charities in existence. If there had been, in Scotland, the kind of monitoring and supervision that is conducted by the Charity Commission in England and Wales, we would not be in the situation that we are in now. There are 28,000 charities in operation in Scotland, and they are desperate for the bill to be passed so that public confidence in their activities will be restored. Like other members—Patrick Harvie, Scott Barrie, Karen Whitefield and Fiona Hyslop—I regret the fact that much of the debate has been taken up by discussion of private schools. The bill is about much more than private schools; it is important for the present and future of charities. The bill treats private schools no differently from any other organisation. Just like any other body, private schools will have to make the case to OSCR that they should be registered. I welcome paragraph 150 of the committee's report, which is key to all that. The committee has recognised the importance of ensuring that only organisations that have as their overriding purpose the provision of a benefit to the public should qualify for charitable status. I agree that there should be greater emphasis of that point in the bill. I whole-heartedly welcome the bill and congratulate the Communities Committee on a very fine job. I look forward to the stage 2 and stage 3 debates on the amendments and then the passing of the legislation for which we and the voluntary and charitable sector in Scotland have waited so long.

Given the interest of the media in all matters to do with standards and MSPs, is the minister as surprised as I am that not a single member of the media is listening to the debate?

First, I apologise on behalf of my colleague, Linda Fabiani, who was supposed to be taking part in this debate but who is, unfortunately, ill at the moment. However, she assures me that she will be back in time for the members' business debate on the motion in her name, so people should not panic. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. The current transitional arrangements were imposed on the Scottish Parliament under the Scotland Act 1998 and it was always expected that the Scottish Parliament would put in place its own members' interests legislation. That is why we are debating this issue today. Of course, this is not the first debate on the subject; a debate was held in October 2002, when the previous Standards Committee proposed a bill to replace the members' interests order. It is a matter of great regret that the necessary legislative time was not found to get that bill on to the statute book before 2003. The Parliament might have saved itself some grief if that parliamentary time had been found. The new Standards Committee has, quite rightly, reviewed the initial work that was done by the previous Standards Committee and has produced its own report, which we are debating today. I will deal with some of the issues that it raises. The requirement to register gifts from spouses over the cost of £250 is an unnecessary and unwelcome infringement of personal life. The proposal to remove that requirement is welcome and long overdue. I remember discussing the subject with Karen Gillon way back in 2001. I cannot think why the requirement was included in the transitional order in the first place. The present provisions on paid advocacy are too wide and could prevent support being given to a member's bill. There is a fatal flaw in the present  transitional arrangements: there is no connection between the amount of support that is given and any personal benefit to an MSP. That must and will be addressed by the proposed bill. I welcome the committee's view that paid advocacy only takes place where there is a connection between the receipt of a benefit that represents a personal gain to the member and that member undertaking action as an MSP. That clarity is welcome and will be much needed when we come to debate the bill. I have long argued that non-pecuniary interests can be at least as important as pecuniary interests and welcome the tests that will apply. Members should be required to register a non-pecuniary interest that a member of the public could reasonably think might influence their actions as an MSP. I remember the avalanche of mail that I got and the many press criticisms to the effect that I was trying unreasonably to vilify freemasons. The issue was never about freemasons; it was about recognising that membership of outside organisations, particularly in village Scotland, is at least as important as pecuniary interests.

I agree, but we need as much transparency as possible, and it is in everyone's interests to declare their non-pecuniary interests—voluntarily or under legislation such as that which we are proposing—whether that be membership of clubs, the freemasons, a football club or whatever. A clear message should go out that this is not about picking out the freemasons; it is about acknowledging that non-pecuniary interests are as important in the Parliament as pecuniary interests. I strongly believe that the members' interests order should have been replaced before the 2003 election to allow the new rules to be in place for the new intake of members. I regret that the parliamentary time was not available. I urge the Parliament to approve the proposal and impress on all business managers—there are at least four sitting in the chamber today—the need to ensure that this committee bill gets to Parliament as quickly as possible and gets through the system as a matter of urgency. Notwithstanding the need for proper scrutiny, we must not delay any longer because there is confusion about the issue and it is in the interests of all members that we have an order that will guide and protect MSPs and will also ensure that the people of Scotland have faith in the institution that is our Scottish Parliament.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In my speech, I might have suggested that the SPCB was not moving fast enough on the issue of ticketing for the public galleries. There has since been a whisper in my ear. I understand that, today, new ticketing arrangements have been announced for the public gallery.

It is always a pleasure to speak after Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. I am grateful for being told what the little blue lights are for—I thought that they were a design feature of the Parliament and did not realise that they have a practical purpose. I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate. The Procedures Committee is one of the Parliament's unsung committees, but what it does and discusses impacts on every member and on how business is discussed in the chamber. No one pretends that every member will be satisfied with what has been proposed today—indeed, there are probably 129 different preferences with respect to the timing of FMQs and question time combinations. There is still concern about First Minister's question time being held at noon on Thursdays, but we need an opportunity to let it bed in a bit more before we take the step of putting it back into an afternoon slot. The proposals that we are considering are more acceptable than all the other schemes that the Procedures Committee discussed. The proposals are that FMQs would be retained at 12 o'clock and, with the earlier start of 9.15 on Thursday mornings to take account of general questions beginning at 11.40, a block of almost 2.5 hours of debating time would be retained on Thursday mornings and Wednesday afternoons. That there is the capacity for us to have longer debates is absolutely critical. I turn to the vexed question of the method of selecting questions. Like many members, I have been frustrated by the seemingly uneven selection of questions. Many of us no longer submit questions, as we believe that our questions will not be selected; even if they are, we believe that they will be so far down the list that they will not be reached anyway. I think that the lack of confidence in and the frustration with the system are the reason for the lack of attendance at question time. That is why I warmly welcome the move towards names being randomly selected, meaning that members would go away and submit a question  only after their names had been randomly selected. There is nothing more frustrating than submitting well-considered questions and simply not getting them taken. Through what has been proposed, at least we will find out whether we will be number 1 or number 12. We can then decide whether submitting a question is worth while. I share the concerns that many members have raised about the allocation of tickets to the public galleries. It is simply unacceptable that, after all this time, the corporate body cannot get its act together and produce a system of two-hour slots so that people are in the chamber on Thursday afternoons when we are debating, rather than tickets being retained for FMQs. That a decision has not been taken on that matter by now is unacceptable and I hope that members of the corporate body who hear the debate or read the Official Report of it will take on board members' views on that matter. I am sure that this will not be the final word on question time timings or question time procedures. Of course, the Procedures Committee will react to members' concerns and I am sure that it will monitor how the new arrangements bed in. However, the arrangements are welcome for the moment and the Scottish National Party will support them at 5 o'clock.

Will the minister join me in condemning the invitation that the University of St Andrews union  debating society issued to Nick Griffin of the British National Party? Is he, like me, grateful that Fife police were convinced that there would be a public order issue and forced cancellation of the debate?

Will the member give way?

I offer my sincere congratulations to Susan Deacon on securing this debate. This is precisely the kind of debate that members' business should be used for. Sometimes, we do not get the unanimity that we should at members' business. As a business manager and chief whip, I feel that this is exactly the kind of debate that we should be having at this time of night. I also congratulate Margaret Smith on a very fine speech. Obviously, she spoke from her own experience. Her speech was heartfelt and I am sure that it contained words of encouragement for many people. LGBT Youth Scotland also deserves all our congratulations and support, because it supports other young people in tackling homophobia and bullying and it helps young people at their most vulnerable, when they are adolescents. They have many problems to deal with at that stage without the pressure under which society puts them to adopt what it views as norms. That is why the work of the LGBT Youth Scotland volunteers deserves recognition, not just in relation to the Philip Lawrence awards scheme, but every day of the week, because they support other young people every day of the week. The work that they do is amazing and I cannot praise them enough. The Philip Lawrence awards scheme is about the outstanding achievement of young people. Young people throughout our communities are  working hard, although they get a bad press. I know about the work that young people do from my experience and, judging by the fact that members are nodding their heads, I think that they have similar experience. We should try to encourage more youth organisations and young people to put themselves forward for the awards next year. It is good to see young people getting the recognition that they need and deserve. The debate has been extremely thoughtful. I apologise that I have to leave immediately after my speech, but we are running late tonight and I have something else to attend to. I offer LGBT Youth Scotland every congratulation and I hope that the work that it does will continue in the years ahead. It is an inspiration to us all and I am grateful for the opportunity to pass on my thanks.

The minister started by making the point that this is the first time that a bill on Gaelic has been put forward by the Government, but of course it is not the first time that a bill on Gaelic has been considered by the UK Parliament or the Scottish Parliament. Way back in 1981, Donald Stewart, the MP for the Western Isles, introduced a bill on Gaelic to the House of Commons, where it was strongly supported by folk such as Dennis Canavan. My colleague Mike Russell introduced his bill to the Scottish Parliament in 2003 with the support of John Farquhar Munro and others. The debate gives me the opportunity to pay tribute to my friend Mike Russell, whose bill ensured that the case for retaining and encouraging Gaelic was firmly on the Parliament's agenda. It was regrettable that the Executive could not fully support that bill, but we are where we are and I welcome the Executive's bill. As Alex Neil and others have said, stage 2 amendments are needed to make the bill better. I look forward to the Executive's support for those amendments. I will take the minister back to spring last year, when the Council of Europe published a report that criticised the UK and the Executive for their  failure to comply with their obligations to Gaelic under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The report said: "There appears to be less emphasis on minority language policy on the part of the Scottish Executive" than there is in Wales. The minister will recall that I lodged a series of questions on the subject, to which I received a response on 27 April 2004. The minister's attempt to explain the lack of emphasis from the Scottish Executive was: "This statement is not surprising given the relative position of Welsh in Wales and Gaelic in Scotland. In the 2001 Census, 20.5% of the Welsh population were found to speak Welsh ... The comparative figures for Gaelic in Scotland were 1.2% speaking Gaelic ... Although this difference would account for the different emphasis on minority language policy in Scotland and Wales, the Scottish Executive is committed to protecting the Gaelic language in Scotland."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 27 April 2004; S2W-7285.]  I was not the only one who was concerned about the minister's apparent lack of understanding of the parlous state of Gaelic. Surely the fact that only 1.2 per cent of people in Scotland are Gaelic speakers, compared with the fact that 20.5 per cent of people in Wales are Welsh speakers, means that the Executive should place greater emphasis on Gaelic. To suggest that the smaller numbers are an excuse for less emphasis on Gaelic in Scotland than on Welsh in Wales does the whole campaign a disservice. There are 6,000 languages in the world, of which the vast majority are under threat. It is reckoned that a language dies every fortnight. Gaelic is in a parlous state; it needs to be protected and encouraged. This national Parliament has a duty to ensure that Gaelic does not die and that all necessary steps are taken to ensure that Gaelic is a living, breathing, vibrant and essential part of Scotland. The bill is a first step to halting the decline of the Gaelic language, but there is no point in passing the bill without a long-term commitment. That is why I welcome the Education Committee's recommendation that a duty should be placed on the bòrd to report to ministers on progress against the commitments that the UK Government made with regard to Gaelic in the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. I would also like an amendment to include a duty to report to the Parliament—to a committee of the Parliament, which I hope would be the Education Committee—on progress on the national plan. That would ensure that not only ministers but the Parliament could monitor progress and the encouragement that is needed for Gaelic. Unless we make those two amendments, the Parliament will have no way to monitor progress. If we do not revive and save our language and ensure that it  grows, the Parliament will have failed.

Since 1999, all the Fife MSPs have repeatedly raised the issue of the appalling service that rail passengers in Fife get. I agree with Iain Smith that the service has not improved one whit since First ScotRail took over the franchise—in fact, it has got worse. Can the minister knock heads together in First ScotRail to ensure that the passengers in Fife, who are paying an absolute fortune to travel by public transport, get the kind of deal that they deserve?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Margo MacDonald might not be aware that the SNP motion was given to all Opposition parties, with the exception of the SSP, four hours before it was lodged, in the hope that we could reach a consensus. That simply was not possible, but it was not for the lack of trying on our part.

It is important to record why we are having the debate. The commissioner for public appointments in Scotland was established by the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Act 2003. Under that act, a commissioner was appointed and statutory duties were placed on her to consult the Parliament and the Executive in producing a code of practice for ministerial appointments to public bodies. In addition, she was required to report material breaches of the code to the Parliament. In February 2003, Peter Peacock said: "the commissioner will be required to consult extensively Scottish ministers, the Parliament and the public in drawing up the code. Parliament will be able to express its view ... clearly and unambiguously."— [ Official Report , 5 February 2003; c 17767.]  Although the act became law, neither the Parliament nor the Executive took steps to identify a committee of the Parliament that could be consulted or be the recipient of reports of material breach. In other words, the commissioner had no mechanism for fulfilling the obligations that were placed on her by the act that created her post. That is despite a ministerial commitment that a committee would be established. To enable the Parliament to express its views clearly and unambiguously, there is no legal alternative to having this short debate. Twenty months after the act was passed, the Procedures Committee is only now considering the mechanism for consulting the Parliament and has still to make a final decision on that. If, in the period between the adoption of the interim code and the putting in place of the final code, a formal mechanism is still not established for reporting a material breach to the Parliament, the Scottish  National Party expects a similar debate to be scheduled for discussion of that material breach. When the Parliament passes legislation, we must act on its implications for the Parliament. We have in place several other commissioners and we must ensure that their mechanisms for reporting to the Parliament are robust enough to allow any actions that are required to be taken timeously.

Does Tommy Sheridan share my anger and concern that the Labour convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee admitted to the bureau that he alone took the decision that the bill would be delayed until after the summer recess and that the committee has never had a chance to consider the proposal or its own work plans? Does he acknowledge the support of other Opposition parties in the face of profoundly undemocratic practice by the Executive parties?

rose—

I am grateful to Christine May for giving way. She is right to talk about tourism in Fife, but does she agree that, in her constituency of Central Fife, places such as the Levenmouth area and Glenrothes are not seeing the benefits of increased tourism that are felt elsewhere in Fife?

I associate myself with the comments that have been made by other members, in particular Scott Barrie, on rail travel. I invite the minister to travel with Fife members on what passes for a rail service between Fife and Edinburgh. Can the minister update Parliament on the discussions that have taken place and the progress that has been made on encouragement of a fast ferry service from Fife to Edinburgh?

I continue to be astonished by Elaine Murray. She argues that what we say in the chamber will not make a blind bit of difference. What she means is that the Labour Government at Westminster will pay absolutely no attention to Jack McConnell or the Labour Government here. That is a startling admission from Elaine Murray. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate, and to record the names of the young men from Fife who went to Camp Dogwood and did not come back: Kevin McHale; Stuart Grey; Paul Lowe; Scott McArdle; and their comrade Pita Tukatukawaqa from Fiji. In one week alone, Fife buried three young men, and the pain of the families goes on. As we welcome back the Black Watch, our thoughts naturally go to the families of those young men who have not come back. While those young men fought and died near Camp Dogwood, Geoff Hoon and Tony Blair were laying their own plans to get rid of those young men's regiment. Scotland's regiments are effective, professional and valued by everybody in Scotland and beyond. The recognition of that professionalism is why the Black Watch was sent to Camp Dogwood in the first place. For all the strength of the American battalions, it was the Black Watch, with 850 men, which was sent to protect the backs of the United States troops. I have never believed that United Kingdom  troops should have been sent to fight an illegal war, based on lies, but they followed the orders that they were given by the politicians—the same politicians who will take the decision today to disband and amalgamate the Scottish regiments. Those are not military decisions. They are not based on military imperatives. They are decisions that are taken by politicians at Westminster who, as Elaine Murray has said, feel free to ignore the democratic will of the Scottish people. Those politicians will now airbrush proud family and local regiments from history. There is a huge feeling of betrayal in Fife about the plans, but then Tony Blair, Geoff Hoon and Alistair Darling would know nothing of that, because they sent our young men to fight and die and did not bother to come to their funerals. The plans to amalgamate and disband are opposed by soldiers, ex-soldiers and the wider Scottish community. [ Interruption. ] If Elaine Murray wishes to intervene, I would be happy to let her, but she should not sit there and hiss at me. Labour claims that it will retain the identity of the regiments by retaining the cap badges. That identity is rooted not in cap badges, but firmly in the communities that the soldiers come from. When that link is cut, there will no longer be a local identity. John Home Robertson commented about Rosyth and Devonport. It is true that the Tories awarded the contract to Devonport, but in 1997 the Labour Government had the opportunity to change the contract and it did not do so. The contract with Devonport continued. This is a difficult debate for many people here, but there is great strength of feeling. A decision will be taken and, at 5 o'clock tonight, the Scottish National Party, like the Liberal Democrats, will support the Conservative motion because it is important—despite what Elaine Murray says—that the view of the Scottish Parliament is heard, and that that view is heard at Westminster.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. An hour ago, the SNP group leader was handed a document entitled "Fair to All, Personal to Each: The next steps for NHSScotland". On inquiring at the Scottish Parliament information centre, I was informed that the document is embargoed until after the minister sits down at the end of his speech in the debate that follows. The document is therefore not available to members or to inform the debate. Presiding Officer, you will be aware that at yesterday's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau I raised concerns about the late delivery of material for debates and that the Minister for Parliamentary Business agreed to consider the matter. However, this is not the late delivery of material, but the deliberate withholding of material by the Executive. That is unacceptable and undemocratic. I recognise that the Presiding Officers are not responsible for the distribution of material for debates, but will you join me in expressing your anger on behalf of the Parliament at the Executive's behaviour today?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I warmly thank Dennis Canavan for lodging the motion and for securing the debate. However, countries the world over will be astonished that the Scottish Parliament is even having such a debate. It should not be up to Dennis Canavan to lodge a  motion and to make the case for a national holiday on St Andrew's day; it is for those who do not want such a holiday to explain why. The United States celebrates independence day, France celebrates Bastille day, Estonia has two national days and Ireland has, of course, St Patrick's day—or Paddy's day, as it is better known to most people. Paddy's day is a celebration of Ireland, the Irish and those who just want to be Irish for a day. It is not as if Scotland has a surfeit of public holidays; we have only seven, while most European countries have 14. That is why we can rightly dismiss Ted Brocklebank's offer to trade May day for a national holiday on 30 November. May day is an important day in our calendar, as is St Andrew's day, and both should be recognised. Almost 90 per cent of our population support St Andrew's day as a national holiday. The Tories are out of step again. Cardinal Keith O'Brien summed up the matter well when he said: "From big business to the ordinary, working people, everyone would benefit from having a day in the darkness of winter to recharge their batteries and think of Scottishness and nationhood." St Andrew, as others have said, never visited Scotland in his lifetime. His bones were borne to Fife by St Regulus. The shape of the cross on which St Andrew was martyred is Scotland's most recognised and enduring symbol: the saltire. It should not have taken Executive money to establish that. St Andrew came to Scotland by accident, but throughout the centuries others have come to Scotland by design: Irish, Polish, Italians, Ugandans and people from every part of the world. All cultures and faiths have added to our wonderful mix, which is why we should have a national day to celebrate who we are, how we see ourselves in the world and how the world sees us. The First Minister is fond of saying that Scotland is the best small nation in the world; it is, but every other small nation has its national day as a public holiday. It is time that Scotland did, too.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister go a wee bit further and explain how the money is going to be divided among the 32 local authorities? Will it be divided according to the number of children in foster care, or will it simply be divided on a population basis?

rose—

Presiding Officer, as you will be aware, I raised this issue at yesterday's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau. The Minister for Parliamentary Business has promised to reflect on how ministerial announcements will be handled in the future. On this occasion, however, there is another problem. In its answer to the question put to it, the Executive made reference to some documents available in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I inform you that those documents were not available until 2.30 pm today, whereas the announcement was made on Monday.

Does the minister agree that, as a result of the rises in fuel prices, more people will go into fuel poverty and that the figures that he quotes are now out of date?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I indicated to you that I intended to raise a point of order. During the weekend, The Sunday Times  and the Sunday Herald  ran details of the Executive's spending review, which is the subject of the ministerial statement that is to follow. The papers reported that there would be an increase of £200 million in transport spending and £100 million in university building programmes. Both the  Sunday Herald  and The Sunday Times  stated that they understood that there would be an above-inflation rise of 5 per cent for the bricks-and-mortar programme. It is an amazing coincidence that two journalists could understand the same thing at the same time. Of course, the more likely explanation is that they were briefed by the same person. On Monday, The Scotsman  ran a similar story, but this time, a senior Executive spokesperson was quoted as saying that there will be an extra 10 per cent for capital investment. Time has been set aside for a ministerial statement to announce to Parliament the details of the spending review, which is to be followed by a debate. If the Executive believes that the statement is important enough to set aside parliamentary time, it is not acceptable that details of the statement should be given to newspapers three days in advance of the announcement and, of course, three days before members of the Parliament have heard it. This is not the first time that details of a finance minister's statement have been given to the media in advance of its being given to Parliament. On that occasion, the Presiding Officer ruled that, as the details were almost all in the public domain, the minister would not be allowed to read the statement to Parliament. The circumstances are similar today. The Executive has shown contempt for parliamentary procedures and discourtesy to you, Presiding Officer, and to members of all parties. We deserve an explanation and an apology from the minister. I do not think that, on this occasion, Parliament would be well served by the minister being prevented from making his statement, but I would be grateful if, on behalf of the Parliament, you would make your views known on the matter and if you would make it clear that you will not hesitate to take stronger action if such a discourtesy occurs in future.

I congratulate Elaine Smith and all who helped her to bring the bill to the Parliament. I know from personal experience the great deal of hard work that goes into a member's bill. Only members with great personal commitment will embark on the process in the first place. I also pay tribute to the fine speech that Elaine Smith made. Anybody who has read the bill and monitored its progress through stage 1 will be aware that the bill's main thrust is to encourage a cultural change in Scotland with regard to views on breastfeeding. We in the Scottish National Party support that principle. The health benefits of breastfeeding are well known and I will discuss some of them later. On a personal note, I feel that it is right to stress that I am not generally inclined to legislate in areas in which cultural change is needed. However, I believe that legislation is necessary in some cases  and this is one such case. We must create a culture in which breastfeeding in public is accepted and, more important, regarded as the norm. Elaine Smith referred earlier to Deputy Chief Constable David Mellor's evidence. However, given that he is the deputy chief constable of Fife, it would be remiss of me not to quote him. He said in evidence to the Health Committee: "It is perfectly legitimate to create a criminal offence as part of a strategy to change attitudes. However, I sense that the creation of a criminal offence in this bill seems to be principally a symbolic act, although I accept that the existence on the statute book of an offence that means that people can threaten to use the criminal law is a convincing way of changing attitudes and behaviours."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 11 May 2004; c 866.] It is my view that in doing that the bill will have a positive impact on breastfeeding rates in Scotland and there will be a subsequent improvement in the health of our children. However, such an improvement will not be possible if the bill exists in isolation. There must be greater a focus on narrowing the inequalities in breastfeeding rates that exist throughout Scotland. The bill must be supported through increased education and awareness campaigns that highlight the benefit of breastfeeding to both mother and child.

I thank the member for that intervention. I have absolutely no hesitation in welcoming the initiative in Coatbridge and I hope that it will be followed in schools throughout Scotland. I have no doubt that members are aware of the health benefits of breastfeeding to both children and mothers, but it never hurts to remind ourselves of some of the facts. Research has shown that breastfeeding can play a large role in reducing the number of childhood illnesses and in improving health in later life. A move to help our children get the best start in life must be welcomed. The World Health Organisation recommends, where possible, exclusive breastfeeding for infants up to the age of six months. Although Scotland might boast increasing levels of breastfeeding over the past 10 years, there is certainly no room for complacency. An equally important point is that statistics show that rates in poorer areas are worse than those in affluent ones, which Elaine Smith touched on. In Shettleston in Glasgow, a mere 21 per cent of mothers breastfeed six months after their child is  born. It is in tackling that inequality that the benefits of the bill can be seen most clearly, by creating a culture that encourages breastfeeding among all social classes. There is evidence to suggest that prior exposure to breastfeeding or a positive role model in breastfeeding increases the likelihood of a new mother choosing to breastfeed her child. That evidence is true no matter which area or social class it is applied to. Ending the negative attitudes towards breastfeeding and helping to create a culture across all sections of society where breastfeeding is the norm would be the bill's most important achievement. However, just as the bill respects the right to breastfeed, we need to ensure that those mothers who cannot breastfeed for whatever reason are not made to feel inadequate. Childbirth is a traumatic enough experience without new mothers feeling pressured into breastfeeding in the first place. At present, funding for breastfeeding promotion and support is spread across various departments. Investment in the promotion of breastfeeding will save money in the longer term. Research has shown that there could be savings in the national health service of £3.5 million if breastfeeding rates increase—a fact that the Executive must take into account when deciding on funding in this area. In conclusion, I am happy to support the general principles of the bill. I believe that it can play a vital role in making breastfeeding more acceptable in our society, but legislation alone cannot achieve that. The bill can achieve its aims only if it is supported by a coherent national breastfeeding strategy and education campaign. I welcome Malcolm Chisholm's remarks about a breastfeeding action plan, given that some health board areas do not have a strategy for breastfeeding. The action plan is long overdue and it will enhance the bill once it is enacted.

Does the minister agree that, given the good will towards Parliament and the need for charity legislation, confidence in the charities sector perhaps would not have been undermined if the Executive had introduced a bill in the previous session and not waited until now?

Bill Butler and his committee colleagues will be glad that they have reached the end of their line as the final stage of this bill comes to Parliament. I offer—as convener of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee—my sincere congratulations to Bill Butler and the committee on their work during what I now know was a tortuous process. As the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee starts its journey, my committee colleagues and I will be looking to Bill Butler—or Railway Bill, as Scott Barrie called him—for any advice that he can give us on the private bill process. Any changes to the process that might result from investigation by the Procedures Committee will come far too late for us. Wearing my Mid Scotland and Fife hat, I warmly welcome the completion of the bill. I know that members of all parties will support it at decision time today. The Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail link has been a dream for a long time for many people, particularly in Clackmannanshire—the wee county will at last have a rail link, which will help to release the potential of the local economy. From a Fife perspective, I am disappointed that the rail link will not extend to the ferry port at Rosyth, which is a wasted opportunity. However, I and many members and other people outside Parliament will continue to press to make that extension a reality. I welcome the minister's comment today—just as I welcomed it during the previous debate—that he, too, sees the opportunities. However, there is a difference between seeing opportunities and seizing them.  We will ensure that the minister understands that difference. The new rail link will take freight pressure off the Forth rail bridge and free up capacity for more passenger trains. The Executive must take the opportunity that is offered by the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail link to ensure that there is an increase in passenger trains from Fife to Edinburgh. Like Christine May, I urge the minister to work with Fife Council and other partners to ensure that Levenmouth—the largest conurbation in Scotland that has no rail link—will have access to the Fife circle, with connections for Leven and Thornton. Long-suffering Fife passengers deserve a far better rail service than they have at the moment. If the minister needs to be reminded of that, I point out to him that a number of those Fife passengers sit around him in the chamber. We will ensure that we continue to press the case for Fife at every opportunity. As Scott Barrie said, the Presiding Officer is not, as constituency member, permitted to speak in this debate. However, I am sure that the Presiding Officer will agree that it is now up to the promoter of the bill to review compensation. I am sure that Mr Reid's office and Scott Barrie will work closely with the promoter and the objectors to try to reach a fair solution. Balancing public gain and private loss is never easy, but if the promoter is willing to assist, I think that all the people of Clackmannan and Fife will welcome the new rail link, which few of us believed would ever be restored. After the bill is passed today, the imperative is to ensure that the rail link is up and running—only that will turn the dream into reality. Ensuring that that happens is important for a number of reasons, not the least of which is that, like all the other members who have spoken, I want to be on the first train.

This has been an excellent debate. Members have spoken about their experiences of volunteering and about organisations in their constituencies. I am sure that our local newspapers are all looking  forward to the rash of press releases that will follow the debate. Christine Grahame tells me that hers is already sent. Why does that not surprise me? I would like to pick up on some of the points in the debate. Ted Brocklebank provided an interesting spin on Margaret Thatcher's speech, which was given in this very place, in which she said that there was no such thing as society. His other comments have been well dealt with by other members, particularly by Karen Whitefield, so I shall, as a fellow Fifer, spare him my comments this time. Nora Radcliffe raised an important point about the role that women, particularly married women, have always played in volunteering, and about how impossible it is becoming these days—because of financial and other pressures—for them to give the kind of commitment that they gave in the past. Like Nora Radcliffe, I believe that there is a new generation of women for whom time constraints are making it impossible to volunteer. Johann Lamont made a fine speech, in which she made a valuable point about how we can ensure that money goes to the more informal voluntary organisations and not just to the bigger and more formal organisations, which have plenty of folk to assist with filling in forms for lottery and Executive funding. When people volunteer, they are actually doing jobs and do not have time for form filling. Such organisations are losing out on funding, but perhaps they need it most.

We are what we are, and we should recognise what we all are. At this stage in the debate, the huge benefits that volunteering brings to our society have been well documented. Many members have talked about that, but it does not hurt to mention some of those benefits again, not least to ensure that everybody recognises that the debate is about an important subject. It is not a filler at the end of a parliamentary term—debates such as this show Parliament in its best light because there is a commitment throughout the chamber to volunteering and to celebrating people who volunteer. Although I believe that the debate shows our Parliament in the best light, it is a pity that there is—as usual—nobody from the media to hear the debate. More than a million Scots do voluntary work every year. That is a fantastic figure, of which we as a nation should be proud. Socially, volunteering can provide people from the young to the elderly with a range of skills. That means that volunteers get something out of it. A key point is that it is not  always about what we do for other people; rather, it may be about what a person gains from helping and supporting other people—in particular those who are in difficulties. It is right that we take the opportunity to celebrate the value of volunteering and to recognise the positive impact that it has on the lives millions of people throughout the country. Mike Watson confuses genuine SNP concern about getting the balance right between Government support and central control with opposition to what the Executive is trying to do. We must all consider the issue of getting the balance right. No one has a monopoly on being right—that includes ministers—and Mike Watson should not interpret constructive comments from the SNP as being an expression of opposition to what the Executive is trying to do. That is not the case. We must not be complacent about volunteering in Scotland. I welcome the research that has been done and I welcome especially the recognition that demographic changes will have an impact on the supply of volunteers in that young people and people from urban backgrounds are less likely to get formally involved. There are a number of reasons for that. Such people feel that they might not be welcome and, unfortunately, there is a traditional image of volunteering as being middle-class. The situation is not helped when Mr Brocklebank—I am sorry, but I cannot resist the temptation—continues to perpetuate that myth. Research does not reflect accurately the numbers of informal volunteers: people who baby-sit; people who look after the neighbours; people who go for messages; and people who run football clubs and the like. There is a gap in the research in that it does not reflect accurately the communities about which members have all spoken, nor does it reflect the people in those communities who are doing their best to help. I welcome project Scotland and the Scottish Executive's support for volunteers, which has already been highlighted. However, there is concern—not only from the SNP, but from Dr Davis Smith of the Institute for Volunteering Research—that the state should not be involved to the extent that volunteers are no longer independent. That perception of volunteering is not helped by Government's insistence that those who receive jobseeker's allowance be called in and given the choice of jobs, training or volunteering. Such coercion means that people will in the future be less likely to embrace volunteering than they would otherwise have been. It has been my pleasure to award certificates for millennium volunteers in Fife to young people who  help people who have disabilities. Their commitment is total and many opportunities are now open to the volunteers because of the skills that they have developed. Christine May, who has sat through the debate, will know about the fantastic work that has been done over the years by the Auchmuty tenants association in Glenrothes. It runs Christmas parties and, more important, it is a contact point for the community. The Drug and Alcohol Project Levenmouth is a leader in providing help for people who have addictions. The success of the project lies in the fact that its counsellors are volunteers who come from the communities that they seek to help. Scott Barrie and I were recently present when Fife Council celebrated children's panel members in Fife. We sometimes forget that they are volunteers who get very little out of their work apart from the satisfaction of knowing that they have helped others. The Deputy Presiding officer is telling me to stop, so I will.

I am confused about where the member is going with his speech. He seems to equate charitable giving with volunteering. Volunteering happens in many areas and involves many people, from the very poorest to the middle classes and the rich. I am not sure what he is saying about people doing things for others.

Does the minister recognise that volunteering should be independent of government and the state? I welcome the Executive's commitment to supporting volunteering, but is the minister conscious of the danger that by pushing volunteering strategies such as project Scotland she might alienate the very people who, if left alone, might volunteer?

Mr Smith knows as well as I do that a majority of individual members in the previous session believed in PR. The Liberal  Democrats voted against the bill. It is as simple as that and Iain Smith cannot wish that fact away.

Before I speak to the amendment in my name, I put on record the Scottish National Party's long-standing support for STV proportional representation. For a long time, the introduction of STVPR has been SNP policy, as we believe that such a system is needed for local government elections. Because the Executive parties were dragging their feet, last year I introduced a member's bill on the issue. We could already have had STVPR in place if, regrettably, the Labour Party and the Liberals had not opposed my bill. In passing, I point out that the provisions for STV in the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill bear a remarkable resemblance to the provisions of the Proportional Representation (Local Government Elections) (Scotland) Bill, which was rejected because the Liberals and others believed that there was not enough detail on the face of the bill—the same detail that the Executive has chosen to include in regulations. The reason for the amendment is that amendments that Mr Sheridan, Mr Mundell and I attempted to lodge at stage 2 to decouple the Scottish Parliament elections from the local government elections were ruled inadmissible because they were outwith the scope of the bill. We believe that that matter is serious. When the Local Government and Transport Committee took  evidence at stage 1, it became clear that there were concerns that holding two different elections on the same day using different forms of proportional representation would be problematic not just for voters, but for those who administer the elections. In evidence to the committee, the Society of Lawyers and Administrators in Scotland said: "The firm and unanimous view of the Society in its submission to the Scottish Executive on September was that if STV was to be introduced for local government elections then these elections should be decoupled from the Scottish Parliament Elections." The SNP opposed combining the two elections in the first place, but the Parliament cannot now ignore the compelling evidence in favour of decoupling them, given that we are almost at the point of passing a bill to introduce PR. Time is short, but I would like to make a couple of other points about STVPR. First, I agree that the mechanisms of the election should be determined by regulation. However, it is important that the Executive should take on board the serious concerns that have been expressed about the extent of those regulations and the method by which the Parliament deals with them. Secondly, I refer to the point made by my colleague Bruce McFee about the role of the Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland. In trying to square away the councillors, the Executive has compromised the commission's independence. The SNP believes that that will leave the door open to a potential legal challenge. I ask the Executive to reflect on that point. The bill is not perfect and we are concerned by aspects of it, but the SNP will support it. For many of us, the introduction of PR for local government is a long-held ambition. I recognise the commitment to it among MSPs from every party and acknowledge that tonight some members from the Labour Party cannot bring themselves to support it. However, all parties will win and lose in local government elections held under STV. The SNP will lose in Angus, whereas Labour will lose in Midlothian and Glasgow. The winners will be the voters, who will get the council for which they voted—their votes will count. That alone is reason enough for supporting the bill. We call on members from all parties to do so tonight. I move amendment S2M-1495.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, considers that the Scottish Executive should bring forward legislation, as a matter of urgency, to decouple elections to Scottish local authorities from the elections to the Parliament."

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the minister accept that although McIntosh recommended a proportional system, it was Kerley who recommended that STV should be adopted because it was proportional and maintained the councillor-ward link and that ward sizes should be from two to five members?

I have heard the Executive's arguments, which I heard at stage 2. Nobody apart  from Labour and Liberal members is convinced by them. The McIntosh commission recommended a proportional system for local government elections. Kerley was charged with concluding what the right kind of proportional system was. Kerley recommended STV, which is what we are examining today, but what is important is that Kerley recommended that each ward should have from two to five members and that a ward could have two members in exceptional circumstances. Amendments 1 and 2 would create such a system. They would put in the bill the Kerley report's recommendations. Every independent group of witnesses and experts who gave evidence to the Local Government and Transport Committee recommended ward sizes of between two and five members. The Executive can reject that—it has the numbers to do so. However, we should not pretend that the bill proposes anything other than a political fix by the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party. The minister gave the game away—he talked about the partnership agreement and how that was more important than putting in place true proportionality. Bristow Muldoon said that rural areas have too many councillors. Like Brian Monteith, I think that that remark will come back to haunt him.

The member misrepresents me, but I do not misrepresent him. I heard him say that rural areas have too many councillors. I do not support a hybrid; I support the Kerley group's recommendations. That group was established to consider the form of proportional representation for local government. It recommended STV and ward sizes of between two and five members. Iain Smith can continue to deny that any expert opinion—and in particular Kerley—suggests that, but that will not be true.

The member makes a point indeed. If we are going to introduce a PR system for local government and if that system is going to be STV, it is incumbent on us to get the best-possible system that retains the member-ward link and  offers proportionality. The Executive's bill is simply not good enough and I urge members of all parties to support amendments 1 and 2.

Does the member accept that two-member wards would only be used in those areas, particularly rural areas, where to create larger ward sizes of more than two members would effectively have councillors responsible for an area the size of a whole country? How can he not support an amendment that would benefit people in rural areas, such as the Highlands and  Islands, the south-west of Scotland and elsewhere?

The Local Governance (Scotland) Bill will introduce proportional representation for local government elections, but the system as laid out in the bill is not as proportional as it could or should be. Amendment 1 would allow for two, three, four and five-member wards. Amendment 2 would provide that two-member wards should not be the norm, but should be used only for reasons of geography or sparse population. That is important for the Highlands and Islands and other rural areas because, otherwise, the ward sizes could be the size of a small country. Amendment 2 is necessary to maintain the councillor-ward link in such areas, which is what the McIntosh and Kerley reports believed should happen.  The Executive's justification for having three or four-member wards with a single transferable vote system is that it achieves the right balance between providing proportionality and maintaining the essential councillor-ward link. However, all the evidence shows that the balance would be better achieved with wards that could have two, three, four or five members. It is accepted that the more members per ward in a system, the more proportional the system is. It is also accepted that the councillor-ward link must be maintained. The balance between those two considerations was a central concern of the Kerley report and of the STV working group interim report, both of which concluded that the balance is best achieved via wards with three, four or five members, with wards of two members in exceptional circumstances—which means in remote or sparsely populated areas. The benefit of having two, three, four or five-member wards is that it would provide proportionality, maintain the councillor-ward link and provide flexibility for areas in which three, four or five-member wards would be inappropriate or impractical. The Executive, in producing the bill and in rejecting similar amendments to the bill at stage 2, set aside the conclusions of the two groups that it set up to consider the matter—the Kerley committee and the STV working group. Expert witnesses to the Local Government and Transport Committee, including Professors John Curtice and David Farrell, argued that, by restricting wards to three or four members, the system becomes significantly less proportional. In fact, if Scotland adopts three or four-member wards, as the Executive wishes, we will have the least proportional STV system in the world. I welcome the fact that the Executive is introducing PR for local government, but it is essential that we get it right and that we get it right the first time. The debate is not about what is in the interests of political parties or councillors, but about what is right for the citizens of Scotland. I move amendment 1.

I remind the minister that Fife constabulary has 200 fewer police officers than our population deserves. I know that Fife Council is concerned about the situation, as is the Fife police authority. Can the minister give us any hope that, at long last, Fife will get an increase in its police?

In 1999, the McIntosh commission recommended that there should be an independent review of local government finance, but the Executive at that time refused to set one up. The Parliament's Local Government Committee had to set up its own review. Since then, the council tax has risen by 50 per cent. Is that the reason that the minister now thinks that it is an appropriate time for a review of local government finance? Given the delays in the Executive getting its act together, it is unacceptable that the minister refuses to set a timescale. If he will not give a timescale for that review today, will he give an undertaking to the chamber that he will announce a timescale for reporting when he announces the membership of the review group?

I congratulate Trish Godman on securing this evening's debate and on the very eloquent speech that she made in support of the motion. As Trish Godman said, this is our opportunity to pay our respects and offer our thanks to those who helped to defeat Nazism and fascism in Europe. My generation has not recognised enough the sacrifices that the previous generation made. Our parents lived through and fought in the war, but I bet that few of us are even aware of the horrors that they endured to ensure that we would live in a free, democratic Europe. My father was a Bevin boy and did not fight in the war, but I did not become aware of the level of commitment that had been shown by all my other relatives until I was much older. That says something about the generation that fought in the war. The Europe that has now been created is a union of 25 states and is truly that generation's legacy. I watched some of the television coverage of the D-day events, which was extremely moving. I was struck by the dignity, humility and courage of the veterans. It is astonishing how they managed to return from the war to pick up their lives and to create a better society for themselves, never mind their children, to live in. These days, counselling is given as a matter of course to people who have experienced minor traumas. It is staggering that when the veterans came back, filled with the horrors that they had experienced, they got on with creating the kind of society that we have now. Another point that struck me forcefully was the certainty of the veterans' belief that they were fighting a just war. Like Trish Godman, I was appalled by George Bush's attempt to link the second world war to what is happening in Iraq. The people who fought in the war believed that they had a part to play in ridding Europe of the evils of Nazism and fascism. Nazism killed millions throughout Europe in concentration camps—not just Jews, but communists, socialists, Gypsies, homosexuals, the mentally ill, the homeless and beggars. As a democratic Scottish Parliament and democratically elected politicians, we have an opportunity to ensure that at all times we argue for democracy and participation, as Trish Godman has done. We, the fortunate generation, must take a lead in rejecting fascism in all its forms today.

I have my other glasses on, but the last time that I looked I was not Richard Lochhead. I congratulate Iain Smith on securing tonight's debate. I know that it is customary in such debates to thank and congratulate the member who has secured them, but on this occasion my congratulations are genuine. This is a very important debate and I have never heard Iain Smith speak better in the chamber.  Although we are right to focus on north-east Fife, we must recognise that a shortage of affordable housing is a problem in rural areas throughout Scotland. Average house prices have risen—as Iain Smith said, prices in Cupar have risen by more than 50 per cent in the past year alone. It is not the case that St Andrews, in particular, is becoming unaffordable; housing is unaffordable in many areas of north-east Fife. If house prices in Scotland had increased only by the rate of inflation since 1975, the average price would be £48,000 lower than it is. Throughout Fife, house prices are rising at an unprecedented rate, partly as a result of the fact that prices are so high in Edinburgh. Because people on modest incomes are unable to buy in Edinburgh the kind of houses that they want, we are seeing a ripple effect throughout Fife. As Iain Smith rightly said, that extends all the way up to Cupar. The parts of Fife that have access to a mainline railway station are the areas in which house prices are rising. Perhaps we should consider the dispersal of jobs from the likes of Edinburgh to places such as Fife and taking jobs to where people are, because at the moment those people are commuting to Edinburgh for jobs. People are moving into Fife and into West Lothian, where house prices are much lower. To the mix of reasons for the rise in house prices, we must add the fact that the number of council houses is decreasing, because houses have been bought under the right to buy and not replaced. I say to Ted Brocklebank that it is clear that, after all these years, the Tories have learned nothing about housing and the housing market. It is not good enough to suggest that people can go away and come back.

It is. I appreciate Keith Raffan's intervention. Local authorities, including Fife Council, have a statutory duty to house people. The Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 placed new duties on local authorities. At the moment, many local authorities are struggling just to meet their statutory duties, never mind to house people with general needs. The Executive has undertaken a review of affordable housing, which lasted until April 2004. When the minister sums up, it will be useful if she speaks about the review, its timetable and its outputs. As Iain Smith recognised, the strategy that Fife Council has developed will be only a piece of paper until the council gets the resources  that it needs to ensure that there is provision of affordable housing. There is only a small rented housing sector in north-east Fife—I refer to both council and private rented accommodation. As Iain Smith said, there are fewer than 1,000 council houses in the whole of north-east Fife. Houses are being built that cost more than £100,000. Few young people can afford to buy such houses and people on average incomes are simply being priced out of the market. Many young people live with their parents for longer, because they simply cannot get into the housing market. The shortage of affordable accommodation and the fact that housing is not available in the right place at the right time are particular problems in north-east Fife, because of the number of second homes there, but they are also problems throughout Fife. Ted Brocklebank is right. There are areas in Scotland in which there are surplus houses. Frankly, however, the surplus houses are in places where jobs do not exist and where people do not want to live. It is not just a matter of saying that there are houses on a council estate somewhere and asking why people do not go there to live. We must provide the houses where the jobs and the people are.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I want to highlight the importance of some major events to the economy of Fife and Kinross. I am told that the open golf championship brings around £25 million to the Fife economy. I am glad that, next year, it will return to its spiritual home, St Andrews. Shops, hotels and ordinary homes all benefit economically. I believe that more than half a billion people throughout the world watch the championship on television. We are fortunate that St Andrews is part of the cycle that ensures that the open is brought to Scotland three out of every five years. I apologise to John Scott for my next remark, but it is true that, as all great golfers know, winning the open in St Andrews is that bit more special. Fife and Scotland have been late in realising the potential for golf tourism—in spite of the fact that we in Fife have more golf courses per head of population than anywhere else in the world. We can learn many lessons from Ireland's marketing of its golf industry. St Andrews is a success despite appalling transport links and poor road, rail and air links and we must do much better for our visitors than we are currently doing. Pauline McNeill has already mentioned T in the park, which is an example of a major event that results in huge benefits for the local economy. I have been told that it has been estimated that £2.5 million is pumped into the economy in the town of Kinross alone. I pay tribute to my colleague Bruce Crawford who, as leader of the SNP-controlled council, was instrumental in bringing T in the park to Kinross in the first place. It is not only the T in the park weekend event that brings benefits—the weeks of preparation beforehand also bring benefits. Roadies, scaffolders and other essential workers who put together the festival site fill the hotels and bed and breakfasts in Fife and Kinross. Of course, youngsters make money for weeks afterwards clearing litter from the site. I have been told that a healthy tent-recycling industry has grown up around the site, thanks to people leaving behind tents, which are then sold on by enterprising youngsters. I have also been told that, in Fife, a person is a bit daft to buy a new tent, as there are plenty just after the event every year.  Scotland has a lot going for it. It has beautiful scenery and friendly people—as the minister said—but our weather is not all that it could be. However, apart from last year, the weather has been no barrier to the Hogmanay celebrations. Scotland and Edinburgh have successfully marketed themselves as the place to bring in Ne'erday. Therefore, if the event is right, the weather is not too important. We must build on the success of events such as the open, T in the park and the Hogmanay celebrations. Scotland is rich in important dates in the winter, no doubt because our ancestors believed that we needed something to cheer us up and get us through the long winter months. Last year, I spoke at a Burns supper in Markinch. Alex Salmond was also there to speak. He made a brilliant suggestion that, because we are so rich in such dates, we should market a winter celebration of Scotland. It could start on St Andrews day, run through Hogmanay and end on Burns night. It should be a celebration of Scotland and all that is Scottish. That is a great marketing opportunity. All that we need now is for somebody to take it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We have spent some minutes on the Green amendment, but the member has not referred to it at all. He seems to want a debate on Scottish Opera and the Scottish Arts Council. I do not recall that the Greens opposed the business motion to debate the matter.

First, I want to acknowledge the very real commitment of MSPs from every party to the issue of MS and to people with the condition. Indeed, their commitment has been highlighted by the amount of work that has been done over the past four years to keep MS on the political agenda through asking parliamentary questions and so on. The Parliament previously debated MS's effect on so many people in Scotland in October 2000. That was a poignant occasion because many MSPs either contributed to the debate or listened to speeches. In fact, it was the last occasion that our first First Minister, Donald Dewar, was in the chamber. Although he did not speak in the debate, he sat and listened to members' speeches. Four years on, I welcome the opportunity presented by this debate to assess the improvements that have been made in the care for MS patients in Scotland. However, before concentrating on the advances—or lack of them—that have been made since the previous debate, I will give a brief explanation of the illness that we are discussing. MS is a complex disease of the central nervous system that impairs the brain's ability to transmit instructions to the muscles. Although different people are affected in different ways, in most cases the symptoms become more severe over time. So far, there is no cure for the disease. Scotland has the highest rate of MS in the world, with approximately 10,500 people suffering from the disease. No one knows why Scotland has such a high number of MS patients, but we do  know that the standard of care for people with MS remains unacceptably low. That was the case four years ago and remains the case today. When we previously debated the issue, the Scottish needs assessment programme—or SNAP—had just published a report that stated that care for MS was "substantially sub-optimal, inadequately resourced and unacceptably fragmented". At that time, I called on the Executive to introduce a national strategy and standard of care across Scotland to end the injustice of substandard care for people with MS. However, only ad hoc and piecemeal improvements have been made since then. We still lack a coherent and well-funded national strategy and, when it comes to treatment, Scottish MS patients still face a postcode lottery. The Executive's response to the problem has been many warm words but precious little action. The October 2000 SNAP report recommended that managed clinical networks should be established across Scotland for those with MS. However, as no requirement was placed on health boards to adopt that recommendation, there is currently only one MCN in the country, and that was set up only through the commitment of individual specialists in Forth valley. The varying standards of care mean that MS patients are still discriminated against depending on the part of the country in which they live. Four years ago, members highlighted the lack of specialist MS nurses in the national health service. Since then, there has been a welcome increase in the number of nurses from seven to 14. However, that is not enough: the Multiple Sclerosis Society Scotland has argued that at least double that number is required. Indeed, five health boards provide no specialist nursing for MS at all. Moreover, the increase in specialist nursing has been possible only because of the society's financial assistance. Scotland's 44 neurologists recently wrote to the newspapers to profess their embarrassment at the quality of care for people with MS. For example, nine out of 10 neurology patients wait 266 days for an appointment. That is unacceptable. Despite the minister Malcolm Chisholm's acceptance that "MS specialist nurses have enormous potential to improve patients' quality of life", the Executive has still failed to provide adequate funds for such nurses. Finally, I want to touch on the area of research. Well-funded research is vital not simply to find a cure for MS but, in the meantime, to develop treatments to improve the standard of life for people with the disease. Again, the Executive has  failed to make any serious inroads into addressing the lack of research.

Mary Scanlon makes a valid point, and the methods to which she refers should also be explored alongside the more traditional methods. Where those methods make improvements, they should be considered. The current research is inadequate to tackle a disease that affects so many thousands of people throughout Scotland. It gives me no pleasure to be standing here lamenting the lack of progress since I last secured a members' business debate on MS. However, the criticisms are all valid and the time for warm words and assurances from the Executive is well and truly over. We need action now. Mark Hazelwood, the director of MS Society Scotland, said today: "The absence of a National Standard or framework for MS means that the condition gets low priority. Even the most basic services for people affected by MS are often absent ... The Scottish Executive should set a standard that spells out the basics which everyone ought to get, wherever they live. We're not asking for the moon. Such standards were published in England and Wales last year, but in Scotland, as yet, there is nothing, even though we have the highest rate of MS in the world." A national framework for standards of care is essential to end the geographical discrepancies in treatment. Such a framework must be matched by increased funding for staffing, equipment, care for those with MS and for research into the causes of MS and possible help for those with the disease. Then and only then will Scotland's 10,000 MS patients be able to achieve the standard of living that they deserve. I hope that when he sums up at the end of the debate, the minister will give us not just warm words but a timescale for action to deal with the chronic lack of support and care for people in Scotland who have MS.

Does the minister agree that pressure on the Forth road bridge and congestion in Edinburgh can be relieved only by the provision of a fast, frequent and safe rail service from Fife and beyond? What hope can the minister give to frustrated commuters from Markinch, who have been waiting for the redevelopment of their station for five years, that the work to include toilets, disabled access and closed-circuit television will begin in the very near future?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. What we heard from the minister tonight was, in effect, a ministerial statement about the nursery nurses, the sector and what the Executive intends to do in the future. Not only has the minister not taken any interventions—

It is not a speech. It is a serious point of order, Presiding Officer, because in effect we heard a ministerial statement on which we have not been allowed to ask any questions.

I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing the debate. Members' business debates are quite important for the Parliament, and there is one thing that distinguishes them from other sorts of debate: at the end of this debate, there will be no vote. That means that Labour members in particular can come into the chamber and say exactly what they feel. I congratulate them on doing so. However, if push came to shove and there was a debate that was followed by a vote, the Labour Party would vote against the nursery nurses, as was the case a few weeks ago.

I am sorry—I cannot. I apologise on behalf of Fiona Hyslop, who has had to leave the debate because of her child care situation. I also remark on the fact that, with the exception of the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People, not one Liberal Democrat member is in the chamber. The issue of nursery nurses' pay is not new. As Jackie Baillie said, it has been an issue since 1995. For more than three and a half years, members of the Parliament have been raising questions and asking for a national review of nurses' wages and conditions. For more than three and a half years, we have been getting parliamentary answers from Executive ministers, saying that the matter is one not for them but for COSLA and the employees. There have been three and a half years when the Executive could have averted the situation that we are in now if, at any point during those three and a half years, it had taken steps and banged together some heads in COSLA, but the Executive refused to do that. Frankly, the Executive has been culpable. There is no doubt on the part of anybody in the chamber tonight that we need a national review of the pay and conditions of nursery teachers. However, the Executive continues to maintain that it is a matter for COSLA and the employees. That has allowed local authorities to put in place local agreements. However, the Executive does have a locus to get involved. It has a locus today, and it had one three and a half years ago. It cannot expect the nursery nurses to deliver the national pre-five programme, yet at the same time say that it has no responsibility for national pay and conditions. If the Executive can commission Professor McCrone to carry out a national review of teachers' pay and conditions, it can commission a national review of nursery nurses' terms and conditions. The issue is about women and low pay. Nobody in the chamber believes that if the dispute had  involved predominantly men, it would not have been solved three and a half years ago. Women get the double whammy: those who are on low pay and those who need the nursery care and teaching that the nursery nurses provide. It is women and young children who are suffering because of the dispute, and I urge the Executive to get its finger out and get it settled soon.

Will Helen Eadie give way?

Is the member also in favour of introducing STV for Scottish Parliament elections?

I congratulate the Executive on finally introducing a bill on STVPR for local government elections. If a week is a long time in politics, five years is an eternity. It is five years since McIntosh recommended PR for local government elections and four years since Richard Kerley recommended STVPR. Of course, we could have had STVPR for the local government elections in 2003 if the Executive parties had not conspired to kick my member's bill on the issue into touch. However, that was then and we are now discussing the general principles of the Executive's bill. I am disappointed that the minister did not respond more positively in his speech to some of the Local Government and Transport Committee's concerns. I want to raise three issues: the number of councillors per ward, the timing of elections and the voting age in the elections. On the first issue, I believe that the more councillors there are per ward, the greater the proportionality. As others have said, the Liberal and Labour proposal for a ward size of three or four councillors will give us the least proportional such system in the world. Most of the evidence that the committee took points to the fact that flexibility needs to be built into the system to give the Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland scope. We must ensure not only that we have greater proportionality, but that there is sufficient flexibility to preserve natural communities as wards. As has been said, the Executive's working party on PR is in favour of wards of three to five councillors, as was Richard Kerley. We now find  out from Iain Smith that, unfortunately, the Liberal Democrats have never been in favour of a fair voting system, but are in favour only of a moderately proportional system. I say to Iain Smith that a moderately proportional system is not a fair voting system.

I was wondering when it would finally strike Iain Smith that the proportionality of STV is determined by the number of councillors per ward. That is the whole point. I cannot believe that, having gone through all the facts, he has only now clicked that that is the case. I welcome the Local Government and Transport Committee's support for the proposal that the boundary commission should redraw the wards from scratch, rather than just bolting on the existing ward boundaries. The boundary commission is confident that it can complete the work in time. I heard Andy Kerr's speech, but the Executive does not seem to be putting forward a good argument for why we cannot go for a clean-sweep approach to ensure that we get the arrangements right this time. The Scottish Local Government (Elections) Act 2002 fixed Scottish Parliament and local government elections to fall on the same day. The SNP opposed that measure in 2002 and we oppose that arrangement now. We opposed it then because voters were being asked to use two different electoral systems and three separate ballot papers. If STV is adopted for council elections, voters will be faced with two different kinds of PR and a first-past-the-post system on the same day. The evidence for the need to decouple the Scottish Parliament elections from the local government elections is overwhelming, as the Local Government and Transport Committee heard from senior officials from Scotland's councils and from Neil McIntosh of the Electoral Commission. Neil McIntosh said: "When it comes to running elections, voter engagement and voter turnout, combination adds complexity, particularly if STV, the additional member system and the first-past-the-post system are being used."—[ Official Report, Local Government and Transport Committee , 16 December 2003; c 455.] The committee supported that view. There was no rationale for bringing the two elections together in the first place and there is even less reason for keeping them together if the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill is enacted.  One of the biggest challenges to face each and every politician is in encouraging young people in particular to participate and exercise their right to vote. I welcome the Executive's proposals to reduce the age at which people may stand for election as a councillor, but we need to go further and to reduce the voting age to 16. That was one of the recommendations of the previous Local Government Committee's inquiry into renewing local democracy. The committee asked ministers for their response to that idea and what actions they would take in discussing lowering the voting age to 16 with their Westminster colleagues. I would be grateful if the minister told us, when summing up, what discussions have been held with his Westminster colleagues and what can be done under the bill not only to reduce the age at which young people can stand as candidates to be councillors, but to address the possibility of lowering the voting age to 16. The SNP will support the motion and the amendment that Tommy Sheridan lodged but did not speak to. It is important that, as we go through stages 2 and 3 of what is an important bill, the Executive starts to listen to the committee and to the people who really want the STVPR system to work.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr Sheridan lodged an amendment to Andy Kerr's motion that refers to ward sizes of three to five members, which Mr Sheridan supports. However, he talked about the bill's general principles and referred only once to his amendment, and by then his time was up. Can you consider for the future, Presiding Officer, the tactic that involves a member lodging an amendment in order to be the first to reply in a debate, and then failing to address that amendment?

Will the minister give way?

I will give the First Minister a further opportunity to answer the question that has been asked repeatedly over the past couple of days. Will he confirm that the agreement on GM maize was a collective decision by Westminster and the devolved authorities? Is it not the case that if the Scottish Executive had said no, it would be talking today not about so-called voluntary agreements but about a total ban on the commercialisation of GM maize in Scotland—yes or no?

Will the minister not acknowledge, even at this stage, that fuel poverty relates to three things: house conditions, household income and fuel prices? Fuel prices were held steady for a long time and that helped in no small way to bring down fuel poverty levels. A 5.9 per cent increase in fuel bills inevitably means that the number of people in fuel poverty will increase. The central heating programme has had an impact, but not the kind of impact that the minister is trying to suggest that it has had.

I thank John Swinburne for bringing this important debate to the Parliament. The subject is exceptionally close to my heart; I think that I have spoken in every debate on fuel poverty in the Parliament since 1999. On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I also thank Margaret Ewing for the work that she has done over three decades, both in this Parliament and at Westminster, to ensure that fuel poverty is on the political agenda. Excess winter deaths are calculated by comparing overall mortality statistics in the period from December to March with average death rates in the previous and subsequent four-month periods. The figures for excess winter deaths in Scotland are a disgrace to a civilised country. Every winter, what can best be described as a cull of elderly people takes place. It is important to remember that we are not talking about statistics; we are talking about people. Of course, the death certificates do not say, "Died of hypothermia" or "Died of cold", but that is why those people have died. Stirling Howieson, of the University of Strathclyde, says: "These additional winter deaths are mainly in the elderly population and about 90 per cent are registered under heart, stroke and respiratory diseases, all of which are known to be exacerbated by cold living conditions. These deaths are essentially preventable if the elderly live in warm, dry homes." That is the challenge for all of us. When we talk about excess winter deaths, it is important to remember that warm, dry homes will prevent those deaths. As John Swinburne rightly said, between 1997 and 2002, Scotland registered 16,600 excess winter deaths among the over-65s in the period from December to March. However, we do not need research to tell us that; we just need to read the columns upon columns of death notices in our local newspapers in winter. Why do people die of cold in winter in fuel-rich Scotland? We do not have particularly harsh winters; Sweden, Germany, Finland and even Siberia have harsher winters but fewer excess winter deaths than Scotland. All those countries, however, have higher standards of housing and a better quality of life. I am grateful to Energy Action Scotland for its continuing work on fuel poverty. Fuel poverty is age related. Some 31 per cent of people over 75 are officially fuel poor, compared with only 5 per cent of people who are aged between 25 and 39. That is why today's debate is so important. The Government claims—and the minister claimed earlier—that the causes of excess winter deaths are complex and uncertain. However, there is  consensus that poor heating and insulation and low income are the major factors. The amount of money that it takes to heat a house varies considerably in different parts of the United Kingdom. It costs 41 per cent more to heat a house in Aberdeen, and 28 per cent more in Edinburgh, than it does in Bristol, yet the pension is the same wherever people live in the United Kingdom. I acknowledge that the Executive has made strides forward with the central heating programme, but that is only one part of the equation in tackling fuel poverty. In a recent debate, the Executive claimed that the number of people in fuel poverty had decreased; that claim is replicated in the Executive's amendment today. During that debate in December, I pointed out that the central heating programme was only one aspect and that we had to take into account household income and fuel prices. Within a week, fuel prices in Scotland went up: Scottish Gas put up gas prices by 5.9 per cent. I asked the Executive in a written question what impact that 5.9 per cent increase would have on the number of people in fuel poverty. The answer began: "The information requested could only be obtained at a disproportionate cost."—[ Official Report, Written Answers, 13 January 2004; S2W-4886.] I acknowledge that the Executive has made strides forward, but let us not pretend that the central heating programme is a panacea. We can eradicate fuel poverty but we have to be able to support income and pension levels. Excess winter deaths are caused by poverty. We need to tackle poverty, and this Parliament needs the power to do so. I move amendment S2M-1021.1, to insert at end: "and that fuel poverty in Scotland will not be eradicated until the Parliament has the full range of powers, including control over the pension and benefit system."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Earlier this afternoon during the debate on the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, I went to the desk at the back of the chamber to ask for a copy of volumes 1 and 2 of the Communities Committee's report on the bill. I was told that somebody would try to get me a copy, but one has not yet appeared. Presiding Officer, I ask you to use your offices to ensure that, in future stage 1 debates on bills, committee reports are available to members who require them.

It is fair to say that when the Deputy Minister for Communities was at the Communities Committee last week, both she and the committee members grappled with the present and future implications of this Sewel motion and its impact on our charities bill, which we have yet to see. The motion suggests that the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator should approve Scottish charities as community interest companies, but the minister struggled to come up with a single example of a Scottish charity that would apply to become a community interest company. The process has been unnecessarily complicated by the fact that there is still no Scottish charities bill before the Parliament. I invite the minister to give at least an indication in her summing up of when we might expect a bill to be introduced. At the Communities Committee, I raised several concerns, including the fact that there is no Scottish appeal process in the UK legislation, and I was not satisfied with the minister's response. I invite the minister to make her position clear when she sums up. My colleague Campbell Martin raised his concern that Scottish charities that are presently accepted as charities could, if the Scottish Parliament changes the definition of charity, be stripped of that recognition, and that CICs are the fallback position.  I am concerned that, in accepting the principle of community interest companies, in effect we limit the Parliament's deliberations on public interest benefit before we even get to the stage of considering our own charities bill. An Executive official told the committee: "The DTI recently published a set of regulations for the bill, which set out proposals for the community interest test. The idea is that the CIC would benefit a narrower range of people than we would expect a charity to benefit. It will be proposed that the test for a charity will be that it will have a wide public benefit, whereas the CIC ... test could be ... more restricted ... perhaps it could relate to a community hall in a village, for example".—[ Official Report, Communities Committee , 25 February 2004; c 655.] In other words, we are being asked, in advance of our Scottish charities bill, to agree the scope of what a public benefit test might be when we eventually discuss it. The suggestion that the public benefit test for charities in the Scottish legislation will involve a wider geographic area than that of a village concerns me. We will not support such a provision when it is introduced. Social enterprises or other companies can opt to become community interest companies under UK legislation. That matter is reserved to the Department of Trade and Industry under the bill. The acceptance or otherwise of the Sewel motion will not affect those companies' ability to choose that option. However, the motion puts the cart before the horse. I share other MSPs' view that it is extremely unlikely that Scottish charities will seek approval to become community interest companies. If the Sewel motion is accepted, it might pre-empt discussions that are needed on the public benefit test that this Parliament should consider as part of the charities bill. If the Executive has made up its mind to have a limited public benefit test and if the Parliament cannot change that view when the time comes for us to consider our own charities bill, we need to preserve the option in the UK legislation, for those charities in Scotland that could find themselves stripped of charity status, to allow them to become CICs. The Scottish Parliament is not permitted to give powers to the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator under the companies legislation. Regrettably, that matter is reserved to the UK Government. However, the SNP has no wish for any current Scottish charity to be disadvantaged, so we will not oppose the Sewel motion.

I would be quite happy for the minister to have a chat with his colleague with responsibility for housing, if he wants to, before he answers this question. Is he aware of the research that was carried out by Stirling Howieson of the University of Strathclyde into ventilation rates, indoor humidity and dust mite allergens, which concluded that the design and use patterns of Scotland's houses are highly likely to be the most significant single driver of the current asthma pandemic in Scotland? Will ministers consider the implications of that research for housing standards in Scotland and the Government's central heating and energy efficiency programmes and report back to the Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met NHS Fife. (S2O-1214)

At the meeting on 9 January, did the Executive discuss the cuts in nursing posts that Fife NHS Board is proposing? Will the minister say whether he supports the board's proposals to cut 34 nursing posts and other posts in occupational health, physiotherapy and dietetics? Is he prepared to guarantee that the cuts will not impact on patient care, waiting lists and waiting times and that they will not result in a poorer health service for the people of Fife?

To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Executive will publish the interim findings of the single transferable vote working group. (S2F-600)

I have my copy and, unlike the Scottish Executive, I have read it and come to a conclusion. The First Minister knows that the STV working group was set up by the Scottish Government. It recommended that there be between three and five councillors for most wards, as did Richard Kerley in his report of June 2000. All the evidence for stage 1 of the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill has now been taken, but the Scottish Government has yet to indicate whether it accepts any of the recommendations. Will the First Minister indicate today whether he supports ward sizes of three to five councillors? Will he guarantee that the Executive's response to the working party's interim report will be available to this Parliament before the stage 1 debate on the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that we also recognise that the Press Association is represented in the press gallery.

I welcome Margaret Curran's announcement that the tolerable standard will be updated. I recall that during the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill last session, I moved to include the tolerable standard and I was disappointed that the minister did not accept my amendments. Now, a few years later, we are moving towards that position and it is important that we do that as quickly as possible. There is no dispute that Scottish housing is in bad condition. The very worst of the housing stock is in the private sector. That is why I welcome the report of the housing improvement task force, and the opportunity to debate that report today. Tommy Sheridan and Murray Tosh are right that there needs to be a debate in Scotland about the supply side and the need for new housing. That will be an important debate when it happens, but it is not the debate that we should be having today; it is a debate for the future. I will deal first with owner-occupiers. No one denies that some owners spend money on new bathrooms and kitchens, and not enough on repairs and maintenance. Of course that is true, but what is needed—as Pauline McNeill rightly said—is a culture change. If owner-occupiers are to be cajoled and encouraged to carry out regular repairs and maintenance, we must ensure that local authorities do the same. I recall that Glenrothes Development Corporation had planned maintenance programmes, under which the windows of houses were painted regularly—perhaps every three years. Few local authorities do that now. We should ensure that as well as expecting owner-occupiers to do such maintenance, we expect the same from landlords in other sectors. At the extreme end of the scale of disrepair are houses that are dilapidated and which are nuisances in neighbourhoods. Local authorities must take action on such houses far more quickly than they are doing at present. I am not convinced that that is a matter for legislation. It is possible that local authorities could use the power of well- being, which was introduced by the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003, to ensure that dilapidated and dangerous houses are dealt with under existing legislation. The minister may wish to consider that and issue some guidelines. Pauline McNeill raised the issue of grants to private owners. Before 1996, the Government told local authorities how much they were allowed to borrow to spend on private sector repair and maintenance grants. Until then, local authorities routinely spent more than £100 million a year on such grants. In 1996, that ring fencing was removed at the behest of the local authorities and the amount of money that was available for repair and improvement grants plummeted to as low as £29 million in 2000-01. Twenty years ago, £167 million was available in grants for private sector repairs and improvements, but in 2000-01 only £29 million was available. Shelter estimates that, if local authority spending on repair and maintenance grants for private houses had remained at the level that it was set at before the ring fencing was removed in 1995-96 and had increased in line with inflation, £667 million more than has actually been spent would have been spent on private housing by now. I accept that, as the minister said, money should not be used indiscriminately, but we should, at the very least, ensure that the care and repairs scheme, which is such a success, is funded and expanded to ensure that elderly people in particular have access to it, regardless of where in Scotland they live. The worst housing conditions are in the private rented sector, which houses some of the most vulnerable people in Scotland. I welcome the Executive's intention to explore a national registration scheme, which it announced in December. Like Cathie Craigie, I am firmly of the view that the condition of a property must be of a certain quality before any registration is permitted and that private landlords must take responsibility for dealing with tenants who indulge in antisocial behaviour. Many communities are being damaged by unregulated and unprincipled landlords; action is needed and it is needed quickly.

I take Margaret Curran's point about the need for owner-occupiers to repair their houses, but surely part of the problem is in our council stock, as local authorities no longer carry out planned maintenance programmes and instead respond only to repairs, which is exactly the same attitude that we find among owner-occupiers.

Does the First Minister support Fife NHS Board's proposals to cut 37 nursing posts and to make further cuts to physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech therapy? Will he explain the impact of the proposals on waiting times and health care in Fife? Will he now order an inquiry into the management of Fife NHS Board, which has lost the confidence of the people of Fife?

I referred to the Fife mafia, which includes me as well as the Labour members.

It is nice to see that, yet again, the Fife mafia are in the chamber today. Many of the comments that I shall make will support what Scott Barrie and Marilyn Livingstone have said. Having spent some time reading the committee's report and the evidence, I pay genuine tribute to committee members and clerks for the work that they have done on behalf of the Parliament. Their work has been time consuming and extremely thorough. In holding its meetings in Alloa, the committee has truly gone out to the people of Clackmannan to hear their views. Paragraph 50 of the committee report states: "the Committee is convinced that the freight/passenger options that would be provided by the S-A-K route could be the catalyst for a major boost to the development of the local economy through attracting new business and encouraging the growth of existing enterprises." That alone would have been sufficient to merit support for the general principles of the bill, but the successful development and expansion of Scotland's wider rail network is dependent on the reopening of the line. As Scott Barrie and other members have said, the development will free up capacity on the Forth bridge and in Fife. According to English Welsh & Scottish Railway, the beneficial effect of the development will be felt right across  the network. As Marilyn Livingstone said, reliability and frequency of service on the Fife to Edinburgh line has not been given the attention that it deserves and is a priority. Freeing up freight from that line gives us an opportunity to ensure that the passenger service from Fife is the best that it can be and that Fife can benefit from the investment that it has been starved of for at least the past 25 years. As has been said, the proposal is incomplete. There is no indication of who will operate the railway and I would have liked the comfort of some agreement, in principle, on that. Nicol Stephen said that the Executive will support the line and I am heartened by his comment that he will try to ensure that the line is developed as far as Rosyth to link with the ferry terminal. That is absolutely essential, because we must make sure that we get all the benefits from the line. Earlier this year, Nicol Stephen said: "I want not only to support the principles of the project, but to help to develop it."— [ Official Report , 12 June 2003;  c 743.]  I urge the minister to ensure that the project's benefits are extended beyond Clackmannanshire to Fife. The line should be extended to Rosyth, to take advantage of freight and passengers going to and coming from the ferry terminal. There is an opportunity to develop the project and open up access to Europe. That opportunity must be grasped and I urge the minister to roll out Rosyth proposals alongside the consideration and implementation of the project, if it is agreed by the Parliament. Kenny MacAskill almost said earlier that for a ha'p'orth of tar, the ship was spoiled. The project and the line will be spoiled if the huge benefits that would accrue from extending the line to Rosyth are not grasped. I urge the minister to take that on board and to ensure that we get all the benefits of the project.

Does the minister agree that it is vital that elections are conducted in a way that reduces voter confusion to a minimum? Does he agree with the unanimous view of the Society for Returning Officers in Scotland that if STV is introduced for local government elections, Scottish Parliament and council elections should not be held on the same day?

On a point of order, Presiding  Officer. Is it in order for Dr Elaine Murray to say to one of my colleagues, "Shut up"?

Will the member take an intervention?

Presumably, the member won his election on a Liberal Democrat platform. If the Parliament's financial powers are not part of the partnership agreement, why have the Liberal Democrats not lodged their own amendment, to argue their position?

Will the member take an intervention?

I associate myself with Nora Radcliffe's remarks, but I take the minister back to the subject of e- voting. Is he aware that research by the Electoral Reform Society into the e-pilots that were conducted earlier this year in England concluded that e-voting—whether by telephone, internet, text or digital TV—does not significantly raise turnout? Will the minister give an assurance that, if Scotland is to be a pilot for the European elections, only postal voting will be offered and not a combination of postal and e-voting?

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the actions that the Executive is taking to eradicate fuel poverty in Scotland. However, I have said before, and it is worth saying again, that the central heating scheme does not go far enough. When the Executive introduced the scheme, I argued that families with young children should be included. Children are the one group for whom a dry, warm home can truly be life enhancing. I welcomed the minister's statement earlier today that we should examine how to extend the central heating scheme to other vulnerable groups. Cold, damp homes lead to bronchitis, asthma and other respiratory diseases; much work is being done in various research programmes to investigate the links. For children, cold, damp homes can mean poor health and absence from school. That, in turn, leads to poor educational achievement. I urge the minister to include families in the scheme. Doing so could make a real difference to the 102,000 families in Scotland who live in cold, damp homes.

I mean the 102,000 families with children who are living in cold, damp homes. That figure is from the "Scottish House Condition Survey". As others have said, fuel poverty is determined by three factors: poor energy efficiency; low household income, where more than 10 per cent of income is used on fuel costs; and the price of domestic fuel. The minister has not dwelt on some issues in the "Scottish House Condition Survey". For example, 88 per cent of all houses in Scotland fail to meet the standard for energy efficiency that was set for new homes way back in 1991. Although I accept that the Executive has made progress, I think that it is disingenuous to suggest that the reduction in the number of fuel-poor families is all, or mostly, down to Executive and Government action. Most independent commentators accept that the drop in fuel poverty has happened mainly because of changes in income and fuel prices—both of which are outwith the control of the Executive. If the Executive does not accept that, I must warn—as others have done—that, with fuel prices, what comes down will  inevitably go up. That will lead again to an increase in the level of fuel poverty. Will the minister confirm that a further Scottish house condition survey will be carried out in 2007? Will she advise how, in the years up to 2008—when that survey will, I presume, report—the Executive will measure fuel poverty in Scotland? How will that information be reported to Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in ensuring that the  same standard of care is available throughout Scotland for people with multiple sclerosis. (S2O-760)

In October 2000, the Scottish needs assessment programme report referred to the facilities for people with MS in Scotland. The report stated: "current care is substantially sub-optimal, inadequately resourced and unacceptably fragmented. ... There is an urgent need to develop properly resourced services in MS care." A recent survey indicated that three quarters of people with MS believed that their standard of care depended on where in Scotland they lived. The minister knows that the National Institute for Clinical Excellence will produce guidelines for England and Wales that will set a national standard for care. Will he give a commitment today that a national standard of care will be developed for people with MS in Scotland?

Is the minister as concerned as I am that, of the four bids that the Ministry of Defence will consider, three have direct implications for Rosyth and the fourth is so vague that it will almost certainly include Rosyth? At the end of the process, at least one of the bids will have an implication for Scotland. Bearing that in mind, will the minister be a bit more specific about the representations that he is making to the Ministry of Defence?

As the minister knows, at the moment there is no third-party right of appeal. Any appeal would involve only the applicant and the local authority. The community voice would never be heard.

I congratulate my colleague Bruce Crawford on securing the debate—it is important that the Parliament has a voice on the matter. I invite Scott Barrie to work with Bruce Crawford on any future motions on the subject so that all members can sign them. I do not think that members are a million miles away from one another on this important issue. As Scott Barrie and George Lyon said, we are at the beginning of a three-year consultation period. However, the problem is that, of the four bids that are on the table, three mention Rosyth and the other one is vague and will almost certainly include Rosyth. We are dealing with a consultation process that already has the end decision in place. That is why we have to be vigilant and why MSPs and the Scottish Executive should make representations to the MOD at the beginning of the consultation period; we must not wait until the end. One of the reasons why Bruce Crawford used the terms that he did in the motion was recent answers that he had received from Ross Finnie. On 18 September, Bruce Crawford asked the Scottish Executive "what representations it has made to Her Majesty's Government regarding the consultation process on the interim storage of laid-up submarines." Ross Finnie replied:  "Subsequent to the Ministry of Defence's announcement on 11 September, the Executive has been in contact with the UK Government on this matter, and will be actively involved in this consultation process in relation to devolved responsibilities."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 18 September 2003; p 664.]  On 9 October, Bruce Crawford asked the Scottish Executive "what representations it has made to Her Majesty's Government about the decommissioning and storage of nuclear submarines in Scotland." This time, Ross Finnie replied: "The Executive has made no such representations to the Ministry of Defence."— [ Official Report , 9 October 2003; c 2562.]  The problem is that the Executive does not seem to be clear about its position. When the minister sums up, I hope that he will say to us that, if representations have not already been made to the MOD, representations will be made soon and that we will not wait until the end of the consultation process to make our views known. Most of us in the chamber know exactly what will happen at the end of the consultation process: Rosyth will be put forward as the choice of the MOD. We must resist that now. The Scottish Executive must make it clear to the MOD that it will use all the powers that are available to it under the devolved settlement to ensure that no planning permission is given and that SEPA receives direction in relation to the radioactive waste. In closing, I will address some comments to Ted Brocklebank, who seemed to suggest that 50 or 150 jobs might be created if the work were to go to Rosyth. I ask him to consider how many thousands of jobs were lost to the Fife economy when the Tories took the work from Rosyth and gave it to Davenport. He should not sit there talking about the carrot of perhaps 150 jobs when a Government of the party of which he is a member was responsible for jobs being lost in the first place.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will next meet Fife NHS Board and what issues will be discussed. (S2O-577)

Will the minister comment on the report on Fife NHS Board by the external auditors Henderson Logie, the findings of which have been published in The Courier ? The report suggests that Fife NHS Board is not achieving effective financial control and that to ensure confidence and belief in the leadership of the NHS in Fife, there needs to be clarity and communication of the corporate vision and actions that are necessary to achieve recurring financial balance. Will the minister confirm that he has confidence in the ability of the present leadership of Fife NHS Board to deliver the health service that the people of Fife need?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last had discussions with Fife Constabulary about the level of police cover in Fife. (S2O-512)

The minister is aware that the Fife police complement is 26.7 officers per 10,000 population, compared to the Scottish average of 30.6 officers per 10,000 population. That is 200 fewer police officers than our population requires. I understand that there is a review of the staffing formula, which ministers are considering and which agrees that Fife needs more officers. Will the minister confirm when that review will be completed, and when we can expect that Fife will receive its fair share of police officers?

The minister opened the debate by saying that we are dealing with real-life problems. She is absolutely right. Communities the length and breadth of Scotland are crying out for support. Everybody has the right to live in their own home in peace and security. A few weeks ago, I attended a public meeting in Auchmuty. That is an area of Glenrothes that Scott Barrie knows well. It is a strong community, with an active tenants association in which I was involved for many years. The association supports both the young folk and the old folk; it runs old folks treats and the like. Nearly 150 people turned out at the meeting. The police, the local authority and other agencies were present, as were Christine May, the local councillor and me. It became clear that the community, like other communities, believes that it is being abandoned by the statutory authorities. That community knows about antisocial behaviour. It was, after all, the community where the Graham family from Glenrothes lived. The  community knows well what it is talking about when it talks about antisocial behaviour. When 150 people turn out on a wet night to present their concerns to MSPs, councillors and statutory authorities, we have an absolute duty to listen, and not only to listen, but to take action. The minister said that the authorities should be accountable to the communities. In some cases, there is scant evidence that that is happening. A culture change is needed among some local authority staff. It is unacceptable for a Fife Council official to tell a community, as one did at a meeting in Tanshall last year, that the council would not do a clean up because the community had caused all the dumping and littering in the first place. Nor is it acceptable for council officials to sit at public meetings, as they did last week, wringing their hands and blaming the police, the community and the Scottish Parliament for not taking action. Legislation alone is not enough: it needs to be enforced by our police and understood by our local authorities. The police must be adequately resourced to ensure that current legislation is enforced properly. Part of the problem is that mere lip service is being paid to existing legislation. Local authorities are not willing to enforce it and the police lack the resources to do that. I supported ASBOs when they were introduced. The rhetoric was that ASBOs would deal with antisocial behaviour, and we raised expectations in our communities that that would happen. In reality, it did not. In the little time that is available to me I want to raise some specific issues. I know that other members have already raised them, but I would like to reinforce the points that have been made. Janis Hughes spoke about off-licences and the difficulty of older people getting alcohol and giving it to youngsters. I raised that issue a couple of weeks ago, when we debated the licensing laws. Janis Hughes is right to highlight the problem. I hope that the ministers will take the point on board when they consider the licensing laws. We need to examine the location of some off-licences in our communities. In Auchmuty, the off-licence is right beside the children's play park, which is unacceptable. When communities come to public meetings or to MSPs they are able to say where drug dealing is happening and who is doing it. Why do the police seem unable to take action or to get convictions? We must have zero tolerance of graffiti and vandalism in our communities. Nicola Sturgeon is right to say that bus shelters are repaired in the morning and destroyed at night. As a society, we must say that that is not acceptable. Bus shelters must be repaired, because we cannot allow the good folk in communities to believe that they are being abandoned and that because things are being  destroyed, we are doing nothing about this problem. We must create communities in which people are respected and that people can respect. We must take action against private landlords and their tenants to ensure that they are not allowed to flout the law. I would like a licensing scheme for private landlords to operate in each local authority area. Unless landlords adhere to a code, local authorities should refuse to license them as private landlords. Perhaps the minister will think about that.

Does the member accept that, as the Home Office is responsible for rolling out TETRA throughout the United Kingdom, that might mean that the results of the research that it is carrying out might not be believed? Does he agree that it would be better for everybody concerned if independent research was commissioned to investigate all the potential health risks?

I welcome the debate on TETRA masts that Mark Ruskell has secured. It is a huge issue in Fife and elsewhere. I doubt that there is anybody in this chamber who does not possess a mobile phone. That is the crux of the problem. We all want mobile phones and 100 per cent coverage, but we do not want the masts anywhere near us. Our challenge is to satisfy those demands while protecting both the environment and the health of our citizens. In 2000, the Transport and the Environment Committee's "Report on inquiry into the proposals to introduce new planning procedures for telecommunications developments" made a number of recommendations about telecommunications masts. Recommendation 20 said that health issues should be "a material consideration" in the planning framework, but that recommendation has not yet been implemented. As Mark Ruskell said, TETRA is the communications system that all the emergency services are to use. I think that we all recognise that the time has come for our police, fire and other emergency services to be able to communicate with each other effectively, but is the TETRA system safe? I do not know. Neither I nor anyone else in the chamber is qualified to judge that issue. That is the problem. More independent research needs to be commissioned. We need to be assured that the proposed system is safe. People are uncertain; they are not convinced about the safety of the masts or the equipment. Although the Home Office implements TETRA throughout the United Kingdom, local authorities in Scotland have the responsibility of determining whether planning permission should be granted. The Scottish Executive is letting our local authorities down badly. It should be giving them guidance on telecommunications masts in general and TETRA masts in particular. I cannot make judgments on whether TETRA is safe and I doubt whether many of our local authority planning committees could make that  judgment. If planning committees cannot take into consideration all the available information, or indeed information that might not yet be available, then we are asking local authorities to make judgments that, frankly, they should not be asked to make. Although I support Mark Ruskell's motion, I believe that far greater testing and security is required. We need to reassure our communities that, if there is a demand—and there is a demand—for a joint communication system, the system is safe for the environment, the people who will use the equipment and those who will live beside the masts.

One of the problems is not young people buying alcohol for themselves, but people aged 18 and 19 buying alcohol and giving it to young people. What are the minister's suggestions for tackling that problem?

The final line of the Liberal Democrat amendment "calls on the Scottish Executive to convey the Parliament's concerns to Her Majesty's Government." Does that mean that the Liberal Democrats agree that the concerns of not only the Parliament but the Scottish people about the detention of children have not been conveyed to the Government until now?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is in the public interest to vary the interdict granted to Tony Freeman of Solutions RMC preventing Robert Winter of Breast Cancer Research (Scotland) from divulging any information pertaining to Solutions RMC's business, finances, products, dealings, transactions or affairs to any third party. (S2O-199)

My understanding is that the interdict is a blanket order with no exclusions. A written answer from the Lord Advocate suggests to me that Mr Robert Winter could co-operate with the regulatory authorities. Can the Lord Advocate confirm whether, with the interdict still standing, Mr Winter would be able to give evidence to MSPs  and any committees of Parliament when they consider any charities bill?

Will the minister give way?

Where is Tommy Sheridan?

Where is Tommy Sheridan?

I must declare a passing interest in that I travel from Fife to Edinburgh, mostly by public transport. I want to concentrate on transport in and around Fife, especially the rail network. I turn first to the problems at the Forth bridgehead. In peak hours, the capacity of the Forth bridge is exceeded and tailbacks are getting longer. If there were ever a case for getting cars off the road and people on to public transport, that is it. Why are the alternative public transport facilities not used by more people? Quite simply, it is because the public transport options from Fife to Edinburgh are inadequate. The trains are unreliable and, at peak times, packed. The rail bridge needs millions of pounds to be spent on it because it has been neglected for years—I would welcome a statement from the minister about when he expects essential work on the Forth rail bridge to be completed. The idea that was put forward by Helen Eadie that the Forth bridge could be knocked down is daft and dangerous—the rail bridge is a vital artery to the north, connecting Dundee and Fife with Edinburgh. For many years, the train fares from Fife to Edinburgh were kept deliberately high to suppress demand for rail travel because it would have cost far too much to meet the genuine demand, but we are now paying the price for that short-sightedness.

We need an integrated network. We are paying the price for the short-sightedness of previous years. We cannot have more trains and carriages on the Fife circle because the platforms are not long  enough. We have been promised that that work will be done but have not been told when. Markinch station is supposed to be a hub station, but it has no disabled access, no toilets, no closed-circuit television cameras and—apart from during a couple of hours in the morning—no staff. A new station has been promised, but Railtrack went into liquidation and we are still waiting for the work to be done. For many years, in the face of opposition from Fife Council, I have campaigned for the reopening of the Leven to Thornton line. Levenmouth is the largest conurbation in Scotland that is without direct access to a railway station. The line exists and there is demand for a station, which would once more open up the area to tourism and allow people in an unemployment black spot to access jobs throughout Fife. However, without the support of Fife Council, no progress has been made on the station. Will the minister consider the case for the reopening of the Leven to Thornton line? The problem with the previous Executive was that it had no vision. An excellent case has been made for a fast ferry service between Burntisland and Granton—the crossing could take as little as nine minutes. The car users of Fife are still paying tolls on a bridge that was paid off years ago and the profit from the tolls is now allegedly going into public transport. The fast ferry service must be supported and the infrastructure must be put in place. There is no mention of the fast ferry service from Granton to Burntisland. I ask the minister to consider the issue and to find out how quickly such a service could be set up.

Does the member agree with Liberal councillor Jane Ann Liston that the money that has been proposed for the Borders rail link should be diverted to St Andrews?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it next plans to meet Fife NHS Board. (S2O-78)

The minister is aware that next year, Fife NHS Board faces a deficit of almost £18 million. It has made a farce of the "Right for Fife" health consultation and consultants at the Queen Margaret hospital and the Victoria hospital are now waging campaigns through the media. Will he guarantee that the financial problems of Fife NHS Board will not result in a poorer health service for all the people of Fife?

It is true that Iain Smith was a minister for a very short time, but when we had that debate, I recall that Iain Smith spoke in it.

He could not lodge a motion, but somehow he was allowed to speak on the issue as a constituency MSP. That seems to be a bit strange to me.

I sincerely congratulate Ted Brocklebank on securing this debate. It is important to note that there have been two parliamentary debates on schools in north-east Fife—one in this session and one in the previous session. Today's debate is being led by Ted Brocklebank and the other—on Bell Baxter—was led by Keith Harding. Despite Iain Smith's late attempt, he has never led a debate on the subject. The debate gives me the opportunity to set the position of SNP and Labour councillors on Fife Council straight, rather than accepting the distortions that Iain Smith perpetuated in his amendment to Ted Brocklebank's motion. I note that he has now withdrawn that amendment.

Okay. The debate also gives me the opportunity to highlight the sheer political opportunism of the Liberal Democrat group on Fife Council. At the council's first meeting following the elections, the Liberal Democrats proposed a motion asking Fife Council to agree immediately to build a new school in north Fife. Quite rightly, the SNP and the Labour administration felt that so important a decision could not be made in a motion of three or four lines, but would need a far greater review of  the issues. The school refurbishment bill for the whole of Fife is about £60 million. To attempt to commit Fife Council and its budgets to a new school in Fife overnight was simply a piece of political posturing by the Liberal Democrats. That is why the SNP and the Labour administration opposed the motion. It has always been my view that we need a new school in north-east Fife, but I believe that educational attainment for all the pupils in Fife is equally important. Ted Brocklebank said that I had never congratulated Madras College and Bell Baxter and their teachers on their attainment levels. That is simply not true. They are doing a wonderful job in appalling conditions. I refer Mr Brocklebank to my comments during the debate on Bell Baxter that we had in Glasgow. I find unacceptable the suggestion that money should be spent in north Fife alone, to the detriment of the rest of Fife. It is unacceptable that we have low levels of attainment in Buckhaven and elsewhere. We need to stop pupils in such areas going to the north-east Fife schools because their parents believe that they will get a better education there. We must ensure that resources are spread evenly. Ted Brocklebank made a great case for proportional representation in local government. He mentioned that there has never been a Labour councillor in north-east Fife and that the Labour party has never had any political representation in that area. For a long time, the Conservatives provided that representation and now the Liberal Democrats are there. If we had PR in local government, north-east Fife would have some Labour councillors. I suggest that the quality of the representation by the Conservatives and the Liberals for generations in north-east Fife has contributed to the lack of consideration of the needs of north-east Fife. If the Liberal Democrats had been a bit more proactive recently, they might have been able to convince the Labour administration and others in north-east Fife that we needed a school. Many issues need to be considered. I welcome the review that Fife Council is carrying out. It is important that that review is conducted fairly and that the council looks at the whole of Fife and at the places where the population is increasing. A case has already been made for a new school in north-east Fife, but there are similar cases elsewhere in Fife. We must look passionately, compassionately and dispassionately at all areas of Fife. We need to ensure that, regardless of where our children live in Fife, they have access to the best schools and the best education. That requires money. We all have a job to convince the  Executive to open the purse-strings a bit more.

Does the member accept that one reason why some school rolls in north-east Fife are getting longer is that some parents of pupils attending such schools as Buckhaven High School, which has low academic attainment, are choosing to send their children to school in north-east Fife instead? They are thereby reducing the number of teachers at Buckhaven and are ensuring that the system keeps revolving. Does the member also accept the argument that we need to ensure that the necessary resources are available throughout Fife—including at Buckhaven—to raise the level of academic attainment and to stop as far as possible the exercising of parental choice whereby parents opt for Madras College, Waid Academy and other colleges?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Rhona Brankin said a few moments ago—before she got into full flow—that "this Parliament" had "debated and defeated" free school meals. Will you tell the member that this Parliament did no such thing and that it was the previous Parliament that had that debate and defeated free school meals?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive is taking to ensure that there is a national review of nursery nurses' pay and conditions. (S2F-29)

Does the First Minister accept that the role of the nursery nurse has expanded because of Executive priorities for the pre-fives? Does he accept that he has a duty to ensure that  the people responsible for delivering those priorities should be rewarded adequately for their skill and expertise? Does the First Minister think that an average wage of £13,000 is a fair wage, or does he want pre-five education and child care on the cheap?

Will the minister acknowledge and admit that the office of regulator will have no more statutory power to prevent another charity scandal than exists in the present system? Will she take advantage of the genuine cross-party support in the Parliament and give both an undertaking that a Scottish charities bill will be introduced as an immediate priority, and a time scale for its introduction?

Will Duncan McNeil give way?

The regulator will be able to carry out only the functions of the ministers, the Scottish charities office and the Lord Advocate that are prescribed in our inadequate charity legislation. Is there anything in the minister's statement that would have prevented the problems relating to Breast Cancer Research?

Can I pin the First Minister down a bit further? He said that there would be no legislation before dissolution. Will he confirm that the Scottish Executive ministers will not use the powers that they have during dissolution to nod through Westminster legislation on a wholly devolved matter?

On a point of order.

It is further to the point of order. I concur with Tommy Sheridan that the matter to which he referred is an extremely important one for the Parliament. I seek your guidance on whether the Executive has given you any indication that a Sewel motion will be lodged and debated in the Parliament next week, or that the Executive intends to make a statement this afternoon on whether legislation will be introduced in Scotland.

I apologise for having to rush off before the debate ends. It will not have escaped Jackie Baillie's notice that I have not signed the motion that we are debating tonight. Although I acknowledge Jackie Baillie's personal commitment to charity law reform, I do not recognise a Scottish Executive commitment to progress reform of charity law as stated in the motion. Charity law reform should already be a reality. As we come to the end of the Scottish Parliament's first session, it is unacceptable that the Executive has not legislated on the matter. Charity law reform would have found all-party support in the Parliament—I note that members of all parties have asked questions about it from 1999 and, if we look around the chamber now, we can see the great groundswell of support in the Parliament for charity law reform. The McFadden commission was established in January 2000 and reported in May 2001, as Jackie Baillie said, after which the Executive decided to consult on the commission's recommendations. That consultation ended on 30 September 2001, but although eighteen months have passed, there is still no bill. The Executive has let down the charities and voluntary organisations in Scotland, which realise how vital charity law reform is. Jackie Baillie was right: for years policy officers from the SCVO urged charity law reform legislation at Westminster and the SCVO had high hopes that, in the first session of the Scottish Parliament, the Executive would introduce such legislation. At the first Justice and Home Affairs Committee meeting in June 1999, I highlighted the need for charity law reform. I said: "One of the major problems faced by charities and voluntary organisations in Scotland is that there is no  regulatory framework for them: charities are allowed to do whatever they want. Unlike the Charity Commission for England and Wales, which has regulatory powers of investigation, the equivalent office in Scotland is small and has virtually no powers. Anybody in Scotland can set up a charity with very little investigation even when things go wrong. ... We would do a great service to the voluntary and charitable sector in Scotland if we could initiate legislation on that."—[ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 29 June 1999; c 11-12.] At that time, I even considered introducing a member's bill on the subject. Unfortunately, I was talked out of doing so by Martin Sime of the SCVO while we chatted at the Parliament's official opening in July—I am sure that he remembers the conversation. He urged me not to introduce a member's bill because he believed confidently that the Executive would legislate: how disappointed he must be. The Executive has let down charities in Scotland. Jackie Baillie spoke about the need for positive action, but it is a pity that we did not have positive action four years ago. I assure members that there will be positive action in the Scottish Parliament's next session, because we must ensure that we have charity law reform. It must be a priority for everybody.

On a point of order.

Will you confirm that on occasion stage 1, stage 2 and stage 3 of a bill have all been considered on the same day?

Will the minister give way?

The situation at present is not working. There are not enough facilities for young people. The health boards have had a responsibility for meeting the needs of young people with mental disorders for a long time and they have not fulfilled that responsibility. Unless amendment 34 is agreed to, the health boards will continue to act as they have done in the past. It is vital that all members support amendment 34. Even at this late stage, I would like to hear the minister say that she will support it, too.

I repeat my congratulations to Keith Harding on his tenacity, not only in seeing his member's bill through to this stage, but in convincing the Executive to support it throughout. I also congratulate Trish Godman and the Local Government Committee clerks on their unstinting work on the bill. Dog fouling is not only about the mess on streets and parks; it is also about our quality of life. There are approximately half a million dogs in Scotland and they produce 80 tonnes of excrement a day. Dog fouling is not only unsightly, but a health hazard—I am sure that we were all grateful to Richard Simpson at stage 1 for outlining exactly what the hazards are. I am unable to repeat some of the words that he used, because they were medical words. The problem is stressful  for those who have to live with it, and it costs councils money to clean the dog mess up. The existing legislation is simply inadequate to tackle dog fouling. Andy Kerr and I had an exchange at stage 1 about who cleans the boots or the wellies. I had come to the conclusion that that was the man's role. Since then, I have been inundated with e-mails from women saying that I am absolutely right: it is something that the men do. Instead of going out and grabbing animals and bringing them back for food, these days the men of our households are cleaning dog poo off wellies. It is a serious matter. Many trips to parks or play parks have been ruined by dog mess getting on children's feet. The key to the proposed legislation lies in redefining the offence, from one of allowing a dog to foul to failing to clear up after the dog has fouled, while giving powers to local authorities to appoint officers. The new approach could also be applied to other legislation that needs to be introduced in future, including legislation to tackle littering. I am sure that Keith Harding would agree that, had the Executive not supported the Dog Fouling (Scotland) Bill, we would not be holding today's stage 3 debate. As we come to the end of our four-year session, members of all parties should reflect on the fact that no members' bill has succeeded in becoming an act without the overt support of the Executive throughout its scrutiny, perhaps with the exception of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill. That is a matter of serious concern, and we need to consider that. I congratulate Keith Harding again. The Dog Fouling (Scotland) Bill is an important piece of proposed legislation. The Parliament is a legislature, and it is right that we put the legislative framework in place to allow local authorities to tackle the problem.

I am sure that all members add their congratulations. Is that a Conservative gain from labour?

Amendment 1 is a wise and welcome amendment. I think it appropriate that the Parliament should commend Keith Harding for his willingness to consider amendments at stages 2 and 3. As he pointed out, amendment 1 was lodged to address some of the concerns that Iain Smith expressed during stage 2. Keith Harding has co-operated with members of the Local Government Committee and has shown his commitment to ensuring that the concerns that were raised in the committee's stage 1 report have been addressed. The passage of his bill is a model of how legislation should be advanced through the Parliament, and the Executive has a lot to learn from the progress of the bill. Specific concerns were expressed at stage 1 and the promoter of the bill showed great willingness to listen. That is a model of how legislation should be considered by the Parliament. The bill has been considered thoroughly by the Local Government Committee and by Parliament through all its stages. It is not surprising that there is only one amendment today, because so much good work has been done at earlier stages, both by Keith Harding, who had the support of the Executive, and by the non-Executive bills unit.

We heard the minister say that, under the power to advance well-being, local authorities have the duty to put in place services that will help individuals or groups of people within their communities. The provision of infrastructure and facilities for a tolerance zone could therefore be covered by that power. If it is not covered, I am sure that the Parliament will introduce legislation to make that clearer. In my view, and in that of the committee and the minister, that power could be used. However, the power to advance well-being cannot tackle soliciting. That is absolutely the right thing.

Will the member give way?

Does Margaret Smith accept that, even if the bill were passed, locating a tolerance zone in Edinburgh would still be a problem? The problem is location, not legislation.

Does John Young accept that the power of well-being will not allow local authorities to decriminalise soliciting, but that it will allow local authorities to work with other people, organisations and agencies? The power of well-being will give local authorities the right to provide infrastructure such as CCTV and for the servicing of such zones, because it is for the betterment of sections of their communities.

I start by thanking the clerks to the Local Government Committee and the Scottish Parliament information centre for the considerable efforts that they have made with regard to the bill. Let us be clear about one thing: prostitution is not a career choice, nor is it a service that women provide for men. Prostitution is an abuse of women. The effect of the proposed legislation will be to allow local authorities to manage and  legalise an activity associated with the abuse of women. The Scottish National Party will oppose the bill. The Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill is essentially a bill of two parts. The first part allows local authorities to set up and manage facilities in a particular designated area and to provide, for example, closed-circuit television, cleansing and other services. The other part of the bill seeks to decriminalise soliciting in the designated area. As Margo MacDonald has rightly said, hers is an enabling bill. No local authority is obliged to set up such zones and, of the 32 Scottish local authorities, 31 are either opposed to the bill or have not responded to it.

I repeat what I have just said: of the 32 local authorities in Scotland that the bill seeks to enable to set up tolerance zones, 31 either are opposed to the bill or have not responded to it. Glasgow City Council is opposed to the bill and the City of Edinburgh Council is in favour of it. Dundee Council did not respond and Aberdeen City Council has taken no decision on the matter. During the evidence sessions, I asked repeatedly—I have not yet had a satisfactory answer—why the bill is needed, if there have been two informal tolerance zones in Edinburgh during past years and a tolerance zone currently operates in Aberdeen. What more can be done though the bill that present legislation does not allow? The answer is simple: nothing. Aberdeen City Council, which has an informal zone, recognises that "From a purely practical point of view, if the bill were not passed, that would not make too much difference in Aberdeen because the arrangements that we have do not rely on the bill."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 7 January 2003; c 3790.] Therefore, Aberdeen, which already has an informal tolerance zone, does not believe that the passing of the bill will allow it to do anything more than it does at present. Current local authority powers and the additional power of well-being that is included in the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 give sufficient powers to local authorities to designate an area and to provide the infrastructure and other services designed to protect the health and safety of prostitutes and the communities in which they operate. The problem exists in Edinburgh—this is a problem only in Edinburgh—not because there is  no tolerance zones act, but because there is no public agreement about where a tolerance zone should be located.

Certainly, every local authority must look at its own arrangements. I am confident that Glasgow will manage the situation. This is a problem purely for Edinburgh. It is not a matter for legislation; it is a matter of location. If the Salamander Street tolerance zone were still in operation, we would not be seeing this bill today. Public opinion forced the closure of that zone and, even if the bill were enacted, it would not allow for a zone to be set up if the public did not wish it to be there. I am concerned that the general public have not been fully consulted on the bill. Prostitutes and pimps travel to existing zones from elsewhere in Scotland and England. We have heard some evidence of nuisance in the surrounding community to do with condoms being dumped, but most of us in the Local Government Committee would agree that the community view has not been put to us. It is a matter for procurators fiscal and policing policy whether they prosecute for soliciting. It is they who make the judgment in the public interest whether to prosecute—just as they did when an informal tolerance zone operated in Edinburgh. Although that approach is not perfect, it is more pragmatic, and preferable to decriminalising an activity in one area while retaining the legislation everywhere else. As the submission from the Scottish Police Federation made clear, the Government should challenge the notion that prostitution is acceptable and inevitable rather than provide for its decriminalisation in defined geographical areas. The debate that we should be having is not about tolerance zones but about prostitution. That is why I fully support the Local Government Committee's recommendation that further investigation is needed by way of a ministerial committee. Prostitution may be the oldest profession in the world, but in Scotland it deserves a considered response. The bill has been useful in that it has highlighted an issue that many would prefer remained hidden. However, the bill is neither needed nor practicable, and it should be opposed.

No.

The lives of some of my constituents in central Fife are an absolute misery because of anti-social behaviour. A whole community is affected, but Fife Council has yet to get the alleged perpetrators to court. There has been a delay of almost seven months mostly because of the failure of the legal aid application to be processed quickly enough. The situation is simply not good enough. Interim orders are an immediate measure and the granting of an interim order may in itself help to modify the behaviour. Delaying the granting of an interim order would allow and encourage the alleged perpetrators to increase the level of harassment and violence—that is the case with ASBOs. Johann Lamont's amendment 4 is necessary; without it, interim ASBOs would be rendered useless.

If I heard the figures correctly, 1,400 grants were made to domestic householders last year. We estimate that half a million houses have lead piping. It is not necessary to be a rocket scientist or a mathematician to work out that it will take a long time to eradicate lead from the domestic water supply if we continue at the rate of 1,400 grants a year.

I, too, congratulate Robert Brown on securing the debate. Two out of three SNP members have now congratulated Robert, so that is not bad. There are two aspects to the debate. First, there is the matter of lead piping in domestic water systems; secondly, there is the problem with lead solder, particularly in new houses. I will concentrate on domestic water supplies and on older houses. I have been concerned about the subject for several years, because the effect of lead on the development of children has been known about for decades—it is not new. Towards the end of last year, I lodged a number of questions asking the Executive how many houses in Scotland had water supplies that contain lead piping, but the Executive could not tell me. Furthermore, there are no plans to collect that information centrally, which is not good enough. There is a grant system for domestic householders to replace lead piping. The problem is that the grants that are available to local authorities, or rather those that are available to householders, are extremely limited. The number of grants that may be granted each year is constrained by the amount of money that is available. It will take many years to make progress on eliminating the existing problem in old houses and to get rid of lead piping in domestic water supplies. The Executive needs to address that as a matter of urgency. I turn now to the issue of the lead solder that is used in new homes. I, too, welcome John Scott's announcement that at stage 3 of the Building (Scotland) Bill he intends to lodge an amendment to address that matter. The SNP will consider that amendment and, if it is as John Scott describes, SNP members will support it. The practice of using lead solder is clearly detrimental to health, and I wonder whether it is a criminal matter. If so, why have there been no prosecutions for using lead solder? As well as ensuring that completion certificates are right, so that building warrants are not issued if lead solder has been used, we must  use the force of law—if necessary—to ensure that contractors who do not comply voluntarily are aware that their actions will be dealt with.

Will the member take an intervention?

The Deputy Minister for Education and Young People's opening comments were permeated with phrases such as "we want to", "we will" and "first steps". One is tempted to ask the Executive what on earth it has been doing for the past four years. It seems that it has been doing nothing, which is of course why the great debate is taking place. The Executive is not doing less, better; it is doing much less, worse.

No. I have just started. It seems that Brian Monteith was being sponsored for every cooking reference that he made—there was much less reference to education. I shall concentrate my remarks on school buildings and the need for young people to be educated in facilities that are conducive to learning.

All right, then.

I wonder whether Johann Lamont, unlike her colleague Cathy Peattie, is speaking on behalf of the Executive. As I said, I shall concentrate my remarks on school buildings—the very point that Johann Lamont brought up. At a recent conference in Edinburgh, it was revealed that schools that have an abundance of natural light and ample ventilation significantly outperform more traditional schools in terms of academic results. Professor  Brian Edwards of Heriot-Watt University claimed that research from America shows that the more natural light in schools, the better pupils learn. Too many of our young people are being taught in poor physical conditions. It will cost up to £2 billion to bring Scottish schools up to standard. Unfortunately, the new PFI schools are generally not being built to a desirable design that will allow pupils to attain. As John Swinney revealed last week, the Amey group made profits of 31 per cent on its schools PFI projects, so £13 million was stuffed into the pockets of Amey and its shareholders—money that should have remained in our schools system. Audit Scotland found that PFI projects will cost taxpayers in Scotland £18 million more every year than they would have paid if all school projects had been funded by normal public procurement methods.

No, I shall continue. The PFI projects have been beset with problems, such as small classrooms, poor materials, no swimming pools in any of the Glasgow schools, very little social space—

As my colleague said, Falkirk is not in Glasgow. Moreover, there has been a problem with reduced community access—it is costing communities an extortionate amount to hire the facilities within schools. Even though public money has already bought those facilities, youngsters who play for football teams are being forced to go elsewhere.

No. I am running out of time. For the past six years, the Labour Government has fixed it to ensure that PFI projects are the preferred option. Indeed, they are the only game in town. The National Audit Office referred to the so-called public sector comparator as "pseudo-scientific mumbo-jumbo". That is the result of a dogma that permeates all the thinking on the provision of new facilities. The Treasury's drive to get capital projects off the balance sheet has ensured that PFI projects cost more, that profits are squirreled out of the public sector and that the facilities that have been provided are not as good as those that could have been provided if students, teachers and the wider community had had some influence on the design process.  I understand that the Liberal Democrats now favour public sector trusts. I look forward to hearing the Liberal Democrat Deputy Minister for Education and Young People say that the past four years of PFI have been a wasted opportunity from the point of view of both cost and design. I suspect that it will not suit him to do so. The SNP will ensure that our young people have decent facilities to learn in and that any profit will be returned to the education system, rather than being put into the pockets of those who seek to profiteer at the expense of our public services.

Will the member give way?

In years to come, the Liberal Democrats will look back on this day and feel ashamed. We have the only policy that the Liberal Democrats have ever espoused—PR for local government—and they are taking the opportunity  to vote against it. Folk such as Chic Brodie, who is a hero of the Liberal Democrat movement—he is the guy who was lauded for moving aside to allow Roy Jenkins to stand in Hillhead—are resigning from the Liberal Democrats because they believe that the party has sold out and lost the place on PR for local government. When a long-standing activist of the stature of Chic Brodie says that, the crowd who are in here allegedly representing Liberal Democrat voters ought to be ashamed. The fact that they protest when I say that they should feel ashamed shows that they have abandoned any vestige of their principles. Mike Russell mentioned the timeline. It is important that, in the concluding part of the debate, we are reminded of the timeline for PR for local government in the Scottish Parliament. The partnership document said that immediate progress would be made on PR. In July 1999, the McIntosh commission report was issued and we debated it in this chamber. McIntosh said that there should be PR for local government, but he did not specify the form. Then another consultation was set up. The Kerley working group reported in June 2000 that the system of PR that would best meet the criteria set down by McIntosh, including maintaining the councillor-ward link, was PRSTV. The Executive's response was to set up a working party, which was established in August 2000. The working party met only three times between August 2000 and February 2001. That was the kind of progress that was being made. The motion on my bill was lodged in November 2001. In June 2002 my bill, which, as I have already said, was drafted privately, was introduced in the Scottish Parliament. What did the Executive do in June 2002? It announced yet another consultation and, over the summer months, it consulted yet again. In September 2002, it announced that it would introduce a local governance bill. When did that bill appear? On the very day that my bill was being considered by the Local Government Committee. Those were exactly the same tactics that Labour and the Liberal Democrats used with Alex Neil's Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill.

No, I will not give way. I have only seven minutes. Robert Brown has had his say—he should sit down, because he has said enough. The next time the local governance bill was mentioned was two days before today's debate. That shows the timeline that we are dealing with, and it shows that the Liberal Democrats have achieved nothing on PR in this Parliament, apart from a bit of paper. Poor Iain Smith even moved an amendment at the Local Government  Committee so that the paper would be referred to as a bill rather than a draft bill.

I will not give way. That is the extent of the desperation of the Liberal Democrats in pretending that they have made progress on PR. Bill Butler's contribution was a Bill Butler contribution, but it would have been a more honest contribution if he had used his argument and his time to oppose PR, rather than to make the spurious argument that the bill could not be supported because it was flawed in some way. If it was 100 per cent the most wonderful bill on PR, he still would not have supported it. That would have been an honest position.

Sit down. We have had enough of Iain Smith. Helen Eadie quoted Professor Bill Miller, the so-called independent person who gave evidence to the Local Government Committee.

Sit down. Bill Miller has been opposed to PR for as long as I can remember.

No. In particular, Helen Eadie quoted Bill Miller's evidence that my bill proposes a minimum of two and a maximum of five councillors. In fact, that is not set down in my bill at all. Bill Miller was forced to admit in evidence that he had merely skimmed through the bill and that that proposal came from the Kerley report, not from my bill. That shows the quality of the evidence that the Local Government Committee heard.

No, I will not give way.

Okay.

I will tell Iain Smith how PR will be introduced in the next Parliament: the SNP Executive will introduce it—no ifs, no buts and no partnerships. A majority of MSPs—73 out of 129—believe in PR for local government. All it needs is for those who believe in PR to vote for PR. John McAllion believes in PR, and he will vote for PR, but the party that claims to support PR for local government is voting against it. That is disgraceful and shameful.

Does the member understand the concept of an enabling bill? An enabling bill allows the principles to be approved. The Proportional Representation (Local Government Elections) (Scotland) Bill uses exactly the same mechanism as the one that the Executive used in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000. The consultation on ward boundaries and all the other issues comes after the bill is passed.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The member has yet again referred to the Executive's bit of paper as a bill. I ask you to confirm that it is not a bill and will not be a bill until it is introduced to the Parliament.

Mr McAllion has said that there is cross-party support for PR in local government elections and that 73 MSPs are in favour of the idea. That is a majority. If all members who believe in PR vote for the bill, we can have PR for local government elections by 2003. That is the goal. How will Mr McAllion vote today?

Does not the minister recognise that, if electors vote in 2003 for another Liberal and Labour coalition—God forbid—or if a partnership is stitched together, and if that partnership is committed to PR in local government, the cost of Labour and the Liberals introducing PR for local government elections sometime after 2003 would be precisely the same as the cost of introducing PR under my bill at the moment? There were a lot of ifs in that question. If members of the coalition parties can support their own introduction of PR, why cannot they support mine?

We know that.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you confirm the status of the piece of paper that Iain Smith is waving about? Can you confirm that a bill is not a bill until it is introduced into the Parliament, and that the bit of paper that is claimed to be a bill is no such thing?

It is now seven months since the Proportional Representation (Local Government Elections) (Scotland) Bill was introduced and nearly four years since the McIntosh commission recommended proportional representation for local government elections. We are now within weeks of the parliamentary elections that will see the end of the coalition Government, which promised to make progress on PR as part of its partnership agreement. I have some views on the success of that coalition. I did not expect that, by 2003, it would have made no progress at all on PR. As Donald Gorrie remarked in September 2000: "If we don't get it"— PR on the statute book by the council elections in 2003— "I believe most of my colleagues and the party in general would decide that the coalition should stop." Well, Donald Gorrie and his colleagues have the chance to vote for a bill that would put PR on the statute book by 2003—my bill. All that the Liberals have to show after four years of coalition and partnership is a bit of paper, issued on Tuesday this week, that promises more discussions and consultations after the 2003 elections if there is another agreement between the Liberals and Labour. Of course, there is the little matter of an election to get through and I am sure that the voters will have a view on the record of the current coalition Government. Donald Gorrie recognises that any Liberal Democrat commitment on PR has been sacrificed on the bonnets of the ministerial Mondeos. As long-standing Liberal Democrat Chick Brodie, who resigned recently, said—

I will let the member speak in a minute, after I have talked about his ex-colleague Chick Brodie, who said: "The opportunity for Liberal Democrats to deliver proportional representation for local government is I believe lost."

I confirm for Robert Brown that it is not what I think that matters. I refer him to the Fairshare briefing—he has obviously not read it—which says that 73 out of 129 MSPs in the chamber believe in PR for local government. There is a clear majority for PR in local government and there has been a clear majority from day one of the Parliament. Fairshare knows it, it knows what the names are and Robert Brown is simply not right. We will discover what kind of support there is for single transferable vote PR in local government at 5 o'clock tonight. I will now explain what my bill will do and tell the chamber what some members of the Local Government Committee were prepared to do to manufacture concerns about the bill. First, I will deal with the Liberal Democrat amendment. Yesterday, I said that the Liberal Democrats had been conned again on PR. Having seen the amendment that Iain Smith lodged for today, I now realise that that comment was much too generous. If the Liberal Democrats do not vote for the motion, which can put the PR bill on the statute book by March 2003, they are not simply stupid, they are unprincipled and they are hypocrites. On a television programme in December last year, Charles Kennedy said that all he wanted for Christmas was PR. His colleagues in this chamber have the chance to have PR by March 2003 but, instead, they will vote for a bit of paper. I can hardly wait for Iain Smith to explain how he can vote for the general principles of the bill in the Local Government Committee and today move an amendment that rejects the general principles of the bill. On second thoughts, it would do us all a favour if Iain Smith spared us the self-serving, "gie's another job" type of speech that he usually makes. Why are the Liberal Democrats voting against PR today? The answer I got from a Liberal Democrat MSP last night was, "We still favour STVPR, but we oppose the SNP." There we have it—the real reason is nothing to do with PR and nothing to do with the bill, and everything to do with the fact that this is a bill from a member of the Scottish National Party. The arguments for STVPR are well rehearsed. All parties in the chamber will be both advantaged and disadvantaged by STVPR. What kind of  system gives Labour in Midlothian 94 per cent of the seats on 46 per cent of the vote, the SNP in Angus 72 per cent of the seats on 47 per cent of the vote or the Lib Dems in East Dunbartonshire 42 per cent of the seats on 27 per cent of the votes? As Mr Harding well knows, the Conservatives have 41 per cent of the seats on 27 per cent of the vote in Stirling. Whatever we call that system, it is neither fair nor democratic. My member's bill was drafted privately because, despite support from the Greens, the SSP and Dennis Canavan, it was denied non-Executive bill drafting time. None of the parties, including the Liberal Democrats, was prepared to support a motion on PR. I thank Alyn Smith and Scott Martin for all their work. I also thank Andrew Mylne of the parliamentary staff, whose wise advice helped to prepare the bill for introduction. My bill is simple. It has one aim and that is to enable STV for local government elections. When the bill was introduced in June, there was an opportunity for the 2003 elections to be held under PR. After all, it took only three months after enactment of PR for the Northern Ireland elections to be held. The Scotland Act 1998 was passed in November of that year and the Scottish Parliament elections were held in May 1999 using a proportional system. The 2003 elections could have been held under an STVPR system—what a wasted opportunity. I turn now to the Local Government Committee's stage 1 report on the bill and the discussions that took place in public and private sessions. On the casting vote of the convener, the committee decided not to support the general principles of the bill. However, at paragraph 22 on page 4, the report claims that Tricia Marwick, Sandra White and Iain Smith supported the bill, and that Trish Godman, Sylvia Jackson, Richard Simpson and Keith Harding were opposed to it. That statement is not true. Keith Harding was not even at the meeting; it was John Young. John Young did not oppose the bill; he abstained. That left the committee tied at 3:3 and Trish Godman used her casting vote against the bill. Page 24 of the report gives the voting results. The committee concluded that the consultation on the bill had not been adequate, despite the fact that representatives from Fairshare said in evidence that the principle of PR in local government had to be the most consulted on in local government history, that the issue had been "consulted to death" and that it was time for the Government to act. The committee also concluded that the lack of prescription on ward sizes was a major flaw in my bill. In fact, it is a major strength. The flexibility of  having up to eight members per electoral ward in an STV ward would allow rural and sparsely populated areas to have fewer members, which is precisely what members from rural councils such as Borders Council argued for in their evidence to the committee. In the PR system in the Scottish Parliament, Orkney and Shetland have separate MSPs so that account is taken of rurality and geographical differences. Not all constituencies have the same number of electors at present and, indeed, the Executive's draft bill also allows for different numbers of councillors in different wards. Paragraph 79 of the stage 1 report says that the committee concluded by a majority that it was "not content with the Policy Memorandum." That conclusion was reached despite the fact that the bill is a member's bill and I was not required to produce a policy memorandum in the first place. I have some sympathy with the view that the financial memorandum may be inadequate. The bill could enable the first STV elections on mainland Britain, and it is impossible for an individual member to quantify costs. However, if members were to approve the general principles of the bill, the Executive would be duty bound to work with me to work out costs before it lodged the financial resolution. As the Executive is apparently prepared to introduce PR, it is presumably prepared to meet the costs. If the Executive is prepared to meet the costs of its bill, it should be prepared to meet the costs of mine. I turn to the most shameful manufactured opposition to a bill that I have experienced in the Parliament. Paragraph 90 of the report says that when the committee was considering its draft report, which concluded that too much power had been given to ministers to determine ward boundaries, the Subordinate Legislation Committee had already considered the matter and was satisfied with those powers. That committee had submitted its report to the convener two weeks before the Local Government Committee was to consider its own draft report. The Subordinate Legislation Committee's report was withheld from the Local Government Committee on the instructions of the convener. It was finally distributed to the committee when I asked where it was. I have yet to get a satisfactory explanation of why a committee was asked to approve a report that was critical of the subordinate legislation powers in a bill without being given any explanation or indication that the Subordinate Legislation Committee's report was available and that it supported the measures I proposed.

It is interesting to note that the Executive's draft proposals give exactly the same powers to ministers to prescribe the number of councillors per ward as my bill does. As I said at the outset, my bill is an enabling bill. It allows Parliament to decide on the principles of PR and it allows the detail of wards and councillors to be determined following consultation. That is precisely the same mechanism that was applied by the Executive to the National Parks (Scotland) Bill. The Fairshare briefing makes clear, as I made clear to Robert Brown, that there is and always has been a clear majority in favour of PR in the Scottish Parliament. Every opinion poll ever taken in Scotland shows a large majority of supporters in every party for PR in local government. I say to MSPs of all parties today that, if they believe in PRSTV, they must vote for it. Let us take the opportunity to get it on the statute book by March 2003. If members fail to do that, they will fail the people of Scotland. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Proportional Representation (Local Government Elections) (Scotland) Bill.

I know that it will be a big surprise for the minister when I say that the Scottish National Party will support the Sewel motion. It is a change to see UK ministers' powers on directing local government being transferred to the Scottish ministers.  I will say in passing only that we should have more of the same and that it would be very nice if all the reserved powers in schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 could be repatriated to the Parliament. It is extremely welcome that direction on TUPE will be given to local government. It is essential that workers' rights be upheld at all times.

Does the member acknowledge that, alone among the parties, the SNP allowed its members a free vote on the information commissioner? The SNP was the only party that did not vote en bloc for the appointment; the Labour party, the Liberal Democrats and the Tories all voted en bloc.

Although we will celebrate the passage of the bill today, we need to look back to where it was born, which was out of the bill that was introduced by Alex Neil as the Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill. That bill went much further than the Executive was prepared to go in the bill that we are debating today. At stage 1 of Alex Neil's bill, the minister was asked to come to the Local Government Committee to give evidence on the bill. The minister, however, took that opportunity to announce that—lo and behold—the Executive was to have a similar bill all of its own. The Executive told its members, the Liberal Democrat members  and everybody else on the committee to vote down Alex Neil's bill because a better one would come along in a minute. The Executive bill is not a better bill than the one that Alex Neil introduced, but it is a bill and we will support it today despite the fact that it does not go far enough. The true test of the effectiveness of the bill will be in four years' time. We will know then whether between 60 per cent and 80 per cent of all appointments to public bodies still come from one political party—the Labour party. If that is the case, the bill will have failed. When Dame Rennie Fritchie, the UK commissioner for public appointments, appeared before the Local Government Committee, she said clearly that there was a role for a Scottish commissioner who would know the situation in Scotland. I look forward to the appointment of the commissioner and to the day when people will be appointed to public bodies in Scotland on merit and not because of their political affiliations. One of the reasons why so many Labour party members are appointed to public bodies is simply that people from other political parties realise that there is absolutely no point in putting themselves forward because they will not be appointed. Alex Neil cited the very good example of appointments to the Gaelic board. Everyone recognises that the number of Labour party members—and, indeed, Liberal Democrat members—on that board does not reflect the Gaelic community. It is also not reflective of the balance of the political parties in Scotland. Although I welcome the bill because it is a step forward; it is not the giant leap forward that was needed and it is certainly not the giant leap forward that would have been achieved by Alex Neil's bill. That said, we will support it, all the same.

Presiding Officer, how much time do I have?

I will not. I have already given the security guards a guarantee that we will probably be out of here by half past four and I am not about to go back on that. Throughout the passage of the bill, Peter Peacock has proved extremely willing to listen to the arguments. I am grateful that the three key amendments that I lodged—on the age of the commissioner, on reporting by the commissioner and on the House of Lords—have been accepted by the minister to a greater or lesser extent. However, as Alex Neil said, I am disappointed that my stage 2 amendment—which proposed that the  commissioner should not be a member of the House of Lords—was not agreed to. The bill states clearly that someone cannot be appointed as commissioner if they are a member of the House of Commons or of the Scottish Parliament. It seemed to me that there was a startling omission, as someone who was a member of the House of Lords could be appointed as commissioner. Given the debacle of the voting in the place down the road yesterday, nobody actually knows how the House of Lords is likely to end up and whether it will be appointed or elected in the future. It is a pity that we do not have a simple amendment today that refers to members of the House of Lords, because if Tony Blair has his way, it is perfectly possible that the membership of the House of Lords will be 100 per cent appointed. That is truly the pinnacle of patronage, and it would be wholly wrong that somebody who was appointed by the political system to the House of Lords would also have the opportunity to be appointed as commissioner. While I regret that today we are not debating my stage 2 amendment and that we do not have the opportunity—thanks to the Presiding Officer's selection process—to have a straight vote on whether the commissioner can be a member of the House of Lords, we will support amendment 23, imperfect though it might be.

I am disappointed that such a major change has been made to the bill at so late a stage. While I acknowledge that information was given to the Local Government Committee, I point out that there are concerns about the effect of the amendment. However, we have no alternative but to accept the amendment. There is no other option because not supporting the amendment would result in extra expense. People have talked about the processes that have been involved in the creation of this legislation and I wonder whether the processes were wrong. The bill was brought forward partly to spite Alex Neil's Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill. When a piece of legislation has started from the wrong premise, we should not be surprised if it goes belly up at the 11 th hour, as this bill has done in relation to the heritage bodies. If the ministers had listened a bit more and had encouraged more joined-up thinking across departments, we would not be in the situation that we are in, whereby last-minute information has necessitated these amendments. All ministers—not just the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services—should think long and hard about what has happened. The situation is not fair to the committees of the Scottish Parliament or to the organisations involved. As other members have said, ministers should examine carefully the quality of the advice that they are given by Historic Scotland.

I thank the minister for accepting amendment 1 with the condition that amendment 9 is agreed to. The SNP will accept amendment 9 because it was never our wish that minor technical breaches of the code should be reported to the Parliament. The words "in a material regard", which amendment 9 will insert, will satisfy that point. It is important that amendment 1 should also be agreed to, because it will place a duty on the commissioner to report any material breach of the code to the Parliament. We believe that that is the right and proper thing to do and I welcome the minister's agreement with that.

I rise to speak in support of amendment 3—members will expect me to do so. The arguments that were put forward by the minister do not stand up. The Scottish Parliament has appointed a Scottish parliamentary standards commissioner and it is also responsible for approving the code of conduct for MSPs. It seems entirely reasonable that the Parliament should have a say on a draft code of practice, which should meet with the approval of the Parliament. I ask the chamber to support amendment 3. The SNP will support amendment 8. As the minister said, it reflects an amendment that Sandra White lodged at stage 2.

If the present system is so fair and transparent, can Iain Smith explain why between 60 per cent and 80 per cent of all applicants who declare a political affiliation come from one political party?

The motion concerns changes to the code of conduct. The changes are set out in the Standards Committee's 12 th report 2002 and are consequential to the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002, which was passed by the Parliament in June 2002. The changes clearly set out how a complaint against a member should be lodged with the commissioner. They also set out the four-stage investigative procedure that was agreed by the Parliament in November 2000. Now that we are coming to the end of the first four-year session of the Scottish Parliament, it is important to note that the Standards Committee has never recommended sanctions against any MSP. Moreover, the committee has not had to deal with any issues of probity in relation to any MSP. All the issues that we have dealt with have related to protocol. I draw that to the attention of the media and the press in particular. The Scottish Parliament set out to be different from Westminster and it is. I move, That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament in the manner indicated in Annex A of the Standards Committee's 12th Report 2002, The Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002: Consequential Changes to the Code of Conduct , with effect from 30 January 2003.

Does the minister agree that it would be better if the servicemen did not have to be utilised in that way, and that the strike could and should be settled through genuine negotiations? Given the hostile and contradictory Executive statement yesterday, will the minister tell members what the Executive is doing to reach a fair and just settlement with the firefighters?

I look forward to hearing the Deputy First Minister condemn the use of the term "fascists" to describe firefighters. Yesterday in the House of Commons, John Prescott said that he would discuss with the devolved Administrations the best way of introducing the legislation. He anticipates that the legislation will apply to Scotland—it is only the mechanism that is to be discussed. The Deputy First Minister has come to the chamber today to tell us that all that the Scottish Executive sought and got was consultation on how the legislation will be introduced. Did the Scottish Executive even try to convince the UK Government that the measure was draconian and a mistake? Will he tell the chamber whether he still wants a distinct  fire service for Scotland or whether he wants to hand the whole lot over to John Prescott and the UK Government?

Will the minister confirm that he understands that all matters relating to the fire service in Scotland, including pay, are devolved to the Scottish  Parliament? Does he intend to proceed with the Bain recommendations or is the Scottish Executive's intention still to develop a distinctive Scottish fire service, as outlined in the consultation paper "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future"?

The point that I was making was that I never cleaned my boots—it was left to my husband to do that.

I congratulate Keith Harding on his determination in introducing the Dog Fouling (Scotland) Bill and on persuading the Executive to support it, which was no mean feat. I regret that it has been necessary for an individual member to introduce the bill in the first place. I have said this before and will say it again, because it is worth repeating: the measures contained in the bill, along with proposals to tackle litter, fireworks and so on, could all have been accommodated in a new civic government bill to replace the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. It is regrettable that, at the end of almost four years and after considerable work has been undertaken by the Convention of Scottish Local  Authorities, the Executive has not introduced such a bill and that we are not discussing that instead today. That is not to take away from Keith Harding's determination or from the worthiness of the bill before us. COSLA is considering civic government proposals, but it recognises that they will be a long time coming and that a stand-alone bill will find support more quickly. Everybody acknowledges that the current legislation is inadequate and does not work. To the huge frustration of councils and councillors, the legislation is clearly inadequate to deal with dog fouling and has been so probably since the hour that it was drafted. That is why it is right and proper that the Parliament should discuss the bill. I know that members and people outside the Parliament are wondering or turning up their noses at our discussion of something that they might not consider important, but the Parliament is about legislating and it is for the Parliament to put in place the legislative framework to allow councils to undertake the job that citizens expect them to undertake. Changing the emphasis from an offence of allowing a dog to foul to one of failing to clear up after a dog has fouled is the proper way to go. It is a pity that previous legislation did not make that big leap. If it had, perhaps we would not have had the problems with implementing it. The bill proposes that fixed-penalty notices should be issued. Keith Harding has said that he will consider an amendment at stage 2 to ensure that the time limit for issuing a fixed-penalty notice is seven days and not 72 hours, which is the limit in the bill. I commend Keith Harding's willingness to consider amendments, which is to his credit. He and the rest of the members who are in the chamber genuinely want a good bill. I commend Keith Harding for working to achieve that. The bill gives local government officers the power to issue fixed-penalty notices. That is a major new power that is a precedent for future legislation on a subject such as litter. Just as the emphasis on dog fouling has changed, so will allowing council officers to issue fixed-penalty notices in other circumstances be the leap that is needed to ensure that legislation on a subject such as litter is enforceable. I commend Keith Harding for introducing such a provision.

I have hardly started.

What a fool. The bill contains provisions that allow challenges to be made. As Keith Harding said, the member should read the bill more closely. I will deal with one potential problem in the bill. After the Local Government Committee's stage 1 report was published, I received several letters and e-mails about one feature of the bill. Mr Alex Lawson and Bruce the dog of Glenrothes are concerned about the areas of ground that the bill will cover. Mr Lawson and the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals believe that the term "public open place" is too wide. It will include areas of wilderness such as hills and mountains, as well as rough ground and woodlands. I am now sympathetic to that view. I acknowledge that the committee—of which I am a member—and Keith Harding are satisfied that the phrase "public open place" is narrow, but I urge Keith Harding and the Executive to reconsider that and to see whether amendments can be drafted to meet the concerns of responsible dog owners such as Mr Lawson.

Does the minister's wife have the same habits that I do? When my children came in with their feet covered in it, their shoes were left at the back door for their dad to deal with when he got home at night.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you remind the member that he should be talking about the terms of the motion  and the amendments and that he is straying far from those terms?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Smith accept that local communities should have a statutory right to be consulted? If not, is he satisfied with the watered-down version of guidance? It is either one or the other.

Today has been a good one for the Parliament. I was heartened by Andy Kerr's remark that he accepts the Parliament's decision on amendment 59. The Executive should acknowledge that the processes that it followed for the bill were, frankly, insulting to the Parliament. The Executive has received the Parliament's answer. I hope that lessons have been learned and that the legislative opportunity that the Executive is looking for will not arrive in two days' time. I also hope that the Executive will allow proper scrutiny in future, not  only of amendments such as amendment 59, but of all legislation. We are entering into an extremely difficult period because of the number of bills that are before the Parliament—we have around 22 outstanding bills to deal with between now and March. As I have said previously, it is important that parliamentarians are responsible for producing good legislation. That does not mean that we must agree with every piece of legislation—sometimes we will not—but we have a duty to ensure that the legislation that comes out of the Parliament is the best that it can be. I sincerely hope that the minister will pay more than just lip service to that duty and that he will embrace the consultative steering group proposals in their entirety. There are a number of good measures in the bill, such as those on community planning, best value and the power of well-being. I will not replicate what the minister said on those issues. All the measures have been a long time in coming. I believe that, if the will exists, local communities, local bodies, local authorities, health boards and the like should be able to work much more closely together. It is a disappointment that we have to legislate for community planning. Most of us would expect statutory bodies and the like to build that in. Legislating is all very well, but we also need to ensure that a culture change takes place that embraces community planning, best value and the power of well-being. There is much work to be done outwith the legislative process to ensure that that happens. A number of the amendments that we discussed at stage 2 were marred but are now part of the bill. As a member of the Local Government Committee, I did not give them the scrutiny that they deserved because there was not enough time. I am not convinced that the bill is a good bill—I hope that it does not come back to haunt us. However, because of the good things that are in the bill, the SNP group will support it today.

I assure the member that the Local Government Committee did not see the amendment at stage 1, at stage 2 or any other time. There has been no consultation. The first knowledge of the amendment was when it was published in the business bulletin on Monday.

Today, the minister has repeated the assertion that consultation on the repeal of section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947 has taken place. The assertion is without any basis in truth. I refer the minister to the consultation document "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future", which he has mentioned. I am prepared to give way to him if he can point me to a specific reference in that document to the repeal of section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947. No such reference exists. Page 18 of the document contains a recommendation from the Executive that the 1947 act be amended. Paragraph 121 on page 40 states: "In paragraph 13 the need for legislative change has been discussed. We would welcome specific or general suggestions about those areas which require reform or a new statutory basis."

I want to finish the point that I am making first. The assertion that the minister has made and that the First Minister made in the chamber on 19 December is not true. The consultation document contained no specific recommendation for the repeal of section 19. Indeed, the Executive was not even clear in its own mind what kind of legislative changes it wanted. That is why it was asking for specific or general recommendations from the people who were being consulted. Despite the fact that there has been a consultation, the minister has yet to publish the consultation report, which means that no one in the chamber has read the findings of the consultation process.  It is a matter for the Parliament that the Bain report has not been made available to members. The minister advised us that copies would be made available to us. On the day that we received the letter telling us that, I requested a copy from the Scottish Parliament information centre. I understand that only yesterday six hard copies were placed in SPICe. I was the seventh person to request a copy, so the report was not available to me, although I have a copy from the web. If that is the level of consultation that we are talking about, it is simply not good enough.

In that reply, the First Minister also said: "In our consultation paper, which we published earlier this year, we considered repealing section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947".— [ Official Report , 19 December 2002;  c 16607.]  That was at best misleading the Parliament, because, as I and other members have explained, there was no specific reference whatever to this proposal to repeal section 19 of the 1947 act. Amendment 59 is sleekit, it is underhand and it strikes at the heart of the democracy of this new Parliament. To slip in an amendment that will deny any scrutiny of the proposals is to legislate by diktat. The purpose of the amendment is to allow the closure of fire stations and a reduction in the number of firefighters and appliances. It will take away the right of communities to be consulted about those changes. I see the minister shaking his head when I suggest that the amendment will do that specifically. I will quote the Bain report and the reasons that it gives for recommending the repeal of section 19 of the 1947 act. In case the minister still has any doubts, I will tell him that Bain said that the Government must repeal section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947, because, under that provision, a fire authority in Great Britain may not close a fire station or reduce appliances or firefighter posts without consent. Bain said that that is not consistent with the delegation of responsibility and effective management, which is why he believes that the repeal of section 19 of the 1947 act is needed. What the minister has been saying today is simply not true. The Executive has taken the most contentious of all the Bain recommendations and  is now trying to bludgeon it through the Parliament without allowing for any scrutiny. Delicate negotiations are going on with the Fire Brigades Union and the employers to end the present dispute. This shabby sleight of hand will inflame that situation and the responsibility for that rests squarely with the Executive and the Government. The consultation paper said that the most significant thing to happen to the fire service in Scotland was the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, because the Parliament has responsibility for all matters concerning the Scottish fire service. I wondered why the Executive was slipping in amendment 59, but it became clear last night that, because something similar was happening at Westminster, the Executive had been telt to lodge amendment 59. I urge the minister to withdraw the amendment. If he insists on pressing it, I urge members of all parties to combine to defeat it, to allow the Parliament the time for scrutiny that the proposal deserves and to ensure that, when fire stations are closed in future, communities will have the right to be consulted.

I am grateful to the Executive for supporting amendment 4. As Peter Peacock said, I lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, because it seemed to me that it is a matter of principle that, where the Government of the day places a duty on local authorities, that duty should be followed by a requirement that the Government provide the money for the duty to be carried out. That is right and proper. Amendment 4 is a simple matter of changing "may" to "shall" in section 30C(6). I acknowledge the Executive's willingness to listen on amendment 4 and hope that, when we come to later amendments, it will show the same willingness.  Amendment 36 agreed to.  Amendments 37 to 39 moved—[Peter Peacock]—and agreed to.  Amendment 4 moved—[Tricia Marwick]—and agreed to. Amendments 40 and 41 moved—[Peter Peacock]—and agreed to.

I was asked to lodge amendments 57 and 58 by an organisation called YouthLink Scotland. The amendments seek to ensure that local authorities consult young people and youth bodies when fulfilling their duties under section 16 to "initiate ... maintain and facilitate" community planning. The bill fails to recognise the significant contribution that young people and youth work bodies can make to the community planning process. Young people are the current and future users of the local authority services that are to be planned and provided through the community planning process. In addition, youth work bodies play a significant role in promoting the interests of young people. Amendment 57 reflects the role of young people and youth work bodies by requiring local authorities to consult and co-operate with them as an integral part of the community planning process. Amendment 57 is important because the definition of community bodies that is contained in section 16(4) does not naturally embrace young people. I understand that, in a reply to YouthLink earlier this year, the minister took the view that a reference to youth organisations should not be included in the bill and that such references would be best dealt with by guidance. If the minister makes an explicit commitment that youth organisations will be referred to in guidance as well as an undertaking to refer specifically to the need for local authorities to consult young people and youth groups, those organisations will be satisfied. If he does that, I will not press amendments 57 and 58. I move amendment 57.

I thank the minister for his helpful reply. I am satisfied that there will be explicit and specific reference to young people in the guidance and I am sure that that will go a long way towards ensuring that the concerns of the  young people of Scotland, the organisations with which they are involved and those who represent young people will be taken seriously in the community planning process in the future. Therefore, I will not press amendments 57 and 58.  Amendment 57, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendment 58 not moved.]

I have given you notice of my intention to raise the point of order, Presiding Officer. At the end of last year, the Parliament approved the general principles of a local government bill, but the Local Government in Scotland Bill that is before us today is not the same bill that was approved then. Indeed, as the Scottish Parliament information centre background paper to the debate says, "the general principle of the Bill was expanded to accommodate" the stage 2 amendments. Those amendments have added new parts and sections on enforcement and scrutiny, rating, waste management and capital expenditure and grants. Presiding Officer, you will have noted that in the Local Government Committee, which considered those amendments, I tried to move a motion that would have allowed the committee to take evidence on the amendments. However, the convener would not allow that motion to be heard. I turn to the stage 3 amendments that were lodged by the Executive during the recess and not published until Monday. Amendment 59, which would repeal section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947, is designed to ensure that the most contentious recommendation of the Bain report is not scrutinised by any committee of the Parliament. It is unacceptable that an issue of great public concern will be debated and disposed of in 15 minutes. If the amendment is passed, it will have the effect of denying the public the right in the future to be consulted about the possible closure of their fire stations. That is unacceptable. Presiding Officer, you have publicly expressed your concern about the quality of legislation coming from the Parliament and you have suggested that the Parliament needs a second chamber. I say to you, with the greatest respect, that the imperative is to ensure that the Parliament and its committees are allowed to use the powers that are already available to them to examine and scrutinise legislation effectively and that it is for the Presiding Officers to offer the Parliament protection from the abuse of power by the Executive. In the interests of the Parliament and the people of Scotland, I invite you to reconsider the decision to accept amendment 59, in the name of Andy Kerr, and to reflect on the type of amendments that will be accepted in the future at stage 2 and stage 3 of bills.

I add my congratulations to Alex Neil on securing tonight's debate and I pay my respects to the firefighters for the work that they do on behalf of the rest of us. The motion supports a call for a fair-pay settlement, which I have supported from the beginning. The dispute should have been settled a long time ago and would have been settled had the UK Government not interfered in the process between employer and employees. I welcome the firefighters from Fife who are in  the public gallery tonight. Their presence gives me an opportunity to record my personal thanks to the firefighters who broke their strike recently to try to rescue two elderly people from Kinghorn harbour. I know that the family also extends its thanks to the firefighters for the work that they did in vain. We have heard a lot about modernisation, but the fire service has already modernised, as many members have mentioned. In Fife, we do not have a fire service but a Fife fire and rescue service. That name better sums up the work that the firefighters do. They are already doing that work; they do not need modernisation to continue to do it. The Scottish Executive's consultation paper "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future" has a section entitled "The Vision", which states: "The biggest change for the fire service in Scotland in recent years has been devolution. Under The Scotland Act 1998, the Scottish Parliament has legislative competence for all fire service matters in which central government has a locus ... the Scottish Executive has identified a number of key issues for the development of a distinctive Scottish Fire Service and these are set out in the sections which follow." That statement is important given the fact that our discussion has been on the Bain report, which makes a number of recommendations, not least of which is that there should be a UK policy-making body that is led by the Deputy Prime Minister. I repeat some of the questions that I asked the First Minister today and I would appreciate an answer from the minister who is here tonight. Does the minister agree that the Scottish Executive will continue to develop a distinctive fire service in Scotland? Will he explain why the Bain report recommends a UK policy-making body led by the Deputy Prime Minister? Does he agree with that recommendation? Will he guarantee to the Parliament that any operational and policy decisions will be made by the Parliament and not by the UK Government? In response to all those questions, the First Minister said only that the Scottish Executive will introduce legislation to repeal section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947. Under that provision, a fire authority may not close a fire station or reduce the number of fire appliances or fire-fighting posts without the consent of the secretary of state. That is what the First Minister seeks to change. When will that legislation be proposed, and what other Bain report recommendations will become the policy of the Scottish Executive? Will the Scottish Executive still attempt to develop a distinctive fire service in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister what input the Scottish Executive has had to the Bain review of the fire service. (S1F-2362)

Will the First Minister arrange to have sent to the Scottish Parliament information centre a copy of the written evidence that the Scottish Executive submitted to the Bain report? Does he agree with the view expressed by Jim Wallace in the consultation paper earlier this year that the Scottish Executive will develop a distinctive fire service in Scotland and that the number of fire brigades in Scotland should remain the same? Will he explain why the Bain report recommends a UK policy-making body led by the Deputy Prime Minister and will he say whether he agrees with that recommendation? Will the First  Minister guarantee that any operational and policy decisions about the fire service in Scotland will be made by this Parliament and not by the UK Government?

I start by congratulating Marilyn Livingstone on securing the debate and, more important, on all the support that she has given to John and Susan O'Brien in their campaign. Anyone who has watched the campaign carefully would recognise that it is a tribute to both the O'Brien family and Marilyn.  Lee O'Brien's death was a great tragedy. The biggest tragedy of all is that, while we are putting resources into tackling drugs and alcohol, we are putting very few resources into tackling solvent abuse or even into raising awareness about solvent abuse. Some 10 or 15 years ago, solvent abuse was something that was spoken about quite often, because that was what many young people indulged in. Unfortunately, we now concentrate so much on drugs and alcohol abuse that we have all but forgotten that solvent abuse is still going on. It is only when there are tragedies such as that of Lee O'Brien that the public and politicians focus on the problem. Lee's death has highlighted the issue once more. It is not an issue that has gone away, but one that continues to damage people, with 70 young people dying every year in the United Kingdom through solvent abuse. That means 70 wasted young lives and 70 destroyed families. That is why it is important that we congratulate the O'Brien family on putting their grief to one side and campaigning to ensure that we raise awareness about solvent abuse in general and the abuse of lighter refill gas in particular. I congratulate Fife Council and the other local authorities that have signed up in support of the campaign. They know the problems in our communities, and it is vital that we recognise where all the pitfalls are for young people. We must raise awareness and ensure that the resources are in place. If we are not considering legislation to encourage retailers to address their responsibilities, we should be ensuring that, even without legislation, retailers take responsible social action and do not sell solvents such as lighter fuel to young people in the quantities that they are undoubtedly selling them in. The retail community has a responsibility, notwithstanding any need for future legislation. Retailers must address what they are doing to our communities and we need to raise awareness within the retail community. I ask the minister to respond positively to the pleas of Marilyn Livingstone and to the campaign by the O'Brien family, who have come to the Public Petitions Committee and have now had their campaign highlighted in the Parliament. I ask the minister to make a positive contribution to the debate, so that we can see where we can go and how we can help the O'Briens' campaign. We need to know how we can raise the issue of solvent abuse among parents, young people and retailers, to ensure that no other young lives are wasted.

I did.

I was very careful to use the term anti-social behaviour, because I recognise that anti-social behaviour occurs in all forms of tenure. Does the member agree that we need to ensure that that the criminal justice system works to deal with criminal behaviour?

I really did not want to start on a soor note, but I found Lyndsay McIntosh's comments quite nauseating. She was quick to throw statistics around, so I will give her just one in return. In 1979, hardly anybody slept rough on the streets of Scotland. By 1997, more than 1,000 people were sleeping rough on the streets of Scotland every night of the year. I do not think that anyone has forgotten about the former housing minister who said that the homeless are the "people you step over when you come out of the opera." It is not, therefore, incumbent on anyone in the chamber to start taking lectures from the Tories about homelessness. I congratulate the Executive on introducing the bill. I also congratulate the homelessness task force on all the work that it has done in guiding the Executive's policy. In today's time for reflection, Archbishop Conti said: "Hope is the leader's star ... 'a signal to the peoples'". The bill is the hope for homeless people in Scotland, and it is a signal to the peoples of Scotland that the Parliament, the Executive and the parliamentary committees are committed to dealing with an important issue. No issue is more pressing, more emotive or more desperate than homelessness. Under the bill, priority need is to be phased out by 2012. The priority need in current legislation is an artificial gate-keeping mechanism. The priorities are hoops that homeless people have to go through. They are asked questions such as, "Are you homeless? Have you priority need? Are you intentionally homeless? Have you a local connection?" When I first joined Shelter, I thought naively that if someone was homeless, they were homeless. One of the great frustrations was that although someone was homeless, they might not be statutorily homeless and, regardless of their circumstances, if they did not manage to meet all the tests, they were simply not entitled to local authority housing. There are concerns about resources and the supply of housing, and those issues must be addressed. Johann Lamont mentioned the concerns that have been raised about whether anti-social tenants will use the proposed legislation to continually get access to local authority housing. I agree with Shelter. The bill should not be used to tackle anti-social behaviour. Anti-social behaviour is criminal behaviour and should be tackled by the justice system. Some of our communities are terrorised by those who blight the  lives of others. Such people need to be dealt with quickly and effectively by the courts. In my experience, anti-social behaviour orders are simply not working. However, the proposed legislation would be diluted if we were to use it as an opportunity to express our frustration with the failure of the criminal justice system. I say to colleagues of all parties that it would be a mistake to do that.

I could not agree more. The problem with anti-social behaviour orders is the length of time that the cases take to get to the courts and the ineffectiveness of the court system when dealing with them. It is imperative that we deal with that issue as quickly as possible. Before the Scottish Parliament was established, Westminster used to devote one hour per year to our housing and homelessness issues—one hour for a set-piece debate. If this Parliament had done nothing else in the past four years, the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill alone would justify its necessity.

Does the member agree that, during the Conservatives' term of office, about 350,000 houses were taken out of the social rented market through the right to buy? Does she recognise that the incidence of homelessness went up to a record level during that time? Does she recognise the correlation between the lack of housing and the length of housing queues?

I fully appreciate what the minister is saying, but does she believe that bed and breakfast or temporary accommodation is suitable for families and children?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Network Rail about the timetable for refurbishment and remedial work on the Forth bridge. (S1O-6078)

I thank the minister for that non-answer. The Forth bridge is not just one of the engineering wonders of the world, it is an essential rail link for Fife and the north. Recent reports suggest: "there is a backlog of work which will take between ten and 14 years and cost up to £280m to complete." Will the minister make strong representations to Network Rail that the work must go ahead and that we must know a time scale for the work as soon as possible?

On a point of order.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you confirm that this appointment is a parliamentary appointment?

I will be brief, Presiding Officer. I have serious concerns about the independence of the advocacy service as detailed in the bill. The bill places a duty on local authorities and health boards to provide and fund an independent advocacy service. Advocacy must be independent of local authorities and health boards. Its primary, indeed only, role must be to represent the interests of the person. Representatives of Fife Advocacy said to the Local Government Committee: "The bottom line is that the user of Fife Advocacy services should feel that he or she is getting an independent service ... In an ideal situation, it would be brilliant if the funding was totally separate from Fife Council and/or Fife NHS Board."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 29 October 2002; c 3376.] It is estimated that one in four persons will suffer from mental health problems at some time in their life and so will need to use the advocacy service. There is a conflict at the heart of the bill with regard to the advocacy service. As the bill puts in place compulsory treatment measures, it is absolutely imperative that advocacy services are independent and are seen to be independent. The bill has some way to go before that is achieved.

PFI contracts cover schools, hospitals and water and sewerage projects. Scotland is PFI-land, thanks to the Executive and the Conservatives before it. For too long, the Executive has claimed that PFI is the only game in town, and local authorities have come to believe that.

I know that the minister prepared for an interruption, but if he had listened, he would know that I said that for too long, the Executive and the Tories before it claimed that PFI was the only game in town. The Finance Committee's report examines PFIs in Scotland, whether they deliver value for money  and their budgetary implications now and in the future. Scotland's public services are in hock for the next 30 years because of PFI. Ronnie Hinds of Audit Scotland said on 12 June: "many of the benefits of PFI could potentially be secured by other means and the scope for this should be considered for future schools projects." With PFIs, the Scottish taxpayer pays way over the odds for new schools and hospitals, then pays again, because such buildings have fewer beds and fewer facilities. PFI projects have an impact on the facilities management function and the delivery of services. I welcome the protocol to which the minister referred, but as other members have said, that does not go far enough. Ten thousand people have already been transferred out of the public sector. The committee's report does not go far enough, but I will highlight a few of its recommendations. The committee recommended "that the Executive sets out what it sees as the cumulative impact of the use of" PFI "to fund capital investment on current and future revenue funding and indicates how much additional revenue funding it intends to commit in respect of capital projects under" PFI "in the budgetary period." The committee also recommended that the full long-term spending implications for the Scottish Executive and the public body commissioning the project should be made public and considered before any project goes ahead. The decision-making process that relates to PFIs requires far greater openness, transparency and accountability than it has. The system must be made much more accountable. I will deal briefly with the public sector comparator that Alasdair Morgan referred to and which he suggested only us anoraks knew anything about.

No. The public sector has been handicapped to allow PFI projects to compete. The National Audit Office described the PSC as "pseudo-scientific mumbo jumbo". Audit Scotland recommended that the PSC should take into account the true cost of borrowing for councils and that councils should have a choice between PFIs and non-PFI projects. It is clear that many criticisms of PFI/PPP have been made by Audit Scotland and the National Audit Office.  At the heart of the Executive's problem with PFI/PPP is the lack of openness and transparency and the inability of the Parliament and others to see what is happening in PFI/PPP projects. As Alasdair Morgan said, it will take a long time to see what is being done in our name. Openness and transparency are bywords in the Parliament. It is time for the Executive to be more open and transparent about the processes for PFIs.

I thank the minister for his courtesy in ensuring that I had an advance copy of the statement, but I am even more grateful to Radio Scotland for reporting this morning the minister's view that the settlement will ensure that there will be only modest rises in council tax. Is the minister aware that a COSLA briefing claims that the Executive spending review directs resources at initiatives rather than core services and that, in total over the three years, core services are being underfunded by £440 million? COSLA went on to claim that the underfunding indicates the prospect of difficult budget decisions for councils. Is the minister aware that, according to COSLA, the funding gap following last year's settlement impacted on the provision of services for children, special educational needs and social work services? Has the minister assured COSLA, and can he assure the chamber, that sufficient resources have been made available to councils to ensure a modest rise in council tax, that core services to the most vulnerable will not be  affected, and that free personal care will be delivered when those who are eligible need it?

Will the member give way?

Do not fix your gaze.

I begin with the disclaimer that I am not a lawyer, nor am I a member of the Justice 1 Committee. However, I inform members that, since Friday, I have read every piece of information on the bill. Indeed, I am the anorak to which Christine Grahame referred. It is a pity that Mike Rumbles has left the chamber, because he raised the same issue that I want to raise with the minister. I have read all the material because I was visited by a number of constituents from a new housing estate in Markinch, who are concerned about the management of the green space on the estate. The developer has sold the green space to  another company, which means that the owner-occupiers in the estate do not own it. Under the existing deeds, the owner of the green space can levy an annual charge on the owner-occupiers to allow maintenance work to be carried out. However, the owners have no control over how much money is extracted from them or over the level of maintenance of the green space. Naturally, my constituents are concerned that, because the annual charges are in the hands of the owner of the green space, they might go up and up. Will the minister say whether such issues are addressed in the bill and how they can be resolved on behalf of the owners of houses in such estates? How can my constituents influence the developer or the owner of the green space and have some control over the annual charge that is levied? How can the owner-occupiers monitor whether the maintenance work is carried out? Another problem for some of my constituents is that they believe that the conditions that are laid down when buying property are restrictive. The minister said that he cannot sell alcohol and Phil Gallie mentioned the restrictive conditions in deeds. The bill allows for deeds to be registered, but where is the provision to allow conditions to be varied? I hope that the minister will address the problems that my constituents have raised in his summing-up speech. The problems are not confined to one area of Scotland—Mike Rumbles made it clear that constituents in his area are worried about the future. As new housing estates are built all the time, the issues might become a problem in the future. I would be grateful for any comfort that the minister can offer to my constituents in Markinch.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have listened carefully to the member's comments about poverty not being solved by throwing money at the problem. Do I take it, therefore, that the member agrees with the UK Labour Government, which reduces lone parent and invalidity benefits and offers 75p a week to pensioners?

I add my regrets to those that the Deputy First Minister expressed that we are now in the midst of a firefighters' strike for the time in 25 years. I also regret the fact that the Deputy First Minister used the majority of his statement to attack the firefighters rather than to address his responsibility to say how the people of Scotland can be protected. The SNP believes that public safety is paramount and both the Government and the firefighters should show good will by settling the dispute before the public and businesses in Scotland are harmed. In the light of that, the SNP calls for a return to a moratorium by the FBU on strike action. However, the Government must enter genuine negotiations to settle the dispute.

I am coming to it. Let us be clear: the breakdown of the original negotiations was caused by Government interference in the normal negotiation process between employers and firefighters. I ask the Deputy First Minister what pressure the Scottish Executive will bring to bear on UK ministerial colleagues to resolve the dispute before lives are lost in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

I listened carefully to what the minister said about the independence of money advice officers who work for local authorities. Will he guarantee to local authority money advice workers that their line managers will not put pressure on them to prioritise council tax arrears?  That will allow those workers to give truly independent advice.

Will the minister give way again?

I seek your guidance on a point of order, Presiding Officer. Paragraph 13 of the policy memorandum to the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill states that the bill "creates a new method of enforcement of legally constituted debt, known as attachment, to be permitted against corporeal moveable property in commercial cases. It makes provision, in exceptional circumstances where strict criteria are satisfied, for an order of court in respect of non-essential valuable assets in domestic cases." However, as the long title shows, the bill does not make that distinction—the provision for the new method of enforcement that is enshrined in part 2 of the bill does not restrict the new diligence to commercial cases. Therefore, the bill clearly does not follow the policy of the policy memorandum. In introducing the bill to Parliament on 19 September, the Minister for Social Justice said: "Part 2 of the bill responds to recommendations from the Parliament, the working group and the consultation exercise that we should treat domestic and commercial situations differently."— [ Official Report , 19 September 2002; c 13886.]  The minister agreed with the policy memorandum. Unfortunately, part 2 does not follow through with that response, which means that domestic cases could still be dealt with through the provisions that are being introduced for commercial cases. Therefore, there is doubt about whether Parliament was fully aware of the general principles of the bill during the stage 1 consideration. Will the Presiding Officer rule whether that situation renders the bill incompetent under rule 9.3.3 of standing orders, which outlines the documents that should accompany Executive bills? I will refresh members' memories on that rule. Among the accompanying documents that are required for Executive bills is a policy memorandum, which must, among other things, set out the bill's policy objectives and its effects on a range of subject matters. Standing orders also provide for the member who is in charge of a bill to refer part of the bill back to the relevant committee for further stage 2 consideration, provided that no more than half of the sections are referred. I ask for guidance on whether now would be the appropriate time to  invite the minister to refer back sections 10 to 32 inclusive to the Social Justice Committee for stage 2 consideration under rule 9.8.6 of standing orders.

Are you telling the chamber that a policy memorandum that is published by the Executive can bear no relation to the bill to which it refers and that that would still be a competent process?

Des McNulty accuses me of misleading the Parliament. I am glad that he has such fascinating bedtime reading. I assure him that the SNP manifesto will contain a commitment to review the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. It is important that such a review is conducted and it is obvious that the Executive and the party of which Mr McNulty is a member will do nothing about the quality-of-life legislation that is needed to make a difference.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is impossible to walk down a street in Scotland without noticing litter, discarded chewing gum, graffiti-covered walls, vandalised swing parks and dog mess. All those issues affect the quality of life, and they all help to foster a belief on the part of some people in our communities that they have been abandoned by the police, local authorities and central Government. In May, Jack McConnell said that he wanted all parties in the Parliament to work together to tackle such issues, which blight so many lives. He spoke specifically about the need to "deal with these issues and strengthen the legal framework." He continued: "We have to give those who need them the powers to improve the quality of all lives throughout Scotland"— [ Official Report , 30 May 2002; c 12390.]  I will return to the legal framework later in my speech. Before that, I warmly welcome the financial commitment that the minister has made in the £95 million that was announced in August as part of the end-year flexibility money for specific quality-of-life projects. I know that COSLA, on behalf of local authorities, appreciates the way in which the money is being distributed and the lack of bureaucracy associated with the projects themselves. I welcome the opportunity that those projects have brought to many individuals in many communities. After those warm words, however—I would not like to disappoint the minister—I turn to the SNP amendment in my name. COSLA claims that core local government services have been underfunded by £440 million over the past few years. If that is so, but if the minister does not accept that, that goes some way towards explaining why the streets are in the mess that they are in today. Why are we having this debate? It is the job of the Parliament to put in place a legislative framework that will provide the necessary powers to deal with the problems that we are discussing. That is what Jack McConnell said he would do in May, but the Executive has singularly failed to do it. It should not be the role of the Executive to micromanage local government. It is up to local government to ensure that our streets are clean and free of graffiti, dog mess and the like.  This is not a council chamber but a Parliament, and the role of a Parliament is to legislate. We have more powers than a parish council, but it often seems that, instead of using those powers to legislate, some members on the Labour and Liberal Democrat benches—I see that Iain Smith is leaving—

Some Labour and Liberal Democrat members would prefer that we spent our time dealing with matters that are rightly in the province of local government. The Executive's role is to ensure that local government has the powers and resources to deal with those matters. COSLA claims that local government does not have the resources and that the Executive has not put in place the legal framework that is needed. Let me turn to the legislation that has been proposed by members to deal with quality-of-life issues, and examine whether Jack McConnell and Andy Kerr have worked "with ... members to look together at how we ... can most effectively ... strengthen the legal framework".— [ Official Report , 30 May 2002; c 12390.]  Keith Harding's Dog Fouling (Scotland) Bill is being considered by the Local Government Committee at stage 1. The Executive has stated that it has a number of policy concerns about the bill, and it is by no means certain that the bill will actually find Government support, as opposed to just support in principle. We wish to hear about that today. Bruce Crawford will say more during his speech about his proposed litter bill, which has received no Executive support. Instead, the Executive has issued a consultation and it is by no means certain that a litter act will be in place by March 2003. Instead of going towards the legislative framework that we need, money has been allocated towards litter projects as part of the quality-of-life initiative, which is tackling the symptoms but not the cause. At the first meeting of the all-party group on quality-of-life issues, to which Andy Kerr referred, I suggested that issues around litter, dog fouling, the proposed hedge control bill and fireworks licensing could be tackled through a review of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. In July 1999, COSLA published a report in which it recommended amendments to the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. Did the Government act in 1999? It did not. Instead, the Executive decided to review the licensing and non-licensing provisions separately. In a memo that I received as a member of the all-party group on quality-of-life issues, the minister stated: "This approach was taken given the lack of legislative  opportunity in view of other legislative priorities." In the three and a half years of the current Executive and the five and half years of the Labour Government, the legislative framework has never been a priority.

The minister knows that anyone who has a view on this issue recognises that the present legislative framework is insufficient. A consultation exercise is not needed. If the legislative framework were sufficient, our streets would not be full of litter.

The minister makes the case for what I am proposing. As he says, individual local authority workers can do nothing about the problem. Current legislation on litter is not working. That is why the minister needs to examine the issue and to do something about it. The legislative framework has never been a priority for the Executive. Since 1999, it has done nothing on the quality-of-life issues because of "the lack of legislative opportunity in view of other legislative priorities." No wonder the minister prefers to debate local government issues in the chamber. He does so to draw attention away from the Executive's failure to do what it was elected to do—to legislate on the issues that affect the quality of life in Scotland. An SNP Administration is committed to doing that in May 2003. We will ensure that the necessary frameworks are put in place, so that authorities have the powers that they need to act to ensure  that our folk have the quality of life that they need and deserve. I move amendment S1M-3543.1, to insert at end: ", but notes COSLA's concerns over the funding of core services."

If the minister intended to change the system, why did he say in September that the procedures with which he was working were open, transparent and working fine?

We should be clear about why we are debating an Executive bill on public appointments today; it is not, as the minister claimed in his opening statement, because the bill is part of a series of bills dealing with public life that the Executive has introduced. We have the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Bill because last September Alex Neil introduced his member's bill—the Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill. I will remind the minister what the Executive memorandum on Alex Neil's bill said: "The current appointments system has built-in mechanisms for ensuring that it is fair, open, transparent and delivers a quality outcome, which is subject to independent scrutiny." Therefore, last September, the minister and the Executive had no intention of introducing the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Bill. Of course, by the time the Local Government Committee took evidence on Alex Neil's bill we had had a U-turn from the minister and the new First Minister—there would be an Executive bill after all. The U-turn was undoubtedly caused by the embarrassing revelation that two thirds of all public appointees who declared a political affiliation were from one political party—the Labour party. I now turn to the bill that we have before us. My colleagues will highlight several other concerns about the provisions to abolish public bodies. I want to highlight areas that I believe weaken the bill. The bill suggests that the commissioner for public appointments may report to the Parliament if there are any breaches of the appointments code. The minister suggests that that can be done by an annual report. However, there is no duty on the commissioner to report at any other time and there is no duty on the commissioner to draw to the attention of Parliament any potential breaches.

As the deputy convener of the Standards Committee, I would like to say how much I agree with the convener of the Standards Committee. The standards commissioner in the Parliament has certain powers and responsibilities in relation to MSPs and the fact that the same powers and responsibilities are not being given to the commissioner for public appointments weakens the position. Matters are left entirely at the discretion of the commissioner, who, I am sure, will be a very good person. Obviously, the commissioner must be as independent as possible, but the Parliament must be informed of the actions of the commissioner to allow for scrutiny and the total transparency of the system and to maintain faith in the system. Ultimately, the Parliament holds ministers to account and we cannot do that unless the commissioner has been given a duty to report to the Parliament any breaches that they come across. The bill is also flawed in that it allows for the possibility of an appointment being made in breach of the code. In evidence, Roger McClure of the Scottish Funding Councils for Further and Higher Education agreed with me that, before an appointment was made, the commissioner should confirm that all the processes were followed, thereby avoiding an appointment that breached the rules. That would give the Parliament and the public a guarantee of the rigour of the process. I acknowledge what the minister said and also what he said when he gave evidence to the committee. He asserted that the bill allows the commissioner to intervene before an appointment is made and to tell Parliament that they do not think that the minister is acting in accordance with the code. However, that is not the same as the commissioner having a duty to do so. As the minister has said, whether there should be a public appointments committee to manage the new scrutiny role is a matter for the Parliament, which is the point that Alex Neil raised with the minister. While it is a matter for the Parliament, the Executive has the majority of the MSPs in the Parliament. Can the Executive guarantee that, if a resolution to establish a parliamentary committee is made, the Executive will support it? It is not the role of the Executive to establish a committee, but it is impossible to establish a committee without the Executive's support. It is surely self-evident that a committee should be established to give support and to ensure that the commissioner is able to carry out his or her own duties. Such a committee should be given as wide a remit as possible and the powers to bring matters to the attention of the commissioner. Quangos and public bodies in Scotland spend nearly £9 billion of public money. If the  commissioner is to ensure that public appointments in Scotland are beyond reproach, the minister needs to consider the question of duty. The creation of a commissioner for public appointments in Scotland is supported by all the political parties and all the respondents to the Executive's consultation process. The bill should be an opportunity to modernise and restore faith in the public appointments system. Jack McConnell has said that devolution will give us the opportunity to modernise our public appointments system, and so it should. The Scottish National Party will support the general principles of the bill, but we have concerns that the bill is not all that it could be and we hope that the minister will take on board our concerns at stage 2.

The minister said that the commissioner will be able to report to Parliament before an appointment is made if he believes that ministers have breached the code. Is there a duty on the commissioner to report to Parliament on such a matter? There is a difference between allowing the commissioner to report and requiring him to do so.

Given that the United Kingdom Government fully consulted local authorities in England and Wales on the terms of reference of the fire service review, will the Deputy First Minister explain why the Scottish Executive failed to consult COSLA on the subject? Will he confirm that COSLA will be fully involved in discussions about arrangements for emergency cover in the event of a strike?

I ask Bristow Muldoon to pronounce the word as "Salin"—I mean that kindly. I say it as a Fifer to someone who is not.

I am neither closing for the Scottish National Party, nor closing for the committee; I am speaking as an individual Standards Committee member, which is how I think it should be. I have listened with interest to the brief, but beautifully formed, debate. It is important that we go back to 1999, when the Standards Committee hoped to set up an inquiry into all aspects of lobbying. The reason why lobbying was important to the committee and filled some of our early discussions was that we were aware that the Parliament was set up at a time when the institution of Westminster had been discredited over such issues as cash for questions. There was a great desire among the people of Scotland that the Parliament should be different. I am sure that I am not alone in recalling that one of the aspirations that was often cited during the referendum campaign and the 1999 election campaign was that the Scottish Parliament should be different from that lot down at Westminster. That was the background to the initial discussions about standards and lobbying. At that point, as Kay Ullrich said, we found ourselves parachuted into an inquiry subsequently known as lobbygate. In the context of commercial lobbying organisations, it is important to remember what that inquiry was essentially about—a lobby company, Beattie Media, boasting to a potential client that it could deliver privileged access to ministers. The subsequent inquiry found that, on the evidence available, none of the ministers in question had transgressed. Why did that  commercial lobbying organisation boast that it could offer privileged access? It made that boast because, if it had not, the client might have wondered what the point of employing the firm was. I believe that lobbying is an essential part of the democratic process. Whether we are talking about the man who came to my office last week to lobby me about his concerns over fluoridation of the water supply or Help the Aged, Shelter Scotland and other voluntary organisations, they are all engaged in lobbying. As Kay Ullrich and others have said, the information that such bodies and individuals have provided has helped to inform debates in the Parliament. It has allowed us to make better legislation than we would otherwise have made. Commercial lobbying organisations fall into a different category. They lobby for profit and engage with the Parliament and parliamentarians on behalf of third parties. During our inquiry, it became clear that the commercial lobbying companies were lobbying heavily to influence the thinking of the Standards Committee. The inquiry took a long time. We listened to commercial lobbying organisations, trade unions, representative organisations and individuals. We also consulted MSPs. The report is not a rush job. We have worked on the issue since 1999.

Committee bills are unique, because they originate with committees. We have proposed the establishment of an ad hoc committee to scrutinise the bill, as happened with the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Bill. I anticipate that ad hoc committees will be set up to consider any future committee bills. That is the right and proper thing to do. I agree with many aspects of the Standards Committee's report, but I would like to distance myself from some of it. That is why I am speaking as an individual in this debate. I do not agree that a statutory registration scheme is enough or that the commercial lobbying organisations are being asked to give enough information. They are not being asked to detail the fees that they receive to lobby the Parliament on behalf of their clients. That is wrong—fees should be banded. I will lobby members of the Standards Committee and of future committees heavily on that issue. My main difficulty is with the desire of the  majority of committee members for a statutory registration scheme. Mike Rumbles, who knows a great deal about these matters, referred to such a scheme as the third way—somewhere between doing nothing and regulation. However, it is for us to propose regulations for the engagement of lobbying organisations with the Parliament. It is for us to regulate the activities of lobbying organisations, in the same way as we regulate the activities of MSPs through the code of conduct. I agree that the primary responsibility lies with MSPs. That is why I support the proposed changes to the code of conduct.

I will give way to the member in a minute. We have had these arguments before and will no doubt have them again. I do not accept that commercial lobbying companies should be able to play fast and loose with the reputation of the Parliament, as Beattie Media did in 1999. The act by a commercial lobbying company of promising something that it did not and could not deliver harmed the Parliament's reputation, which is of paramount importance—it is far more important than the reputations of individual members and the commercial considerations of lobbying companies.

I accept that. The first Standards Committee meeting that I missed was the meeting at which the committee signed off a report about which I feel strongly. That was no one's fault—it was simply one of those things that happen. I accept that the unanimous view of the committee members who were present at the meeting was that we should opt for registration rather than regulation. I disagree with that view and will continue to argue my case in the future. Having said that, I invite all members to support the motion. I look forward to contributing to the debate that will take place in future. Whatever happens, the system that has been proposed is robust. Whether we opt for registration or regulation, standards in this Parliament will be far higher than standards elsewhere. No other Parliament has proposed even a registration scheme. Such a scheme would be okay, but it would not go far enough. I will argue for regulation.

First, I thank Sam Jones and the Standards Committee clerking team, who have done all the hard work and guided us through this issue. Although much in our proposal is technical, the chamber must not underestimate the importance of rules on members' interests and paid advocacy. They not only underpin how we conduct ourselves as parliamentarians, but govern how we are perceived by the world at large. We need only go back to Westminster in the early 1990s to see how corrosive allegations and impropriety can be to the democratic process. As other members have pointed out, much of the public's disenchantment with politics and politicians probably has its roots in cash for questions and other scandals of the 1990s. However, it is important that we do not get allegations of sleaze out of proportion. It has been a busy parliamentary session for the Standards Committee, but for all the right reasons. Through the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002, we have established robust and transparent procedures for investigating complaints. We have produced a comprehensive code of conduct and—as we did today—we have not hesitated to make changes to it as we have learned from experience. We have also conducted a wide-ranging inquiry into lobbying, which we will debate later. The complaints that we have dealt with have generally been matters of protocol not probity. Today, following a comprehensive review of the Scotland Act 1998 (Transitory and Transitional Provisions) (Members' Interests) Order 1999, we seek the Parliament's agreement to introduce a committee bill. Other members have outlined the key elements of our proposals. We have recommended changes to the rules on gifts that will balance transparency with allowing family members to have legitimate privacy. I seem to recall that, when Karen Gillon was a member of the committee, the two of us discussed the fact that our husbands were mean. At that time, she said that she hoped to get a ring worth £250. I have looked at the register of members' interests and have found no such declaration. Therefore, I am forced to conclude that Karen never received the ring from her husband, Jim. That is a disgrace; after all, she has  had two children since then. We have suggested changes to the rules on shareholdings, which will make the registration and declaration of such interests far more meaningful. Moreover, we have proposed the mandatory registration of non-pecuniary interests, which we believe will enhance the current registration framework. The registration of such interests will not only strengthen our commitment to openness but provide a fuller picture of the experience and expertise of the member concerned. Every step of the way, we have tried to ensure that our response has been proportionate. It is not—and never will be—the Standards Committee's intention to overburden members with unnecessary bureaucratic rules that hamper the conduct of their parliamentary duties.

If Mr Gallie bears with me, I think that I will address his point. We are determined that the rules on members' interests will establish clear and rigorous standards that reflect the high expectations that we as elected members must strive to meet. I want to focus on the issue of paid employment, which was raised in the course of the debate. Following oral evidence in April, the committee considered whether MSPs should be permitted to take on paid employment. That consideration followed a suggestion from witnesses that the Parliament and the committee should be able to act if a member's outside employment impacted adversely on his or her parliamentary duties. The committee feels that the MSP's role should be a full-time commitment. However, provided that outside employment is properly registered and declared, we feel that any decision to accept such work is a matter for individual members' judgment. It is not for the Standards Committee or for the standards commissioner to judge whether a member's parliamentary work is being hampered by outside commitments. That is ultimately a matter for the electorate to decide. That said, it is vital that members' entries on paid outside employment in the register of members' interests contain sufficient information. As a result, details of the nature of the work and its regularity should be provided as set out in the code of conduct. I will address the matter of non-pecuniary interests and in particular the points that Phil Gallie raised. The bill will not allow members to decide for themselves whether their non-pecuniary interest necessitates an entry in the register. The committee deliberately went down the route of using the wording in the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc (Scotland) Act 2000. MSPs are required to register interests that the public might reasonably think could influence their action.  Whether something should be registered is not a matter of individual conscience. An MSP must bear in mind the fact that the test is whether the public could reasonably expect that membership of an organisation might influence the member's actions.

I will let Phil Gallie intervene in a minute, although I must say that I was disappointed with his earlier comments. It is incumbent on every member of the Parliament to uphold the Parliament's standards and protect its reputation. I think that Phil Gallie's statement was appalling—notwithstanding the fact that the Parliament may pass an act with which he will not comply.

Comprehensive guidance, which will include illustrative examples, will be issued to all MSPs but, ultimately, the test is not whether the member believes that there is an interest to declare; ultimately, the test—as in the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc (Scotland) Act 2000—is whether the member has an interest that the public might reasonably think could influence their action. The test is not a personal test; it is about what the public might reasonably think could influence a member's action.

Comprehensive guidance will be produced. If we were discussing issues of morality, I imagine that an MSP who is a member of a particular church and has a certain point of view might well register that, and that the public might reasonably think that the member should register it. Comprehensive guidance that contains illustrative examples will be produced. I hope that we will all register all our interests to ensure that the Parliament, which is supposed to be open, transparent and accountable, genuinely meets those standards. The situation is the same for all members. We believe that the rules on paid advocacy must  be clarified and that the flaw in the current MIO must be addressed. Paid advocacy is a serious offence, not only in the sense that it is a criminal offence, like other transgressions of the MIO, but because it is the ultimate betrayal of trust. It strikes at the heart of the relationship between an MSP and the electorate. Any such allegations will be treated with the utmost seriousness by the Standards Committee, the standards commissioner and, if necessary, the procurator fiscal. It is crucial that the rules on paid advocacy are clear. Although the Scotland Act 1998 is unambiguous, the omission of the link between the payment of benefit and an MSP's subsequent parliamentary action is a failing of the current MIO. Members may recall that that omission gave us great concern in late 1999. The proposal is not just about parliamentary housekeeping; it is about individual members' accountability for their actions and decisions in the Parliament and about maintaining the highest standards of integrity and probity. Our conduct impacts not only on our individual reputations but on the credibility of the Parliament as a democratic institution. That is why I urge colleagues from all parties to support the bill. On whether we will get the bill passed by 2003, I have great faith in the parliamentary draftsmen. We have done a lot of the hard work on the thinking behind the bill already. The bill will be a doddle for the parliamentary draftspeople who drew up the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002. I believe that there will be sufficient time for us to make the bill an act by 2003, so that the next intake of parliamentarians to this democratic institution will have the benefit of an MIO that will guide them, protect them and ensure that the people of Scotland have faith in the parliamentarians and the institution.

Can Phil Gallie name one act that has been rushed through the Scottish Parliament? Is it not the case that Westminster has repeatedly had to introduce other legislation to close loopholes? Have we had to do that yet?

Further to your comments, Presiding Officer, can you confirm that that code will, in effect, be rules of engagement that are agreed by you and the business managers and which, I hope, will be agreed by the parties? That code will not replace Parliament's code of conduct but will be more about rules of engagement in the run-up to the election period that will guide the behaviour of MSPs, parliamentary staff who are candidates and others.

I support Mike Rumbles's and Euan Robson's comments. The Standards Committee found paragraph 10.2.1 in the code of conduct to be  inadequate. As Mike Rumbles said, there is no intention to gag members. Press comment that a complaint about an MSP is to be made to the standards adviser is an unedifying spectacle. Such comments are sometimes encouraged for the sake of a press release or a quick soundbite, regardless of the effect on the MSP concerned. Many MSPs think that the Standards Committee knows all about the progress of complaints, but although the newspapers might say that a complaint is to be made to the Standards Committee, the committee does not know about complaints until stage 3 of the process. It is right and proper that the standards adviser—or, next year, the standards commissioner—should carry out stages 1 and 2, which are the initial complaint and investigation, in private. Members of the Standards Committee first hear about a complaint when a report on it comes from the standards adviser. At that point, the Standards Committee takes over. All further evidence is heard in public and decisions are taken in public. I support Mike Rumbles's view that, in the run-up to the 2003 elections, we do not want the Standards Committee and the complaints procedure to be used by MSPs to settle scores or to score political points over rivals. MSPs should display more grown-up behaviour. I know from experience that there is nothing worse than finding that the newspapers have been briefed that a complaint is to made against oneself. I suffered that, not at the hands of a fellow MSP, but at the hands of a member of the public, who faxed her letter of complaint to the press. Of course, it was found subsequently that there was no case to answer. That situation was difficult, but I dealt with it robustly. I defended myself and said that the allegation was not true. However, it is not helpful to any member to find in the press details of a complaint that is subsequently considered and in respect of which the member is exonerated. Often, complaints do not reach the Standards Committee. I ask all members to support the proposed change to the code of conduct. I ask also for all members' consideration as we approach the 2003 elections. Let us conduct our election campaigns out there in the streets and not in here, in the Standards Committee. I am conscious of the fact that the SNP chief whip is sitting at my side. On this and on every standards issue that will ever come before the Parliament, the SNP will have a free vote. There is no SNP whipping on standards issues in the Parliament. That is how it should be, and I hope that the other parties will act similarly.

I actually said that the bill's provisions are welcome, and indeed have been welcomed throughout Scotland. Local government will particularly appreciate the power of well-being. However, I also said that people are disappointed with the bill's scope. They feel that it does not go far enough and that it does not include many of the provisions that the Executive's consultation paper in 2001 said that it would include. It certainly does not cover PR in local government.

Keith Harding and Bill Aitken have said that the power of general competence is unnecessary. Keith Harding said that, as leader of Stirling Council, he could do anything that he needed to do without such a power of general competence. However, the Royal Commission on Local Government in Scotland, chaired by Lord Wheatley way back in 1969, concluded that there should be a power of general competence for local authorities. The European Charter of Local Self-Government, which was established in 1985, supports the concept of local government having substantial freedom within the limits of the law. Article 4(2) states: "Local authorities shall, within the limits of the law, have full discretion to exercise their initiative with regard to any matter which is not excluded from their competence nor assigned to any authority."  Unsurprisingly, the Conservative Government at that time did not believe that a case had been made for the need for the UK to adopt an international agreement. However, that same Conservative Government, accepting in 1996 that a clear signal should be given that it recognised the value of local government, recommended the creation of a new statutory power of local competence. That power is indeed the power of well-being. It might not go as far as the power of general competence that McIntosh supported, but it is an incremental step in that direction. I am surprised by the comments of the Conservatives today. When they are in Government, they say one thing and when they are out of Government, they say something else.

If I recall correctly, Mr Harding said that he was against the power of general competence because when he was the leader of Stirling Council, that council could do anything that it wanted to do. It is strange that the Conservatives support the provisions in the bill but will not vote for the general principles of the bill. Tavish Scott talked about milk and honey in response to Bruce Crawford's comments about wine and local authorities. Perhaps Bruce Crawford was referring to the fact that Fife Council allowed £650,000 of public money to go down the tubes in supporting the Gothenburg in Cardenden. We might still need an investigation into that. I will talk about the scope of the ministerial amendments in the miscellaneous provisions part of the bill, to which the deputy minister referred. I would like him to address that point today and to give members some idea of what amendments he is considering lodging at stage 2. Every member who has spoken has said that best value must apply to all public services equally and consistently, and that there should be a statutory duty. I invite the minister to respond to that point and to say that he will lodge an amendment that will achieve that. As the Local Government Committee has suggested, there should be a duty on local authorities, and on all of their partners who have a duty to participate, to report on community planning. The ministers are empowered to issue regulations and I ask the minister to accept the recommendations of the Local Government Committee that those regulations should cover a number of issues that are laid out in paragraph 57  of the committee's report. I know that it is not within the scope of the bill to discuss what those regulations might be, but the minister must give a clear indication as to whether he accepts the suggestions about what those regulations should include. That will impact on possible amendments at stage 2. He owes it to the chamber to give an indication of what he is thinking. The minister said that the power of well-being should be seen as a power of first resort, not a power of last resort. That is welcome by everybody in the chamber. Local authorities must be free to act for the well-being and the good of their area where they are not specifically forbidden to so do. As Angus MacKay rightly said, we will support the bill. The bill is incremental change. It is not the kind of change that local government in Scotland needs; local government needs much more radical change. It certainly needs bolder change, in the words of the Prime Minister. The bill represents a very timid attempt to change local government.

I thank Robin Harper for drawing my attention to the fact that in the one minute I have left I will be addressing the issue of PR. We will support the bill because it is incremental change, but it is not the radical change that local government needs. For example, it does not include proportional representation for local government. That is the one thing that would transform local government in Scotland. It is the one thing that would renew local democracy. The SNP makes two pledges. First, the local government elections that the Executive has combined with the Scottish Parliament elections will be separated again. Secondly, the Scottish National Party will introduce proportional representation for local government. No ifs, no buts, no maybes, no coalitions—next year, the SNP Administration will bring in PR for local government.

The SNP will support the broad principles of the bill, but we believe that it is a wasted opportunity. The one thing that cannot be said about the bill is that it is bold; indeed, it is not. Although it addresses some of the issues in local government today, it does not represent the kind of reform that could have been introduced and which would revitalise Scottish local government. The Local Government in Scotland Bill was to be the Executive's flagship local government bill, but the Executive has delivered a bill that covers best value, community planning and the power of well-being, but goes no further. I was interested in the minister's final remarks when he said that he will lodge miscellaneous amendments to the bill at stage 2 and that he will share those with the convener of the Local Government Committee. I would like to hear from the minister when he is summing up what kind of amendments he will lodge. The McIntosh commission, to which the minister referred, considered the whole issue of renewing local democracy. Many of us had hoped that many of the McIntosh recommendations would have been included in the Executive's flagship local government bill. The measures in the bill are perfectly reasonable, but there is no mention of councillors, nor is there mention of proportional representation for local government, which would be a significant measure that would renew local government and release its potential. There are a number of concerns about well-being, community planning and best value. At this stage, I pay tribute to the work of the Local Government Committee, which has—as it always does—scrutinised the bill thoroughly and fairly. The members of the committee have the thanks of the rest of us in the Parliament for the work that they have done on this and other bills. I turn now to best value. I feel—so, indeed, did the Local Government Committee—that securing best value could become problematic if different public bodies are subject to different guidance, which would result in different public bodies potentially interpreting and pursuing best value in different ways. That could lead to problems in achieving best value through partnership working, ultimately devaluing best value and undermining partnership working practices. When that issue was raised, the deputy minister indicated in a memorandum that steps would be taken to ensure  that guidance "is consistent between local government and these other bodies" I am not persuaded that guidance alone is enough. If bodies are to work with local authorities, it is only right and proper that best value be applied equally to them all and that the matter is not left to interpretation. There also appears to be uncertainty over whether the powers and duties of the Auditor General in relation to the Scottish Executive and public bodies have been modified to take best value into account. An element of confusion has been introduced, but that confusion could be remedied easily if the bill were to provide for common guidance, audit and enforcement. There is also a lack of clarity around the duty to secure best value and the duty in relation to community planning. It has not been considered necessary to use primary legislation to place on accountable officers a duty to secure best value, whereas it has been considered necessary to do so in order to place a duty on them to participate in the community planning process. That apparent double standard calls into question the Executive's commitment to best value. Although I welcome the minister's comments, I would still like the bill to include a statutory framework for best value that would be applied throughout the public sector. If best value and community planning are to work and if they are to give local authorities the impetus to develop policies, the bill must include that statutory framework. Local businesses and local communities have an impact on sustainable development, which we must consider in relation to securing best value. The bill's policy memorandum places great emphasis on sustainable development and on how "local authorities will want to consider the impact on sustainable development" of the bill. We must recognise and acknowledge the requirements of sustainable development in order to allow councils to address those requirements. The lack of a definition of sustainable development causes another problem. Should that definition appear in the bill, or will the statutory guidelines contain a sufficiently robust definition? It would be useful if the deputy minister would indicate—before stage 2—what the guidelines are likely to include. If it appears that the Executive's proposals for statutory guidance are insufficiently robust, members of the Local Government Committee and others would be better informed as to whether to lodge amendments to the bill on that matter. It is not good enough to leave until a later date the debate on whether the guidelines are sufficiently robust.  The work of local authorities is vital to the well-being of the communities that they serve. Any changes to working practices must come under the scrutiny of the Parliament. Under the provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Act 2000, the principal accountable officer for Scotland—the permanent secretary—can change the terms of reference of other accountable officers to include best value. That also means that the principal accountable officer could remove best value without the approval of the Parliament, which is simply unacceptable. The functions of council accountable officers must fall under the scrutiny of the Parliament, and the Parliament must have the power to scrutinise any binding directions to councils on what they do and how they do it. It is a matter of concern that such an undertaking will not come under the scrutiny of the Parliament or of the Local Government Committee. When the deputy minister sums up the debate, I would be grateful if he would explain what the term "substantial harm" means with reference to issuing such directions. I repeat that the bill is a lost opportunity. It fails to address some of the major issues that affect local government, which is a disappointment, given that we are three and a bit years into the life of the Parliament. I am disappointed by the bill, as, I believe, are many others. The Executive has failed to deliver—the bill could have done so much more. Although the broad principles of the bill are perfectly reasonable, it has been a wasted exercise.

The recently published report into racism in Scotland claimed that one in every four Scots admits to being racist. That is a hard fact for us to accept, but we must accept it if we hope ever to make progress towards ridding our society of racism. For many years, we in Scotland deluded ourselves by believing that racism was not a problem here. Kate Maclean mentioned the need for political parties to get their acts together. For many years, the Scottish National Party has had a policy whereby anyone found guilty of racist remarks or behaviour is expelled. I would like the other parties to make a similar commitment. Over the years, many people have made the journey to Scotland. Some have come to make new lives for themselves and their families, some have been forced to flee their homelands and many have come because of poverty, hardship or violence. They have chosen to settle here and to make Scotland their home. Many members of the Parliament are first or second-generation Scots. Many people have enriched our country and have brought a diversity to Scotland that makes it the country that it is. Scotland is a warm and welcoming country and we must not allow a minority to blight our society with racism. All Scotland can come together on the issue. I welcome the campaign to stamp out racism in all forms, whether intentional or unintentional. Racism takes many forms, including taunts in the playground, job discrimination, physical attacks and the use of derogatory words such as Chinkie and Paki. It is the responsibility of all members, at all times, to refuse to accept racism and to attempt to put a stop to it. The number of racist incidents that are reported to the police continues to rise. At present, there are more than 3,000 such incidents a year. Many members of ethnic minority communities feel frustrated when no action is taken after they have reported incidents, which leads many members of those communities not to report such incidents at all. Victims of racist crime must be supported and, more important, must feel that they are supported and that the authorities take their experiences seriously. The Parliament has been shocked by the Chhokar case and by the experience of the Stephen Lawrence case. We have a responsibility to learn from those experiences to ensure that, in three or four years' time, we do not receive further reports about how badly people have been treated. There must be monitoring of the relevant  authorities to maintain correct procedures. Support for victims must be implemented. Measures such as the use of interpreters in trials and feedback from the court system are an absolute prerequisite. There must be action and support at grass-roots level. Michael Matheson referred to the need to give organisations on the ground the resources and the support that they need to do their jobs. We support initiatives in our schools to educate our youngsters and to inform them that racism is not to be tolerated. We must encourage our children to learn to appreciate the diversity of our Scottish nation. We have a responsibility to ensure through positive and sustained action that all Scotland's citizens—those who are here and those who have yet to come—feel that they are part of Scotland. Racism has no place in Scotland. The eradication of racism from our land could be one of the Parliament's greatest achievements.

The Cabinet has agreed to publish a draft bill on PR for local government, although PR is not the stated policy of the Executive. Can the First Minister explain why taxpayers' money is being used to pay for the legal, civil service and drafting costs of a draft bill on an issue that is not the policy of the Executive? Does he agree that the cost of the proposed draft bill should be met by the Labour party and the Scottish Liberal Democrats?

The minister will be aware that homelessness applications to Scottish local authorities were running at record levels last year. Never since records started have we had so many applications. Is it not about time that the minister stopped talking about action plans and actually took some action?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would you care to invite those members who made declarations of interest to declare what those interests were?

Will the minister confirm how many times HRH Prince Charles has written to him?

Iain Smith would have had more credibility had he  joined me, Robin Harper and the community of north-east Fife at the recent public meeting in Newport to oppose the spring trials about which he now complains. On 29 May, my colleague Bruce Crawford drew Ross Finnie's attention to a report from the European Environment Agency, which highlighted the fact that GM pollen can be transferred beyond 10km. Will the First Minister explain why the scientific information has been ignored and why Ross Finnie and the Lib-Lab coalition continue to put the environment of Fife at risk by approving an autumn GM crop planting in Newport?

Will the minister give way?

What representations have been made to the United Kingdom Government over the pay claim of the Fire Brigades Union? What arrangements have been put in place in the event of a strike? The First Minister is bound to be aware that limited action has been taken by the fire brigades in both Fife and Strathclyde. The Scottish public would expect some reassurance that arrangements are in place and would like to know what arrangements the Cabinet has made.

I recognise that the weather in the area that Jamie Stone represents is cold and windy. However, does Jamie Stone recognise that we have a greater number of deaths each winter per head of population in Scotland than is the case in Siberia? If cold, wet, damp, windy conditions can be coped with in Siberia, how on earth is it that, in oil-rich Scotland, we cannot cope with them?

The debate is welcome. I know that members of all parties are as committed as I am to ending fuel poverty. I welcome the new research that the minister announced, but we know some facts about fuel poverty already. We know that only those who are poor live in fuel poverty. People who are old, young or who have a long-term illness are more likely to live in a cold, damp home. People who live in cold, damp homes are almost certainly poor, because if they were not poor, they would not live in cold, damp homes—they would have alternatives. Fuel poverty is a scandal in oil-rich 21 st century Scotland. We pay a high price for it in ill-health and excess heating bills and in stress and worry for the families who are involved. I welcome the Government's central heating initiative and I acknowledge that it has made a difference to many people, but I will highlight the adverse effects of fuel poverty on two of my constituents in central Fife and how the Government's programme has not met their needs. The first constituent is a 46-year-old disabled man whose central heating system does not work. He has mobility problems because of childhood polio and he has sciatica. He also takes medication for irritable bowel syndrome. However, he does not receive disability living allowance. He is unemployed and an owner-occupier. As a result of his illnesses, he spends much time at home, where the lack of central heating exacerbates his health problems. He needs a warm house, but because of his age, he is ineligible for help under the Executive's scheme. My office has spent months trying to assist him. We have contacted the local authority, charities and other agencies to try to find assistance for that young man. So far, we have been unable to offer him any assistance.  I would like to hear from the minister how that young man is to be assisted to get himself out of fuel poverty. The second constituent is a pensioner from Glenrothes. She is entitled to help under the Executive's central heating scheme, but she has been informed that, because of the backlog, new central heating will not be installed in her home for a further 18 months. That will leave her throughout this winter in a cold, damp home. She phoned me last week and said that she cannot face another winter in that house without central heating. She is arranging to pay from her savings to have central heating installed. I have pursued fuel poverty over the life of the Parliament. In last year's debate on fuel poverty, I voiced my concerns about the central heating scheme criteria. I will restate that Shelter Scotland said at that time that it would be "very concerned if the Executive think their central heating scheme will be a major step in eradicating fuel poverty." It is a step forward, but it is not a major step and we should not allow the Executive to believe that that is the case. I chose to highlight two individual cases to expose the inadequacies in the Executive's scheme. Common sense dictates that those two constituents should be given help and that they should be given help now. They should not have the worry and stress of facing another Scottish winter in cold, damp homes. I believe that Margaret Curran is personally committed to tackling poverty. I urge her to look again at the central heating programme and consider ways of helping many more people out of fuel poverty.

I add my support for the motions to appoint Alice Brown and the candidates who have been nominated for the post of deputy ombudsman. The process has been good and it has commanded all-party support. I am not aware of the other applicants or of their talents and expertise, which Lord James Douglas-Hamilton described. I am certain that Alice Brown, with all her experience of governance in Scotland, will be a welcome choice as the Scottish public services ombudsman. I have no doubt that she and her deputies were chosen on merit.

It is customary to thank the clerks to a committee for all their work. On this occasion, on behalf of my colleagues on the Standards Committee and the ad hoc committee, I offer my sincere thanks to Sam Jones and her team and to David Cullum of the non-Executive bills unit. The bill is most complicated, as it deals with the relationship between the standards commissioner and the Standards Committee. I pay tribute to the clerks and the non-Executive bills unit for all the help and guidance that they gave us. As Ken Macintosh said, we are considering the bill at a time of growing concern about people's disengagement from politics, which is reflected in low election turnouts and a general atmosphere of cynicism about the motives of politicians. In reality, that scepticism and cynicism about the ethical conduct of MSPs and the suspicion of endemic sleaze are misplaced. In this Parliament, we are governed by a tough code of conduct, which the members of the Parliament put in place. Breaches of the rules on the registration and declaration of members' interests are a criminal offence. To date, the Standards Committee has never had to recommend the imposition of sanctions on a member. The few breaches of the code that we have identified have related to matters of protocol, not of probity. However, we cannot afford to be complacent and we must acknowledge that although public cynicism might not be well founded, it exists and has the potential to erode the democratic process. I am sure that I am not the only member to notice that not one member of the press is present for this debate. Perhaps the press simply does not want to report a debate about standards in the Parliament and the good news about the independence of our process. By passing the bill, we will demonstrate the Parliament's commitment to upholding the highest standards of integrity among members. The appointment of a commissioner will inject an independent element into the complaints procedure. He or she will consider complaints and conduct investigations in private, independently of the Standards Committee. The commissioner will also have the backing of statutory powers to compel evidence. The four-stage complaints process that we have developed strikes the right balance between the need for investigations to be carried out in private and the demand for transparency. We make no apology for proposing that the commissioner's inquiries take place in private, because we simply cannot countenance trial by the media. Speculation in the press is not only unfair to the complainer and members, but it will erode  confidence in the complaints procedure. I make a plea to colleagues from all parties to ensure that the complaints procedure is not used to settle political scores. The later stage of the investigative process, which is oral evidence to the Standards Committee, will of course take place in public. Both the commissioner's report and the committee's report will also be published, together with any relevant evidence. It is important that the member, the complainer and the wider public see the reasons for the findings of the commissioner and of the committee. The bill marks the end of a long journey for the Standards Committee, which began in 2000 with the models of investigation inquiry. That concluded that an independent element was critical if the Parliament's handling of complaints about conduct was to have credibility. By enacting the bill, all members of the Parliament will make our commitment to accountability and integrity a reality. I support the bill.

Will the minister give way on that point?

I thank the minister for giving me my Sunday name, yet again. He knows full well that I was making no reference to Bob Black and that I never suggested that Audit Scotland is not independent. I was referring to the Labour cronies that the Executive has stuffed on health boards and NHS trusts the length and breadth of Scotland. They are the ones who know what the Executive wants to be done.

The Audit Scotland report has shown up the disgrace of the waiting time fiddle that is confusing for patients and distressing for their relatives. The minister has repeated the Audit Scotland finding that there is "no evidence of systematic or deliberate irregularities in the management of waiting lists." I am reminded of a passage in a book by John Pilger, in which he wrote about Robert Maxwell and the apologists for Robert Maxwell who used to say, "I am a journalist. Maxwell never told me what I had to write." Of course Maxwell did not do so. The journalists knew exactly what they had to do. The case is the same for the Labour cronies who stuff health boards and health trusts in Scotland.  The minister does not have to tell them what to do about waiting lists. They just know that they have to make the list look better for the Executive.

I am sure that the minister will withdraw that remark. I did not refer to Audit Scotland but to the cronies that he has stuffed on health boards and health trusts. Those people do not have to be told what to do; they know what they have to do. They have to make the Executive look good. Audit Scotland has exposed the waiting list fiddle and the minister failed to address that point today. Tayside NHS Board has taken existing in-patients and out-patients off its waiting lists and has not recorded elective admissions. In Fife, procedures have been reclassified and patients waiting for such procedures who could have been treated as out-patients have been taken off waiting lists. New referrals are not added to the waiting list if they are already in-patients. Some patients retain their waiting-time guarantees, while others do not. The situation is confusing and distressing for patients and their relatives. Patients are left worried and unsure about which list they are on, how long the list is, what the waiting time is and what will happen to them. On Tuesday of this week, The Courier and Advertiser highlighted the circumstances of Mrs May Cullen. For those members who did not read the article, here are the details. Mrs May Cullen from Burntisland was admitted to hospital in March and was advised to seek an appointment with a neurologist with respect to her condition. She suffers from seizures and epilepsy had already been ruled out. Mrs Cullen received a reply from Fife Acute Hospitals NHS Trust telling her that the first appointment with a consultant would be early in 2004—almost two years away. Mary Mair, the trust's directorate manager of medicine, wrote to Mrs Cullen and admitted that the delay was "unacceptable to yourself and to the trust." The unacceptable delay is not helped by the fact that there is no neurosurgeon in Fife. More worryingly, Fife NHS Board has known of that situation for some time, but has refused to make resources available. The situation is intolerable. The distress that has been caused to Mrs Cullen and patients like her the length and breadth of Scotland cannot be allowed to continue. I challenge the minister to explain to Mrs Cullen  why she will have to wait so long for an out-patient appointment and what he intends to do about that. The six-month guarantee is welcome, but it will do absolutely nothing for people like Mrs Cullen.

The minister misses the point. Mrs Cullen is an out-patient. She will get no waiting time guarantee.

Exactly, but she has no guarantee of when she will be seen. It is completely unacceptable that the minister will not roll out the system to allow out-patients to be given a waiting time guarantee. Mrs Cullen will have to wait two years and then she will perhaps get a waiting time guarantee of six months for treatment. That is not helping at the moment. It is quite clear that, while the Executive fiddles the figures, the people of Scotland are suffering. It is time that the Executive got a grip of the situation and gave waiting time guarantees to people at every single stage of the process through the system, including seeing a GP and seeing a consultant at an out-patient clinic. That is what people like Mrs Cullen are crying out for and that is what the minister should be doing.

I congratulate Iain Smith on bringing the bill to the Parliament. It is an ideal subject for a member's bill and has received support from all the MSPs in Mid Scotland and Fife. The bill reinstates to the University of St Andrews the ability to award a  postgraduate degree in research in medicine. The University of St Andrews believes that the course will have a knock-on effect in the local area. The bill will be good for St Andrews and for Fife and I am glad to be able to add my support to it.

I welcome the additional money for local authorities. The minister has said repeatedly today that the money for local authorities is at record levels. If that is the case, why do local authorities need an additional £95 million for the core local services, such as cleaning up graffiti, collecting litter collection and filling potholes?

Marilyn Livingstone and I know full well what the railway system in Fife is like. Does she honestly believe that the investment that is being made in the Fife railway is satisfactory? Does she not think that we could do the job better here?

The Parliament is asked yet again to support a Sewel motion on a bill that will amend Scottish legislation. The motion that is before us seeks to amend the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to allow Scottish ministers to make regulations to aid the mobility of persons who have guide dogs and who use private hire vehicles. That is a welcome outcome with which no one will disagree, but it is unacceptable that, yet again, the UK Parliament will legislate on behalf of the Scottish Parliament. Yet again, we see the Executive's inability to legislate for the people of Scotland, reliant as it is on Sewel motions to bail it out when its own legislative programme is found wanting. The motion also concerns another piece of legislation that relates to local government matters in Scotland. In recent months, four members have suggested measures that could easily be incorporated into a new civic government bill. Those measures concern litter, dog fouling, fireworks and hedges. Those are obviously matters of public concern. Individual members have undertaken the work that is involved and have had the foresight to see in which areas current legislation needs to be addressed. Meanwhile, the Executive has waited for Sewel motions to appear, as it has done on so many occasions. The SNP wants the needs and concerns of persons who have disabilities to be addressed properly, not as a mere add-on to English legislation through Sewel motions. It is time for the Executive to act like an Executive and to stop hiding behind Sewel motions and the work of others. We need an overhaul of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. That is overdue and would take care of the measure that is proposed and many others.

I congratulate the members of the Local Government Committee and the committee's clerks on their work in compiling the report. I pay particular tribute to Trish Godman—the  convener—to Sylvia Jackson and to all members who have belonged to the committee since it started. The inquiry was long and, as other members know, I was a member of the committee for a short time while the inquiry was being conducted and the work load was considerable. The Parliament should commend the committee and others who carried that work load for such a long time. The McIntosh report of 1999 recommended that an independent inquiry into local government finance should be instituted immediately. The Executive refused to do so, which is why the Local Government Committee undertook the work on behalf of the Parliament. Again, I commend the committee for doing so. The committee took evidence from many organisations and individuals and its report highlights several areas of concern. The SNP does not, however, agree with all the report's recommendations. We do not, for example, support the return of business rates to local authority control. We are not persuaded by arguments that the return of business rates to local authority control would increase business opportunities and expansion, nor do we agree that doing so would increase revenue to local authorities. It is more than likely that the Executive would give with one hand and take away with the other. The end result would be that local government finance would remain in the chaotic position that it is in at the moment. Local government finance is in chaos. There is a lack of transparency and a lack of agreement between local authorities and the Executive about how much money should go into local government and how much should be ring fenced. We spend so much time arguing about local government finance that there is no time to reach a baseline agreement on a definition of local government finance and of how much money is involved. However, the argument about that is sterile. We should instead concentrate on delivering the public services that we all need. The Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities disagree about the percentage and the amount of funds that should be ring fenced. Their disagreement is silly and needs to be sorted out as soon as possible. Such disagreements damage the good work of local government. The lack of transparency in local government finance between the money that is raised and the services that are provided leaves local residents confused about who delivers what. If we, as citizens, are asked to come out and vote in local council elections, the least that politicians can do is ensure that local council finances are conducted openly and transparently. All councils are financially responsible and accountable to the electorate.

I will come to ring fencing in a moment. The Local Government Committee became sidelined into discussing restructuring of council tax bands. To do that was merely to tinker around the edges of local government finance instead of making the root-and-branch reform that is required. As I said, the notion of restoring business rates to local government control should be opposed. The business community firmly opposes such a move and the SNP will not sanction penalisation of local businesses in order to overcome the inadequacies of central funding to councils. The Executive should consider a local income tax that is based on ability to pay, which the SNP has advocated in the past. The introduction of a local income tax would bring accountability and fairness to local funding. That proposal is supported by various organisations and it is recommended in the Local Government Committee's report. I agree with Trish Godman that the proposal for local income tax is radical and I am extremely disappointed that the Executive has not accepted the committee's recommendation to consider local income tax in the short and medium-term. There is agreement throughout the chamber that there should be examination of how we raise the money for local government. The proposal for a local income tax has much to commend it. I, along with the members of the Local Government Committee, commend that proposal to the Executive; I hope that the Executive will reconsider its rejection of that proposal. Ring fencing of funding erodes the financial responsibility and freedom of local authorities. It is rigid and bureaucratic and it weakens co-ordination of services. It creates pressure to ring fence other services and can sometimes generate an almost perverse outcome. No one denies that, in some circumstances, ring fencing should be accepted; however, the problem is that neither COSLA nor the Executive can agree about the level of local government finance that is ring fenced. Until that is sorted out, we will find it difficult to track the amount of local government spending that is available for core services and the amount that is available for ring fencing. Council services are no longer being addressed by core services. COSLA believes that almost 30 per cent of local authority funding is either ring fenced or  centrally directed. If that is the case, such a situation is untenable. Andy Kerr shakes his head. That is precisely the problem: the Executive and COSLA—

Oh, go on then.

I said that I am not opposed to ring fencing. The problem is that there is no agreement between COSLA, which represents most of the local authorities, and the Executive about the amount of funding that is ring fenced. I want to move on to PFI. We heard much evidence on that subject, particularly from Dougald Middleton from Ernst & Young. PFI should not and must not be used for local government capital projects. As the evidence shows time and again, such projects are costly to the public purse, do not deliver value for money and are now being rejected by councils such as West Dunbartonshire Council in favour of not-for-profit trusts. We must give local authorities the ability to establish projects such as new schools that deliver true value for money and core services for the community. In its written evidence, Ernst & Young pointed out that developing such trusts would "deliver tangible benefits in terms of empowering the procuring authority", and went on to say that local trusts would "deliver enhanced value for money". The committee report recommends that the Executive should work to develop alternatives to conventional PFI/PPP schemes and that that must be implemented as a priority. As the Executive has accepted that recommendation, I hope that it will work towards the establishment of not-for-profit trusts. From the evidence that I heard at the Local Government Committee, it is clear that PFI is neither transparent nor does it offer value for money, and that it does not provide the kind of services that we need. When we ask ourselves what local government is for, and what the whole debate is about, the answer is delivery of high-quality public services. It is important that we do not overlook that. Local government must be financed in an open, transparent and publicly accountable way and it must deliver core services. An inordinate amount of time and hard work has been spent preparing  the report, so I hope that the Executive translates that time and hard work into action, resolves the confusion, addresses the imbalance, removes some of the ring fencing and abolishes PFI. It is time for the Executive to act. It is time to give our councils resources in a clear and simple way. Indeed, it is time to deliver high-value public services for the people of Scotland.

I have listened to the minister's list of potential penalties but, in reality, nobody has been convicted or fined. It is all very well to say that environmental health officers are responsible for dealing with noise, but the bombs go off, the people who are responsible disappear and there is no way that the legislation can be enforced.

I congratulate Shona Robison on securing this evening's debate. The issue has attracted her attention for a long time and she should be congratulated on her pursuit of it. I declare an interest: my birthday is on Guy Fawkes day—now members know when to send me presents. When I was young, I was given fireworks as my birthday present. By that I mean that my father used to set them off in the garden. It took me until I was about nine years old to realise that I had been cheated. My present went up in smoke, whereas everyone else's presents lasted at least a few days. The problem of fireworks is indisputably getting worse. The voluntary code is simply not working. Shona Robison mentioned the proposal for a licensing scheme, which could ensure tighter restrictions on sales. There has to be a greater restriction on what vendors can do. The idea of vendor licensing has been supported by police and local authorities. Let us consider how the names of fireworks have changed: we now hear about Atomic Warlords, Midnight Thunders and Superblitzknall rockets. In our day, we just had Catherine wheels and rockets. The new names suggest the extent to which the power of fireworks has increased; as their power has increased, so has the danger to many people. We know that people with learning difficulties,  people with mental illness and old folk can be absolutely terrified by the bangs from the fireworks that we have these days. Things are bad enough in the three-week period leading up to Guy Fawkes day; at least when we hear a big bang then we know that there is a good chance that it is a firework. It is the use of fireworks outwith that three-week period that is causing the most distress. I am sure that some old folk must wonder what is happening when fireworks go off at 10 o'clock at night. Much more needs to be done and I look forward to hearing the minister's remarks. The issue has cross-party support, because we have all been contacted about it by our constituents, who are extremely concerned. It is now beyond the time when the Executive should have taken action on the matter.

I welcome the bill and congratulate Iain Smith on its introduction. Although the bill is modest, it is nonetheless important for the University of St  Andrews and for the wider Fife community. The bill will allow the university to offer a new postgraduate degree for research in medicine. As Alex Neil said, the University of St Andrews was established in 1411. Over the centuries, it has contributed significantly to Scotland and the rest of the world. The postgraduate degree course will give qualified medical practitioners the opportunity to take up research and will be particularly beneficial for those who choose not to undertake the alternative PhD course, which takes three years to complete. Some discussion has taken place on whether St Andrews is old-fashioned. That has never been my view, although some of the university's practices may be a little old-fashioned. I refer in particular to the Kate Kennedy pageant, but boys will be boys, or rather boys will be girls—it is up to them. NHS Fife has welcomed the bill, as have the other universities in Scotland. I am sure that the bill will pass speedily through the next two parliamentary stages.

Iain Smith will be aware that our proposal for a bill that would introduce the single transferable vote—a Liberal Democrat policy—is on the table. He will also know that, because of the refusal of Liberal Democrat and Labour members to sign up to the bill, the parliamentary authorities have given no support with the drafting. I make a pledge that the bill will be in the system from next week. Will the member back it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Although I am intrigued to hear Euan Robson's speech, is it common practice for a junior minister to speak as a Liberal Democrat during a debate about a matter that is not his subject?

The hospitality that has been shown and the effort that has been made by so many organisations have made it a pleasure for the Parliament to be in Aberdeen this week. In time for reflection, reference was made to "The Lord of the Rings", but this fine chamber reminded Mike Russell and me more of Hogwarts school. Perhaps we are former pupils. I will not start on a discordant note. The SNP welcomes the Executive's stated commitment to e-government, which is an aspiration that I am sure is shared by all parties in the chamber. I recently travelled to Estonia, not for the Eurovision song contest—

Why not indeed. No, we went as part of the parliamentary delegation. We were struck by the similarities between the Estonian  Parliament and our own Scots Parliament in the commitment to providing services and to ensuring that parliamentary proceedings are online for those who want to see them. In the words of the Executive, the modernising government fund is "designed to support innovative projects by the wider public sector which will improve the delivery of public services, promote partnership, deliver savings and contribute to the progress of the 21 st century government agenda in Scotland." Scottish local government has many examples of good practice. Clackmannanshire Council's website, ClacksWeb, is first class. The fact that it came top in a survey of local authority websites shows that the wee county is indeed leading the way. Angus Council, which received £0.5 million from MGF money, aims to achieve multi-agency service delivery through new broadband technologies and through a one-stop shop that will cover a range of services. After consulting widely, Falkirk Council is now involved in a joint purchasing bid with Stirling Council and Clackmannanshire Council. Good practice exists throughout Scotland. However, delivering first-class public services requires more than e-communication and a commitment to ensuring that people can get access to information, important though those might be. The purpose of the SNP amendment is to draw attention to the fact that the debate should be about how those public services are delivered. Delivering first-class public services means investing in those who deliver the service. That means investing in our councils and health boards to ensure that we have the right people to deliver the services. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has claimed that there is a shortfall in local government funding of about £1.5 billion. I know that the Executive disputes that figure, but one of my frustrations is that those who deliver the service and those who provide the money argue about the extent or existence of the shortfall. The Parliament should concentrate on how those services are delivered.

Frankly, we expect ministers to do that. Jack McConnell defined public services thus:  "In the modern world, public services are hard to define. The easy definition is that which is owned or directly run by public or democratically elected organisations".— [ Official Report , 23 February 2000; Vol 5, c 7.]  That seems a fair definition. However, the delivery of public services in Scotland is not good enough and people are being denied the level of services that they need. The level of cleaning in our hospitals is appalling and the incidence of hospital acquired infection is increasing. Home help services in councils such as Fife Council have been cut. The delivery of first-class public services is the real challenge for the Parliament and the Executive. It is a challenge that the Executive has so far failed. The fact that people can access council or national health service websites is not much use when the services are not available and waiting lists are increasing or when someone who is waiting for a home help finds that the hours of the service have been cut. I welcome the debate, modest though it may be, but public services and their delivery require much more than the Executive motion suggests. A commitment to the delivery of public services must go way beyond the motion. The debate starts our programme in Aberdeen, but the Executive has missed the opportunity of holding a debate on public services that goes wider than simply saying that we are signed up for e-government. Good practice exists, but much more needs to be done. I commend the councils that have introduced innovative projects.

I ask the Executive to support the amendment, which is modest. If the Executive is truly committed to public services, it should support it. I move amendment S1M-3150.1, to insert at end: ", but recognises that the delivery of first class public services also requires support to the staff working in that sector, adequate funding from central government and a commitment to ensure that the services remain in the public sector."

Presiding Officer, I gave you advance notice of this point of order. Earlier this morning, the Executive issued and posted on its website a press release announcing the introduction into Parliament of the Local Government in Scotland Bill. The press release claims that the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services told Parliament about the importance of the bill. No written question has been posted. No statement is planned for today. I am informed by the Scottish Parliament information centre that copies of the bill will not be available to MSPs until tomorrow. However, an Executive briefing on the bill took place at 11 am this morning. The only place to which the bill has been introduced today is the media. Presiding Officer, not for the first time, I have occasion to raise with you what I consider to be the Executive's contempt for the Parliament. I urge you to consider the matter and to uphold the rights of the Parliament.

Further to that point of order, I appreciate your comment that it was an administrative error. However, the fact remains that contempt has been shown to the Parliament. We do not have copies of the bill. It has not been introduced to the Parliament, but the media know about it.

I am well known for my consensual speeches and I am sure that today will be no different. I begin by paying tribute to the retained auxiliary and volunteers in the Scottish fire service, particularly as this the first debate in the Scottish Parliament on the fire service. If the fire service is so important to the Executive, why have we had to wait three years for a debate? We have heard from ministers who seem more focused on producing publications than on delivering the services that they talk about. The minister indicated that no legislation will come before Parliament before the elections in 2003. However, many of the provisions that are set out in the consultation paper on which we can all agree could be implemented without legislation. It would be helpful if the minister could indicate a time scale for implementing some of those recommendations. The consultation exercise should not be an excuse for doing nothing. Trish Godman raised important points about fire at sea and Michael Matheson addressed serious issues about the appalling number of fatalities in Scotland and the financial cost of fires. Many members have commented on the changing role of the fire service and it is important that that is reflected. Many members have spoken about personal issues that are not contained in the document, but which form a worthy part of the debate. However, six of the 28 recommendations in the  document tie up more taxpayers' money with consultants rather than with service delivery. There is even a recommendation—number 20—to appoint consultants to "reduce bureaucracy". That is a real case of creating paperwork to make more paperwork. I am concerned that the document contains recommendations that might lead to a reduction in the service. We have already reaped the results of the privatisation of key industries. Air traffic control, Railtrack and the national health service are the most obvious casualties of new Labour privatisation. The fire service cannot be viewed as anything other than a vital public service. It is there for our protection and safety. As ever, new Labour is far from clear about what it means by increased private sector involvement. The consultation document recommends "the development of partnership schemes with the private sector" and the minister claimed that an example was the private sector producing fire alarms. However, tucked away at recommendation 26, the document says clearly that: "The Executive will appoint consultants to evaluate the suitability of implementing the PFI model as a means of reducing public expenditure." I might be a cynic, but that suggests to me that we are going far beyond working with the private sector to produce fire alarms. We are appointing the private sector to tell us why we should place the fire service in the private sector—in order to cut public expenditure. We have seen what cutting public expenditure does to public services. PFI costs. The minister need only recall the royal infirmary of Edinburgh, which is cutting services to pay for the PFI project. That is not the way forward. Like Roseanna Cunningham, I welcome the Executive's acceptance of the SNP's amendment. However, the Executive should be doing more than paying lip service to the amendment, which was carefully crafted.

It is a pity that Mr Monteith did not take the opportunity to make a speech rather than intervening for such a long time in my speech. Roseanna Cunningham said that reducing the number of fatalities should be one of the drivers for change. I urge the minister to take that on board. Many interesting points have been raised today. Many of the recommendations can be implemented—there is consensus on them—and I hope the minister will not delay that. I return to the subject of public services and private money. It is obvious that if money is taken from the public purse to pay for private profit, there will be less to spend on services. That is certainly what is happening at the royal infirmary of Edinburgh. We do not need to spend more public money on another firm of consultants from the private sector to have them explain what will happen if we move the fire service to the private sector. We have already seen the effect of Labour's privatisation and the collapse in standards that goes with it. The Executive's consultation document asks for views on its recommendations. We look forward to hearing the views of the key partners in the consultation, not least the Fire Brigades Union. I trust that the minister has listened, will listen and will act on some of the points that have been raised in the debate so far.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister explain what he means when he calls for "the development of partnership schemes with the private sector" in recommendation 4?

I welcome the report from the Social Justice Committee. It should come as no great surprise to anybody that my remarks will focus on the independence of the voluntary sector—a subject that I pursued before this Parliament was set up and that I have continued to pursue during various debates in the chamber. The Social Justice Committee's report says that some organisations expressed concern about their ability fully to maintain their independence from their funding organisations. That is a very serious problem indeed. The Third Age Group affair in Fife received much publicity and rightly so. It is the tip of a very large iceberg and the template for the worst kind of control—

Certainly.

Helen Eadie should read the report for herself rather than believe the spin from the leader of the administration in Fife. The report is quite clear. It speaks of "wholly irregular" practices, "serious concerns" and "wholly inappropriate" actions by Fife Council employees. The Third Age Group never actually existed as a voluntary organisation. Yes, it was an official charity, recognised by the Scottish Charities Office; yes, it had a management committee; but it was no more than a sham organisation—a front for Fife social work. As Douglas Sinclair, the chief executive of Fife Council said in his second report: "It was council made. Over the life of the project the dominant roles in the management were played by employees of Fife Council rather than by the volunteer members of the management committee." Every significant person who was associated with the Third Age Group centre was a member of the Labour party. Angela McCallum, the first employee, was employed after she became a Labour councillor. Lynda Struthers, the second employee, was a Labour activist and Henry McLeish's election agent. Maureen Rodger, a social worker, was the driving force throughout the life of the centre, and was a Labour party election agent.

Cathie Craigie well knows that that is not what I am saying.

The member well knows that that is not what I am saying. What I am doing is ensuring that the links between the Labour party and a sham organisation are well known to this chamber. I will continue. Mary Cairns and Frances Howatson, who are social workers—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I draw your attention to my first remarks on the independence of the voluntary sector, a subject that was highlighted in the Social Justice Committee's report. Mr Sinclair, the chief executive, quaintly referred to those links as "crossovers". The rest of us see the affair for what it is—good old-fashioned cronyism. Social workers purported to be office bearers, after the organisation wound up, to allow access to funds; documents were shredded by Fife social workers; and the remaining funds were transferred to another organisation by Fife social workers. There have been a number of inquiries. There was a whitewash in December when Douglas Sinclair claimed that the council's actions with regard to the Third Age Group centre were "above reproach". After some dragging, kicking and screaming, a more detailed report was produced. Audit Scotland had, at my request, investigated the matter and provided an independent report—

There are continuing police inquiries into the matter. One organisation that has not been involved is the Scottish Charities Office— despite having the power to be so. The silence has been deafening from the Scottish Charities Office. I have now formally asked the Scottish Charities Office to investigate the matter. Charity law reform in Scotland is long overdue. The SCVO was led to believe that such reform would come in the first session of this Parliament, but a reply to me this week from the Deputy Minister for Justice has finally ruled that out.  The Third Age Group affair has shone a light on the practices in Fife but no one is naive enough to believe that such practices do not exist elsewhere. The voluntary sector is vital to the well-being of our community life in Scotland. It is important to the sector and to us that the sector has proper regulation, proper monitoring—and independence.

I congratulate Margaret Smith on securing the debate and welcome the National Asthma Campaign's report, "Sleepless Nights, Anxious Days", which reveals that a lack of time and resources means that GPs in schools are putting children at risk. More research is needed to explain all the causes of asthma. Mary Scanlon is right when she points out that, in the Isle of Skye and some other rural areas, there are low levels of pollution but high levels of asthma. In September 1999, in one of my first speeches in the Scottish Parliament, I raised the issue of damp housing and asthma in connection with a debate on public health and the white paper, "Towards a Healthier Scotland". I said then that I would return to the subject over and over again and I make no apology for doing so. We know that 362,000 children in Scotland live in damp housing and we also know that a study of damp housing and asthma in Glasgow that was published in  1996 stated: "The greater the severity of dampness or mould in a home the more likely the patient is to have severe asthma." I was disappointed that the Scottish Executive's central heating scheme did not make children living in damp homes a priority, as it did for pensioners. I mention that because that was not the case south of the Border, where children living in damp homes were made a priority. We have still not got to grips with the problems of dampness, condensation and mould and the effect that they can have on people's health. Many members have said that we need to have a minimum standard of asthma care. It is right and proper that we highlight that and I hope that the minister can address that tonight. I recognise that she cannot address the problems of damp homes but I am sure that she will lean on some of her colleagues. Teachers and GPs need to be better trained to ensure that asthma is recognised and diagnosed at an early stage. They need to be given the tools and resources to allow them to deal with the problem. I was moved when Margaret Jamieson highlighted the problems that she had with her daughter's asthma. The strength of the Scottish Parliament is that people from many backgrounds come to the Parliament with differing experiences and can, in debates such as this one, passionately bring to the attention of the rest of us the problems that they have faced. I congratulate the National Asthma Campaign once again and urge the minister to respond positively to the debate.

If Helen Eadie is so proud of Labour's record—and if she is particularly proud of the Fife chancellor and the Fife MSPs—will she explain why, the day after Gordon Brown's budget, the Labour party lost a seat to the SNP in the Thornton, Stenton and Finglassie council by-election?

rose—

Will the member give way?

The white paper includes the McIntosh commission recommendation that "Proportional Representation should be introduced for local government elections. A review should be set up immediately, to identify the most appropriate voting system for Scottish local government." However, it is curious that Peter Peacock left out the fact that McIntosh also said that that system should be in place by 2002. Does he really think that the white paper is a step forward? It is, in fact, a step back. Will he give a guarantee that legislation to introduce PR in local government elections will be enacted in the Parliament by May 2003?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In November, I lodged two written questions asking the Scottish Executive about the process for announcing appointments to the membership of public bodies, when the procedures were introduced and on how many occasions since their introduction the procedures had not been followed. Last Sunday, an article in Scotland on Sunday revealed that, in 411 cases, the political activity declaration had not been completed and the correct procedure had not been followed. At 15:31 yesterday, I received a response to my written questions by e-mail from Andy Kerr. At almost the same time, a press release was issued in which the minister quoted in full his reply to me, but did not reveal the fact that it was my written question that had instigated the investigation in the Executive. I ask you to consider the release of the information to Scotland on Sunday , which I consider to be serious. I ask you also to consider all the facts and to record your displeasure at the gross discourtesy that has been shown by a minister to a member of the Scottish Parliament.

Like others, I welcome the opportunity to debate the proposed changes to the code of conduct. Susan Deacon is absolutely right to draw a distinction between this debate and the debate about whether committees should meet in private and the circumstances that make us do so. In my experience, committees normally meet in private to consider draft reports and documents that they want to discuss fully. We are coming forward with changes to the code of conduct in relation to draft documents and the periods in which MSPs meet in private. I echo Mike Rumbles's opening remarks that the proposed changes to section 9.4 of the code of conduct are not extensive or severe. The Standards Committee is not suggesting draconian measures. Despite the hysterical response from sections of the media that we are seeking to gag MSPs, nothing could be further from the truth. The changes are merely a clarification of the rules. They should be seen as enhancements and welcomed as producing a clearer set of guidelines for us all. They are not intended to be a straitjacket to stifle debate among members.  Last year, the Standards Committee spent a fair amount of time dealing with unauthorised disclosures or leaks. I do not mean to suggest that we reached a situation in which the Parliament and committee structure was leaking like a sieve, but the Standards Committee considered three reports from the standards adviser on unauthorised disclosures from committees to the media. Our subsequent inquiries into the adequacies of the provisions in the code on leaks and the arrangements for their investigation are based on experience. As a result of the inquiry, we concluded that clarification was required to ensure that the rules that the Parliament endorsed were robust enough.The Standards Committee report states: "The Code's provisions on confidentiality largely focus on the treatment of draft committee reports. The Committee's inquiry and the Adviser's investigation, however, have suggested that the current provisions may not adequately reflect the range of Committee business that is conducted on a confidential basis." That is one of the main reasons for the revisions of the code. The code is perhaps not clear enough about what is considered to be confidential. The Standards Committee agreed that a tidying-up exercise was required. Although misunderstanding of the rules can account for some disclosures, others cannot be laid at that door. Leaks have occurred when someone had what they considered to be a good reason to put information into the public domain without the consent or foreknowledge of their colleagues. That is not an acceptable way for us to work. It can quickly lead to an atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust and it can hamper our proceedings. I refer specifically to proposed section 9.4.6 of the code, which states: "It is also unacceptable, unless the Parliament or the relevant Committee has agreed otherwise, to disclose any information to which a member has privileged access, for example derived from a confidential document or details of discussions or votes taken in private session, either orally or in writing." That change, which was required to be made, came out of the discussion of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill, which has been mentioned. Within hours of a committee having met in private and taken a vote, the result was leaked to every member of the press, who, by the following day could tell how every member of the committee had voted. That kind of leaking is unacceptable behaviour for the Parliament. If people do not know by now that they really ought not to leak details of private discussions or votes, the changes to the code that we are proposing will allow them to be absolutely  clear about what is required of them. The words "confidential" or "in confidence" are the key to the issue. Any definition of confidence must relate to faith, reliance or trust. We must be able to have trust in one another. We must be able to demonstrate the integrity that people want of their elected representatives. On behalf of the Standards Committee, I commend the motion to the Parliament.

I am happy to begin summing up the debate by reflecting on the broad welcome that Parliament has given the final report of the homelessness task force. I welcome the minister's announcement of a homelessness bill by the end of the year. This substantial piece of work provides a blueprint for ending the shame of homelessness that plagues Scotland. In passing, I say that the Conservatives have lost the plot. I heard some language from them that I last heard a long time ago. I was ashamed to hear Keith Harding seem to suggest that all homeless people are criminal or anti-social. That is not my experience of homeless people and I do not think that that is the experience of most people in the chamber.

No. I will finish my point. An implementation plan and the appropriate finance are urgently required to ensure that the report's recommendations become a reality. I congratulate Jackie Baillie on a fine speech on a subject about which she cares deeply. He is not here at the moment, but Angus MacKay sat through most of the debate. Now that he is a back bencher, I say as one ex-Shelter worker to another ex-Shelter worker that I look forward to hearing his contributions on homelessness.  The report contains many recommendations to change legislation to expand the definition of those who are in priority need. That comes as little surprise, as there are clear gaps in provision that have, in my experience, long required urgent action. Those amendments—particularly to include 16 and 17-year-olds, vulnerable people and people who are experiencing domestic abuse—were proposed by me when the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 was discussed. The then housing minister rejected them because the Executive's "strong preference is not to make ad hoc amendments to the current categories, but to wait for the considered opinion of the task force."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 4 April 2001; c 1995.] Although I welcome today's announcement, I cannot help but reflect that the categories for priority need could already have been extended for at least a year. I hope that the minister will take on board the recommendations of the report, because its thrust is not a new philosophy. Solving and preventing homelessness is not, and has never been, simply a housing matter. As the report says: "Part of the answer ... lies in reducing the social and economic divide between those who are prosperous and those who are disadvantaged." The report makes a series of recommendations on benefit policy. I will highlight some of them, particularly those that relate to young people. Although benefits are beyond the Parliament's competence, the issues are critical to tackling homelessness. The report is the result of considerable effort to tailor a Scottish solution to the Scottish homelessness problem and our work must not be undermined by a Whitehall department's one-size-fits-all attitude to benefits. I urge the Executive to ensure that the Department for Work and Pensions is fully aware of Scotland's needs. It is vital that the Executive demands that DWP policies are dovetailed to meet Scotland's needs and priorities, rather than an arbitrary London-based assessment of the situation. I want to move on quickly to something that has concerned me for a long time—tied housing. The minister knows of my concern about the lack of legal provision for people who live in tied housing. In rural areas in particular, evictions from tied housing cause part of the homelessness problem. I hope that ministers will consider the forthcoming legislation very carefully to see whether there is any way in which we can extend protection to people who live in tied housing but who can be evicted for various reasons, some of which are not very important. I urge the minister to consider that point, because that protection is essential.  Considerable work has gone into the task force's report. It is clear that most of us in the Parliament want to end homelessness. The Executive must demonstrate that it can match the will of the Parliament. I can give a commitment from the SNP that the homelessness legislation that will be introduced at the end of the year should find a fair wind from us.

I know that tomorrow is international women's day, but Donald Gorrie is suggesting that all young men are absolutely hopeless and that we need women, in the shape of aunties, to look after them. That is not my experience of young men.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for the Deputy First Minister to mislead the Parliament with his claim that he could not comment on a leaked report when the report's authors, the chief executive of Fife Council and the leader of the Labour group, have today given detailed interviews about its contents and have therefore put it into the public domain?

When we entered the Parliament in May 1999, we were determined that it would not be sullied by sleaze or by a repeat of the scandals that took place at Westminster in the 1990s, which did great damage to the reputation of politics and politicians. However, we were not driven just by the need to be different from Westminster. From the outset, members of this Parliament believed that it should be a model of probity. That belief has driven the members of the Standards Committee, past and present, not only to produce a bill that makes provision for the appointment of an independent standards commissioner, but in the other work that they have done, which is the cornerstone of the Parliament. I refer to the rigid code of conduct that has been drawn up, the possible registration of commercial lobby companies and the members' interests order. All those measures will be in place by 2003. By the end of the first session of the Scottish Parliament, structures will be in place that will enable the Scottish people to have confidence both in the procedures of the Parliament and in the politicians who are members of it. In February 2000, the Standards Committee introduced a rigorous code of conduct, which was endorsed by the Parliament. Members will recall that at that time the Standards Committee made a commitment to put in place robust arrangements for enforcing the code. The Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Bill is the result of the committee's endeavours in that regard. We believe that the proposals contained in the bill, together with the exacting requirements of the code of conduct, will ensure the highest possible standards in the Parliament. They may also go some way towards dispelling public cynicism about politicians. Under the Scotland Act 1998, the Standards Committee has the power to carry out investigations. It is to the credit of members of the Standards Committee that they wanted to ensure that there was some independence in that process. That is why we have come forward with the Scottish Parliamentary Standards  Commissioner Bill today. The appointment of a commissioner would bring that independent element into the complaints procedure. He or she will consider complaints and carry out investigations in private and independently of the Standards Committee. Secondly, the bill will give the commissioner statutory powers, which will enable him or her to carry out those investigations effectively. That is an important distinction from the arrangements at Westminster. Refusal to co-operate with the Scottish Parliament's standards commissioner will not be tolerated, although we hope that the commissioner will not have to use their powers in that respect. The power to summon witnesses to give evidence will also enhance the independence of the post. The commissioner will not have to rely on the committee's powers under the Scotland Act 1998. When Elizabeth Filkin gave evidence to our inquiry, she was satisfied at that time that she had no powers independent of the Standards and Privileges Committee at Westminster. She felt that there was no need for her to have such powers, because she worked well with the committee at Westminster. I suspect that she does not think that now. The next aspect of the bill that I highlight relates to the procedure for appointing and removing the commissioner. Those are transparent and will ensure that the appointment is made strictly on merit. We envisage an open recruitment process with the post being advertised. The commissioner can be removed only by a two-thirds majority of those voting, thus providing security of tenure. The appointment and removal provisions will also serve to underpin the independence of the post. The committee has also indicated that there will be an open and transparent recruitment process. The commissioner will be appointed by the Parliament on the recommendation of the Standards Committee. It is envisaged that that recommendation could be the subject of a debate in the chamber if need be. Any evidence taken by the committee at stage 3 of the complaints process will be in public session, as will the committee's decision on the complaint. I emphasise that the commissioner and the committee's report into investigations will be published with relevant evidence. Alex Neil's point about the make-up of the Standards Committee struck me. Mike Rumbles and the members of the Standards Committee have operated thus far in a strictly non-partisan manner. I pay tribute to all my colleagues on the committee, past and present, who have worked in that way. The Standards Committee is probably the one committee of the Parliament that has worked in such a way. I am struck by what Alex Neil said and I think that we could consider it in  terms of the standing orders and procedures to ensure that an underpinning is there. The Standards Committee is currently undertaking a review of the members' interests order, which has had a fair amount of publicity recently. The bill also covers breaches of the order, but makes it clear that the commissioner's power will apply to any legislation that replaces the order. We will shortly publish our interim conclusions for consultation with a proposal for a further committee bill this year. I urge every member to get involved in that consultation process to ensure that we have legislation on members' interests that is transparent and proportionate. I am happy to take interventions but, failing that, I will continue. The reputation of the Parliament stands or falls on the integrity of its members. That is inextricably linked to confidence in the arrangements for handling complaints of misconduct. I believe that the bill will provide a strong foundation for such confidence in the probity of Parliament and its members. I turn briefly to another point that Alex Neil made about petty complaints and the role of the commissioner. Some people have said that the bill is very complicated and perhaps it looks extremely complicated. The bill essentially defines relationships between the independent commissioner, the Standards Committee and the Parliament. It is inevitable that it has to be a fairly complicated-looking bill. I am sure that members of my party and other parties, who will consider the bill at stage 2, will find themselves working through that. Alex Neil is right that the standards commissioner should not be used for petty fights between members.

Alex Neil makes a good point. That is precisely why, at stages 1 and 2, the investigative process will be in private. That is to protect both the complainant and the person about whom a complaint has been made. We are certainly not looking to appoint a witch-finder general as part of the bill. That would be  entirely the wrong message for members. We do not anticipate having a Ken Starr who will consider one complaint, go on to another and another and try to unravel some sort of spaghetti. It is absolutely essential that the commissioner investigate specific complaints and not general complaints that would allow investigations to keep going and going. There has to be a beginning and end to that process. I believe that the bill will provide a strong foundation for confidence.

I agree with Des McNulty's point. Any legislation that we pass can be subject to review by the courts. Indeed the Scottish Countryside Alliance took to judicial review a decision of the Standards Committee that cleared Mike Watson early on in our lifetime. That found that the Standards Committee's decisions had been entirely appropriate. We have already been subject to judicial review and I expect that any decisions of the Parliament would naturally be judicially reviewed. In the absence of more interventions, I conclude that I believe that the bill will provide a strong foundation for confidence in the probity of the Parliament and its members. I call upon colleagues of all parties to endorse the general principles of the bill and to ensure that it has a safe passage. More important, we must give the independent commissioner our full support for the work that he may do, but I hope will not have to do.

Will the member give way?

Perhaps I can set Des McNulty's mind at ease. Anonymous complaints fail the second admissibility test, which deals with procedural defects, at stage 1 of the investigative process. The bill requires that complaints be made by an individual person, be signed by that person and that they provide their name and address. The commissioner must refer any procedurally defective complaints to the Standards Committee, and the committee can then direct the commissioner either to dismiss the complaint or to disregard that defect. The committee will also have the power to make a class direction for anonymous complaints, which will require the commissioner to refer those immediately to the committee without considering the first or third tests at stage 1. In other words, it will determine whether the complaint is relevant and warrants a full investigation. It is therefore not anticipated that anonymous complaints will be dealt with by the commissioner or by the committee.

As the Marriage (Scotland) Bill returns to Parliament in the last stage before it becomes law, I again put on record my party's support for it. I congratulate Euan Robson on the bill, which started out as his member's bill before it was adopted by the Executive. When the bill was first debated in the chamber, I said that I was pleased that we would be able to act to make the happy occasion of marriage happier still for the individuals involved. During that debate, I was please to be able to put on record the good Scots word "winching". In too many cases, couples who are considering marriage have been forced to make a choice between faith and location. In a multicultural society, we should not allow the matter of personal religious belief—or the lack of it—to put limits on where a wedding should take place. One in three people who were married in a religious ceremony would have had a civil ceremony if a suitable location had been available. The bill will offer people such a choice, which is why it is important.  To fill in time in a previous debate on the bill, we highlighted many tourist spots in our constituencies. I will not do that again, but I point out that we have some nice castles in Fife. The legislation is relatively uncontroversial and members should be able to unite in support of it. I welcome the Executive's sensible amendments on the matter of appeals over decisions that are taken by local authorities on the designations of approved places. When first the bill was discussed, we had a problem with the fact that many of the provisions would be dealt with in regulations. The Subordinate Legislation Committee said that the bill did not strike the correct balance between primary and secondary legislation. The Local Government Committee was forced to consider a set of draft regulations, but would have preferred to consider more provisions in the bill. The minister's stage 2 amendments to make such regulations subject to parliamentary approval is a welcome step, but it falls short of allowing the Parliament and its committees fully to scrutinise and amend the regulations as we could have done had we been dealing with primary legislation. Those are minor points at this stage, but I hope that the Executive will consider them when introducing other bills. I am pleased to support the bill, which should allow the Scottish Parliament to make the nation a happier place for those who happen to find themselves engaged and those rosy romantics in pursuit of marriage.

The SNP will support both amendments. I welcome the minister's amendment 2, which will place the right of appeal in the bill instead of in regulations, as was originally anticipated. The suggestion that the right of appeal would be put in regulations was of concern to the Local Government Committee and to the Subordinate Legislation Committee, and I welcome the fact that the minister has now taken the right steps. It is right and proper that the grounds on which an appeal can be made are narrow and that it is not left to the sheriff to arrive at his own judgment of what is the right location. We welcome the clear definition of the areas of appeal and will therefore support both amendments.

I start by thanking a number of people and organisations. I thank the members of the Parliament who accepted the guidance from Bristow Muldoon, me and others of the pro-bill support group and the tight amendments that we suggested would make the bill complete, remove the wrecking amendments that were accepted at stage 2 and ensure that no wrecking amendments were accepted at stage 3. I thank my parliamentary staff—Craig Milroy and Karen Newton—for the extra work that they have had to do in connection with the bill. I thank Les Ward, from Advocates for Animals, and the Scottish Campaign Against Hunting with Dogs. I thank Peter Hastie for the work that he did on the bill, but I will not praise him too highly, because that might cause him difficulties in his new employment. I thank the Scottish Gamekeepers Association for the constructive way in which it has engaged with the Parliament on the bill. It has done a power of work in lobbying, on which it is to be congratulated. Mike Watson and I gave a commitment to the Parliament at stage 1 that the final bill would do three things: it would ban mounted fox hunts; it would ban hare coursing; and it would ban fox baiting. I am satisfied today that we have achieved  all three aims. We also gave a commitment to the Parliament, particularly to Karen Gillon when she raised the issue, that legitimate pest control would continue. I am satisfied that the amendments that have been passed today, and the amendments that were passed at stage 2 that have been retained, will allow gamekeepers and hill packs to continue their necessary pest control work. George Lyon said that the bill would be challenged in the courts. Well, what a surprise. I seem to recall that the bill was challenged in the courts before it even got to the Parliament. It was challenged in the courts in an attempt to prevent this day from happening. I agree with John Home Robertson that the bill is not a priority for the Parliament. It has never been a priority for Mike Watson, Tommy Sheridan, Bristow Muldoon or me. I have been progressing other matters in the Parliament, but just because the bill is not a priority does not mean that it is not worth having. Euan Robson said that the bill would devastate the Borders economy. I say to him that the Borders has suffered grievously during the past few years. It has lost hundreds of jobs at Viasystems and elsewhere. However, very few jobs are associated with the hunts. If the hunt owners would go over to drag hunting, there would be no job losses. That would be the sensible thing for them to do. Why will the hunt owners not go over to drag hunting? A master of foxhounds said, "We will not indulge in drag hunting because it would be like having sex with a condom on." Perhaps he, rather than me, should explain that. I want to make it clear to those inside and outside the chamber that the bill will not be the forerunner of future bills. The Scottish Countryside Alliance and others in rural Scotland have peddled lies. Those lies need to be nailed and they need to be nailed today. I will never give my support in the Parliament to a bill that would ban fishing or shooting. Those activities are an essential part of our countryside. I do not believe that any member of the Parliament would support such a move. The bill is not about rural Scotland versus urban Scotland. There is a majority in both rural and urban Scotland for the bill. I resent being told by people who leave Edinburgh's new town every week in their Range Rovers to hunt in the Borders that the rest of us do not understand the countryside. This is our country. Rural Scotland is important to every member in the chamber. Today has been a long day. Let us now vote on the bill.

I am happy to support amendment 88, which is a consequence—no doubt unintended—of Fergus Ewing's stage 2 amendment. As it stands, the phrase in section 7(1) means that hunting with single dogs is not covered by the law, which would allow some hare coursing and fox baiting to continued unhindered. That was not Fergus's intention, and I am happy that the minister has taken this opportunity to lodge the necessary technical amendment.  Amendment 88 agreed to.  Amendments 89 and 90 moved—[Ross Finnie}—and agreed to.

I will deal with amendment 1. No more than 20 people are employed by hunts in Scotland. There is no need for anybody to lose their job under the bill. If the hunt managers chose to, they could adopt drag hunting instead of fox hunting. The kennel jobs and the hounds would then survive. I had a phone call at the beginning of the consideration of the bill from a woman who would not give me her name. She said, "Tricia, I work for a hunt. I would be far happier drag hunting, but the hunters won't have it, so I am forced to campaign against the bill to save my job. I know that you are right and I wish you well." In areas where hunts have ceased to exist, equestrian activity has increased. Farriers, feed shops and vets will therefore find increased opportunities. I will address tied housing, which Mike Rumbles also raises in amendment 1. As most members know, I previously worked for Shelter Scotland. I can tell members that there are many problems with current legislation, which mean that people who are sacked are also left homeless. The minister knows that—I have spoken to him about it. I will examine what tied housing exists for. It is required, usually in rural areas, to ensure that someone who does a particular job also has somewhere to live. The reason for eviction is that the house is needed for some worker who comes in to do the same job as the person who has left. If employers or hunt managers argue that, because of the bill, a job no longer exists, the person who does that job will be made redundant. If the job has ceased to exist, the person will not be replaced and there is no need for the former worker to lose the house. It is simple for the hunt managers to convert the tied tenancy into a secure tenancy. If anybody is evicted because of the bill, it will be because of the vindictiveness of the hunt managers who evict them. I do not believe that a case has been made for compensation, but if members believe that there is a case for compensation, I urge them to support amendment 84 and to reject amendments 1 and 33.

I refer members to the text of section 1G. It states: "A person does not contravene section 1(1) by using a dog to despatch a wild mammal for the purpose of preventing suffering to the mammal, where the person reasonably believes that the mammal is injured or diseased." That means that people can go out on horseback, take dogs with them and, if a fox limps by—or someone thinks that they saw a fox limp by—a mounted fox hunt can take place. It is critical that section 1G be removed from the bill, as it would allow mounted fox hunts to continue. The section was introduced through one of the wrecking amendments that were lodged at stage 2. The section must be removed—let us go for it.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am summing up on behalf of the supporters of the bill. I thank the Executive for making clear the position in relation to amendments 39, 46 and 47, which should never have been lodged. It is unfortunate that the Presiding Officers could not agree to withdraw those amendments. Those are the amendments that caused concern to the Scottish Gamekeepers Association. I have been working tirelessly with the association to ensure, as Mike Watson and I promised at stage 1, that the legitimate pest control activities could continue. I am satisfied that if the Parliament supports the appropriate amendments, as suggested by the pro-bill group, there will be nothing in the amended bill to stop the gamekeepers or hill packs from continuing.

I am sorry, but I have no time to take an intervention. Unless we agree to amendment 41 and remove the words "or a dog"—in this bill and other legislation, "a dog" means a pack of dogs—mounted fox hunts will be allowed to continue. If we substitute amendment 41 for amendment 94—Fergus Ewing spoke in favour of amendment 94 and my party leader supported the amendment—the bill will allow fox baiting to continue. It is unacceptable that the bill, which was intended to ban three things, be amended to allow either mounted fox hunts or bear baiting to continue. If the amendments are accepted, there will be nothing in the amended bill to give concern to the gamekeepers and the hill packs. I think that those people know that that is the situation. I have given them my word that that will be so. The matter is  very important. I urge members to vote for amendment 41 and against amendments 5 and 94.

I seek guidance from you, Presiding Officer. Fergus Ewing moved amendment 36, but because of the time constraints there was no opportunity for the sponsors of the bill to give an opinion. When we are coming close to the knife, I ask you to bear in mind the fact that other members might have a view.

Before I start, I record that I have received legal advice from the Scottish Campaign Against Hunting With Dogs and Advocates for Animals. This Parliament, and those of us who have fought for many years for a Scots Parliament, have a duty to ensure that the legislation that we pass is good legislation. By that I do not suggest that we should all agree with every piece of legislation that is passed—I do not—but that the legislation itself should be sound. It is the duty of all members to ensure that we pass good legislation.  Over the past few months, amendments have been lodged and passed by members of the Rural Development Committee that do three things. Today, we have a whole slew of amendments that serve the same purposes. First, they seek to confuse; secondly, they seek to wreck; and thirdly, they are designed to create loopholes in the bill to allow the very activities that this Parliament wishes to ban to continue, and perhaps pave the way for future challenges in the courts to legislation that the Scottish Parliament has passed.

Everyone in this Parliament has a duty to ensure that that does not happen. Bristow Muldoon, I and others will do our best to guide members through this stage this afternoon. If members are opposed to the bill—I accept that some members are opposed to the bill—they should oppose the motion to pass the bill. That is the moral and honourable position to take. David Mundell's amendments 2 and 3 and Alex Fergusson's amendment 18 are quite outrageous. Have those members not realised that the Parliament has expressed its support for the principle of a ban on hunting, or are they determined to create more loopholes?

I had hoped that Alex Fergusson, following his admission in The Daily Telegraph last week that his Rural Development Committee had let in wrecking amendments, would take this opportunity to remedy the situation. He has not done so.

After the first of perhaps many bogus points of order, I will continue. Hare coursing is one of the key activities that the Parliament thought it was banning. I do not know whether David Mundell and Alex Fergusson have taken the time to brief themselves on how hare coursing works. Two types of people are involved: one set owns the dogs and the other owns the land. Any realistic attempt to ban hare coursing must deal with both groups of people. Exempting landowners from legislation may be the Conservative way, but I do not think that it is the  way of the Parliament.

Mounted fox hunts also involve two groups of people. Alex Fergusson's amendment 18 was roundly slammed, even in the Rural Development Committee. Rhoda Grant made a telling point when she gave the example of a landowner saying that his factor and not himself had given permission. Amendments 2, 3 and 18 are designed to create more loopholes in the bill. I urge members to vote against them.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

rose—

Iain Smith has not commented on Esther Roberton's other jobs; for example, as chair of Fife Health Board and her other quango appointment. She might well have the qualifications for her present position, but we were never allowed to examine the matter. There is something wrong with a situation in which a Labour party member has had three top quango jobs since this lot came to power.

There is a perception that an old-pal network thrives in Scotland, corroding and undermining democracy and public confidence. The reality is that an old-pal network in Scotland, thriving, corroding and undermining democracy and public confidence. Lack of confidence in quango appointments is a challenge that must be addressed. Alex Neil's bill tackles the 900 Executive appointments made to the 114 Scottish quangos. This week we heard about the 50 per cent of independent Labour— [Interruption.] Did I say "independent Labour"? That is going back a bit. This week we heard that 50 per cent of independent assessors are from the Labour party. There are even Executive cronies at the top level of assessors. Alex Neil's bill provides a practical means of delivering accountability, which ensures that appointments are not only made on merit but are seen to be made on merit. That would begin to restore public confidence in the appointments procedure. There is a lack of public confidence in the procedure. That came out in Dame Rennie Fritchie's evidence to the committee. The public believes that there is political interference in the process. We must address the perception as well as the reality of the situation. At the outset, let me say that I am disappointed with the Local Government Committee's approach to the bill. It seemed that minds had been made up and that circular arguments were made to justify what was, frankly, unjustifiable.

I am sure the member will get his chance later. Let us examine some of the conclusions of the  Local Government Committee, from which Sandra White and I exempted ourselves. First, let us examine the conclusion that the bill will deter people from diverse backgrounds from applying for public appointments. That argument was based on a vague assertion in the Executive's consultation paper. Even the research that the Executive commissioned to consider the specific issue of deterrence failed to come up with any hard evidence. The Executive claims that it does not want to deter people from the broad pool of potential candidates, but experience shows that the current situation fails to encourage people to apply. A further conclusion was that "the Bill could render nominees for public appointments more vulnerable to discrimination than would otherwise be the case."

The committee accepts that under the bill the Parliament would be required to consider "any statutory requirements concerning the person appointed", which would include anti-discrimination legislation. Therefore, the idea that a committee of MSPs of this Parliament would turn down an individual because of their race, gender, religion or any other such issue is, quite frankly, ludicrous.

No, I will not give way to Michael McMahon. He made circular arguments in committee; I will not engage in those arguments during my time in the chamber. The third conclusion of the Local Government Committee was that the bill "will slow down key appointments". There is absolutely no evidence to support that. The committee decided to ignore the submissions from the Scottish Civic Forum and Glasgow City Council, which both commented that concerns about delays had been overstated. Of the 12 submissions in favour of the bill, not one raised that as a concern. The Local Government Committee's sixth conclusion was that the bill "will depend excessively on changes to the Parliament's Standing Orders, which cannot be scrutinised at this stage." The Local Government Committee completely ignored the advice of the experts on that issue. The Subordinate Legislation Committee, which deals solely with the technical aspects of  legislation, concluded: "The procedures described are entirely suited to standing orders rather than statutory instrument or primary legislation." The Local Government Committee ignored the recommendations of the Subordinate Legislation Committee on that point. Finally, the Local Government Committee said that the bill "will lead to a politicisation of the appointments process". Alex Neil covered that point more than adequately. The point is that the system is already political, and that we need to find a way to take political hands out of the process all together. I turn now to the Executive, because in September, when it made its original submission to the Local Government Committee, it was confident to the point of arrogance. There was no mention of a public appointments commissioner (Scotland) bill then. No—the Executive believed that responsibility for making appointments to public bodies that are accountable to the Executive must rest with ministers, who in turn are accountable to Parliament for their actions. Since Labour came to power, 60 per cent of the political appointees who declared a political affiliation were Labour supporters. That revelation did nothing to back up the Executive's complacent assertion that everything is okay as far as quango appointments are concerned. Alex Neil's bill is needed more now than it has ever been. The Executive was caught with its trousers down. It recognised that the public were seriously concerned about the number of political appointments that it was making, so it had to come up with its own system, come hell or high water. As a result, the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services turned up at the Local Government Committee to give evidence on Alex Neil's bill, but took the opportunity to come along with a proposed bill of his own. The proposed bill had been cobbled together over the weekend. The minister's presentation consisted of seven slides; the first six were devoted to the Executive's plans, which we were not considering, and there was one slide on Alex Neil's bill, which we were supposed to be considering.

Peter Peacock has described Alex Neil's bill as being out of its time, like a dinosaur roaming a past age. It is not the bill that is a dinosaur, it is the old-pal network, which poisons confidence in democracy. That network and those perceptions must go—and soon.

Will the minister give way?

The Executive's estimate of the cost of implementing the McCrone settlement was £430.4 million and its agreed funding for the settlement is £404.9 million. COSLA's figures show that a shortfall of £42.7 million is being met by local authorities. Does the minister agree with COSLA's figures?

The minister said that the finance order was critical for local government services. Indeed it is. Yet it took seven minutes of an 11-minute speech before the minister actually talked about the finance order itself. We heard a great deal about what the minister hopes to do for local government in future, but he did not address the order that we are supposed to be debating this afternoon. I wonder why. The minister's rhetoric at the end of last year was that the Executive was offering a 10.7 per cent increase. The reality is that the increase is nothing of the sort. In my speech, I intend to look through the smoke-and-mirrors approach to local government that this minister and his predecessors have adopted. I will lay bare the reality of the so-called substantial additional resources that the minister promises.

No, let me get on with it. In reality, we are facing council tax rises in practically every council in Scotland. Those rises will be accompanied by a reduction in services. That does not suggest to me—or to very many people who are involved in local government—that we have had the substantial increases that the minister claims.

I rely on figures that COSLA produces. I think that they are probably more accurate than the minister's figures. According to COSLA, instead of an increase of £650 million that the Executive claims, there will be a shortfall next year of £130 million. The minister perpetuates an illusion. Perhaps when have this debate next year, it will be based on agreed figures and not on the Executive's smoke-and-mirrors approach.  The Executive has four main techniques for inflating the local government settlement figure: first there is the double count; then, in the headline increase figure, they include money allocated to new burdens; then they underfund those new burdens, compounding the problems; then they ignore new year-on-year pressures. For example, money that has already been paid to councils in the form of direct grants—for, say, pre-school education—has now been included in the headline budget figure. It shows as an increase, but it is not new money. Another of the minister's tricks is to include money for new burdens that the Executive has imposed. I was disappointed that the minister, in the newspapers today, did not recognise that "burdens" is the terminology that we all use. The Executive has instructed councils to do work—for example, to provide personal care for the elderly—but that new work has to be paid for. The Executive has paid councils £125 million for the service. Put simply, that money is already spoken for. It is determined centrally. It is not additional money for councils. It is to pay for additional services that the councils must provide.

No, I will continue for a moment. The money that I was speaking about also includes money for the rough sleepers initiative, adult literacy, balance transfers from the Department for Work and Pensions, out-of-school care and, indeed, McCrone. COSLA estimates that that totals approximately £440 million. A quick subtraction reduces the Executive's increase of £645 million to approximately £250 million. We are not finished yet. There is one more  sleight of hand. The Executive is quick enough to trumpet new policy initiatives to sell to the press. However, it is irresponsible enough to attempt to implement those policies without providing enough funding to do so. Once again, the councils are left to carry the can for the shortfall. Perhaps the most topical example of that is the McCrone settlement.

No. I have a point to make and time is short. I quote the minister's predecessor, Angus MacKay, speaking in the chamber in the same debate a year ago. He said: "I am happy to confirm that the Executive has always said that it would fully fund McCrone."— [ Official Report , 7 February 2001; Vol 10, c 968.]  In fact, the Executive is doing no such thing.

No, I will not. In a recent report on teachers' pay, COSLA reported "as a result of insufficient funding being provided, Scottish Executive and COSLA recognised that there was a cumulative shortfall over the three year period of £42.7m. It was agreed that this would be funded by local authorities." The reality of the situation is that the Executive said last year that McCrone would be fully funded, but it is not fully funded. There is a shortfall of £42.7 million and that is to be met by the local authorities.

If the minister wishes me to give way, perhaps he should have addressed the finance order in the first seven minutes of his speech. He did not do so.

I will give way to the previous minister.

I look forward to February 2004 when Mr MacKay will have the opportunity to debate the SNP's local government settlement. Since Labour came to power, COSLA estimates that approximately £700 million has been lost from local government budgets.  Returning to the minister's illusions, COSLA estimates that the underfunding of new burdens and the underfunding of year-on-year increases will cost local government £340 million. If we subtract that from the £210 million surplus, we are left with a deficit of £130 million. Minister, the time for smoke and mirrors is over. Next year, we need to discuss real figures and not the hype that the minister brings to the debate. Nobody believes that the Executive is producing more money. COSLA does not believe it and, when the council tax bills go through people's doors in a few months' time, the people of Scotland will not believe it either.

As the minister said, the aim of the bill is to establish a public sector complaints system that is open, accountable, easily accessible to all and that has the trust of the Scottish public. That is  quite a challenge. The bill generally meets that challenge. I welcome the minister's comments about the number of amendments that he accepts from the Local Government Committee's report. I hope that he will continue to reflect on those that he has not yet accepted. I am sure that the convener and other members of the committee will press those points during the debate. The bill will make it simpler and more effective for members of the public to make complaints about maladministration in the public sector. However, we need to be clear that a public sector ombudsman will not be a panacea and will not solve all the problems that the public have with public services. Although it is right and proper that we publicise the service as much as possible when it comes into being, we must also make it very clear that the ombudsman cannot solve problems that do not fit within the parameters of maladministration. For many, one of the frustrations of the present system is that their complaints do not seem to fit into any category. We must consider that matter outwith the bill. Although I welcome the commitment to publicise the new service when the bill is enacted, we must be careful not to raise hopes that the service will do what it simply cannot do. I was struck by evidence that only something like 8 per cent of all the complaints that go to the present ombudsmen are dealt with. That means that a substantial number of complaints are not resolved in the ombudsman service. Although it is right that we have a single framework and that we publicise it, I do not want anybody to get the impression that any problem that they take to the ombudsman will be resolved, because the parameters for the ombudsman's work will still be defined within maladministration. I was disappointed that the minister did not accept the need for amendments to the bill to safeguard and enhance the ombudsman's ability to resolve dispute by informal measures and means. I hope that the minister will reconsider. I was certainly persuaded by the evidence that the committee heard that informal resolution is sometimes better than formal resolution. I understand what the minister is saying, but there will be opportunities at stage 2 to lodge an amendment that will meet those concerns. I am still not persuaded that the water authorities should not be brought within the scope of the bill. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities gave evidence to that effect. I hope that the minister will reconsider that issue during the passage of the bill. If he does not, concern will be expressed in the future about the water authorities not being included. Water is, and will continue to be, a vital public service.  I turn to the question of the consistency of the range of investigative powers that are included in the bill. At the moment, the Executive continues to allow the NHS ombudsman to have greater powers to investigate judgments as opposed to maladministration. The bill gives an opportunity to widen the range of powers. If we are to have a public services ombudsman, it will be helpful for the ombudsman's range of powers to be consistent. The committee felt strongly that the Executive should consider amending the bill to extend the range of investigative powers so that they are consistent across all authorities. I will move on to a matter that arose in the evidence that was given to the committee. The Scottish parliamentary commissioner for administration expressed concern about the present ombudsman staff. He was not persuaded that the bill conforms to the code of practice for staff transfers in the public sector. When the minister appeared before the committee, he gave an assurance that the code of practice and the guidelines would be met and that staff would be protected at transfer. I am not persuaded that that is the case. I hope that the minister will examine the situation to ensure that staff will not be disadvantaged. I thank the minister for his positive response to some of the committee's report. I am sure that several amendments will be lodged at stage 2—he is committed to lodging some, but there will be others. All members want the bill to work and want the new office to work well. However, members will lodge amendments to make the bill work better. I hope that the minister will reflect positively on the comments that were made in the report. I hope that he will not give the usual Executive knee-jerk reaction of rejecting amendments that it does not want. I ask the minister to examine carefully and reflect on some of the amendments that will be lodged. The Scottish public sector ombudsman should be allowed to gain the trust of the people of Scotland. The office of the Scottish public sector ombudsman should be a genuine one-stop shop where the vast majority of complaints can be resolved.

I thank the minister for his warm words. Perhaps he could have accepted the SNP amendment as an addendum to the Executive motion. I wish that we were not constantly forced to lodge amendments to the Executive's self-congratulatory motions. That is an issue that the minister may want to consider in future. As the minister indicated, Scotland has been a long-time beneficiary of EU regional policy. Some £6 billion has been made available to Scotland through structural funds. Credit for that must go to our very own Madame Ecosse, Winnie Ewing, who won objective 1 status for the Highlands and Islands. It is unfortunate, to say the least, that successive Tory and Labour Governments have not provided the necessary match funding to allow our country to access European money. Significant improvements to our nation's infrastructure that could have been put in place remain unmade. The Executive was also responsible for losing objective 1 status for the Highlands and Islands. While other areas in the United Kingdom were devising cunning plans and redrawing boundaries to ensure that places such as west Wales, Cornwall and Merseyside could access structural funds, the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Office were twiddling their thumbs. It would be easy for me to dwell on those matters, but the SNP amendment is positive in tone. I intend to move the debate forward to examine what is required now. However, lessons must be learned if the mistakes of the past are not to be repeated. The end of the current programme, in 2006, is not far away, and already the rest of Europe is beginning to discuss the future for structural funds. One thing is not in dispute—that the money available to Scotland through structural funds is likely to diminish in the future. The European Union faces swift expansion, with a dozen or so additional member states seeking entry to it. The income levels of those states are well below the EU average and their need for structural funding is at least as great, if not greater, than Scotland's.  They include Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.

As my colleague says, we would hardly criticise ourselves. If Tavish Scott waits to hear the rest of my speech, he will find out exactly where I am going.

That is unworthy of the member. Several applicant countries may join the EU before the next round of structural funding begins in 2006. An article by John Bachtler quantifies some of the possible effects of that: a reduction in overall wealth per capita of as much as 15 per cent; an increase in the gap between richer and poorer member states; and the appearance of an even wider gap between the regions. Structural funds were designed to iron out disparities, to ameliorate the structural problems that are faced by certain regions and, principally, to level the playing field for trade. One of the main issues exercising our European neighbours is the reform of structural funding. How does Scotland stand and how do we face the challenges to which I have referred? First, we must ensure that our economy is leading the current EU 15. We must ensure that the £1 billion or so that is left of EU funding for Scotland is used wisely and to provide long-term benefits. We must have something to show for that money. That means having infrastructure investment in transport and communication links to make areas such as the Highlands and Islands more accessible. Secondly, we need to participate in the debate. When the previous funding map was redrawn, Scotland was on the sidelines; the cost of being a spectator was the loss of objective 1 status for the Highlands and Islands. The debate for the next round has already started—

I ask the member to let me finish. The debate for the next round has already  started and will involve an even more fundamental Europe-wide rethink. We cannot allow Scotland to be excluded from that debate. A number of proposals are on the table, including proposals for opt-outs from structural funds for richer countries, proposals for a redrawing of the map, proposals for supporting poorer nations rather than poorer regions and proposals for different regional support policies for the current EU 15 and for new member states. Where does Scotland fit into all that? First, rather than being inward looking, we must take an outward-looking, European viewpoint. New European regional policy will be based on the lessons of the past. As one of the main beneficiaries of EU funding, Scotland can make a valuable contribution to the debate. Securing regional assistance for our own areas will present some difficulties. However, securing such funding will be possible only if we are involved in discussing the mechanisms by which that funding will be distributed. If we want to argue that funding should be allocated on social criteria, the case will have to be made for using a different statistical approach. If we want to make Scotland's case on geographic criteria, we must start to make common cause, and find common ground, with neighbours such as Sweden and Finland. We must do three things. First, we must acknowledge that changes to European politics mean that we will face a significant drop in EU funding. Secondly, we must take an honest, rather than a self-congratulatory, look at the way in which we spend what remains of the current round of funding. That means that we must concentrate on sustainability as we ready our economy to be in the leading EU 15. Thirdly, and perhaps most important, we must engage Scotland in the European debate. We must be participants, not spectators. I quote John Bachtler: "The message that EU funding is making a significant commitment to cohesion is often lost amidst the debate of whether supposed national interests have been advanced or not." The Parliament must look outward. Scotland, as a European nation, should be satisfied that we are arguing not just for Scotland but for our neighbours, old and new, and for the benefit of Europe as a whole. I move amendment S1M-2630.1, to leave out from "the success of" to end and insert: "that £6 billion has been made available to Scotland since 1975 through European Union (EU) structural funding; further recognises that, because of EU enlargement, the level of support offered to Scotland in future years is likely to diminish, and urges the Scottish Executive to ensure that the full benefits of EU structural funds still available are used for sustainable, strategic and  infrastructure improvements and to involve itself fully in the ongoing debate about the future of EU enlargement and the consequences for EU structural funding."

Thank you for giving me an additional two minutes, Presiding Officer. This has been a very short debate. In summing up a debate, one usually refers to what previous speakers have said. Brian Fitzpatrick made a humorous speech and Keith Harding said, quite rightly, that the council tax is not perfect. Indeed, it is not a perfect tax; neither was the poll tax perfect, but I am sure that Mr Harding defended that tax to its death. We need to rethink radically the way in which our council tax is determined and the way in which local government is financed. Iain Smith said that the Parliament needs more powers. He, too, is right. The real and radical changes that we need to make to local government finance will happen  only when the Parliament acquires the powers necessary to do that.

I start by expressing regret that Mr Sheridan has chosen to split the debating time available to him into three half-hour sections. It is, of course, Mr Sheridan's right to determine how his allocation of time is used. When this was discussed last year, as SNP business manager, I robustly defended his right—and the right of all non-Executive parties—to do so. However, it is clear that Mr Sheridan has no wish to engage in debate. There will be little time for meaningful speeches from other members. The present system of council tax is undoubtedly unfair—it takes no account of ability to pay. For that reason, the SNP advocates a system of local income tax. However, a change in  the method or form of collection cannot be considered in isolation, without an examination of how local government is financed at present. Such an examination would include consideration of the method of distribution of moneys from the Executive as well as consideration of the system of raising tax locally. The McIntosh commission recommended that an independent commission should examine all aspects of local government in Scotland. Following the refusal of the Executive to set up such a commission, it has been left to the Local Government Committee to carry out a review. As the minister said, the committee will report shortly. I do not want to pre-empt what the Local Government Committee may say, but it has been clear to me in my short time on that committee that few people or organisations are satisfied with the present system. Few organisations agree with each other on what should be done. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Executive do not even agree about the percentage of money that is ring-fenced or is for grant-aided expenditure: COSLA claims that the proportion that is ring-fenced is 30 per cent while the Executive claims that it is 10 per cent. It suits the Scottish Government to take a smoke-and-mirrors approach to local government finance because Labour in government has caused an increase of £103 in council tax bills while services to the public are worse than they have ever been. Local government has been underfunded for decades. Schools are crumbling and lighting, footpath and bridge repairs have all but stopped. Social work services are at crisis point, with social work posts going unfilled and services to the vulnerable being reduced. We need radical reform of local government finance and we need independence to free up the wealth of Scotland and to provide the resources and services that we need and desire. I move amendment S1M-2631.1, to leave out from second "believes" to end and insert: "notes that it is part of an unsustainable system of local government finance which, under Labour's stewardship, has resulted in an increase of £103 to the average householder's yearly tax bill while local services have deteriorated, and calls for a full review of local government finance which includes the replacement of unfair property based taxation with a system of local income tax, which takes account of ability to pay."

Iain Smith spoke eloquently about the joys of North-East Fife, but not about the whole of Fife. One of the absolute pleasures of being a regional member is that I can speak for the whole of an area, as I can for God's own kingdom, Fife. If we do not stop at Falkland and look beyond that border, we find wonderful locations, not the least of which is Balgonie castle in Markinch. Dunfermline glen, although it is not perhaps a marriage venue, has certainly been the place for courting or winching couples for a long time. I am quite sure that Dunfermline glen might want to be considered as a place for marriages. I shall stop at that point, in case my youthful indiscretions come tumbling out. The debate was brightened considerably by the contributions of David Mundell and Richard Lochhead. I am sure that all my colleagues join me in wishing Richard all the best in July. Having been married for 26 years, I am happy to give him all the advice he needs. There is great willingness on all sides of the chamber for the Marriage (Scotland) Bill to become law. We are all very much committed to it. I thank Euan Robson for introducing it, both as a member's bill and as an Executive bill, but there are still problems. There is no desire on anyone's part to delay or try to destroy the bill that he has introduced. I know that members can get precious about their own bills, but I do not want the minister to be precious about this bill. We should ensure that we pass a bill with a framework to take into the 21 st century. Perhaps we can attract tourists from all over the world, who might want to marry in our glorious country. I congratulate Euan Robson on the bill, but much work is still to be done. I am sure that, following discussions with the Local Government Committee and others, there can be a fine bill.

Does the member agree that he is the saddest person in the chamber?

There will be a degree of difficulty in reaching seven minutes, Deputy Presiding Officer. I welcome the last part of the minister's speech, which talked about the reason why we are discussing the Marriage (Scotland) Bill. The bill is designed to allow people to get married in a greater variety of places than they can at the moment. Of course, as I think the minister said, marriage should be a happy occasion and it is only right that people should be able to choose where they get married. That said, no one can pretend that this is a particularly happy debate; indeed, it is a bit boring. Judging by the small number of people in the chamber, I believe that people may wonder what the bill has to do with their lives. The fact is that the bill has the potential to make a special day an even happier day in the lives of many couples. On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I am pleased to support the general intentions behind the bill. At the moment, there are clear restrictions on where people can marry. In too many cases, the choice comes down to one between faith and location. In a truly pluralist and multicultural society, the idea that a couple's lack of religious  belief should limit their choice of where they can be married is outdated. When almost a third of people who got married in a religious ceremony would have preferred to have a civil ceremony if a suitable location had been available, it is clearly time for change. That is why the SNP has no hesitation in supporting the aims of the bill. However, we have considerable reservations about the mechanisms and the specific proposals in the bill and regulations. I will make two points on that. First, I return to a theme that I mentioned earlier: the use of secondary rather than primary legislation to hoard power, which limits the ability to make necessary amendments at stage 2. It is fundamentally wrong that, when we consider a bill, its important aspects are hidden away in secondary legislation. Although I accept the minister's assurances that the secondary legislation will be subject to the affirmative procedure, I do not think that that is the same as the committees having the opportunity at stages 1 and 2 to give the bill the scrutiny that it deserves and to amend it. That is significant. The Executive shows a pattern of putting more into regulations. The bill is a bad example of that trend. As James Smith of Dumfries and Galloway Council said in evidence to the Local Government Committee: "We do not want the paternalistic approach that all the regulation and guidance represents. Government officials should not issue guidance on matters that are way outwith their remit."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 27 November 2001; c 2421.] To put it bluntly, the approach is incorrect. Matters of a constant nature, such as the appeals procedure, should be contained in primary legislation. That is also the opinion of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, whose opinion is that the bill does not strike the right balance between primary and secondary legislation. That was reflected also in the Local Government Committee's consideration of the bill. So many of the powers of the bill are exercised through secondary legislation that it was felt necessary for the committee to examine the draft regulations which, technically, are not part of what we should have considered. It was a useful exercise, not least in highlighting the dangers of the Executive reserving so much power by means of secondary legislation. If I recall correctly, the minister talked about "seemly and dignified" venues and said that the phrase would not be subject to amendment in the regulations. There was considerable and widespread concern about matters such as the  definition of seemly and dignified venues. The Executive's wish to retain that phrase in the subordinate legislation and regulations means, in effect, that there is no opportunity to amend it at stage 2. That is wrong. I ask the minister to go back and think again. The Equal Opportunities Committee, other committees of the Parliament and individuals are concerned about the wording. There is a considerable body of opinion, including in local government, that says that the approach that has been taken in the bill is incorrect. It has been widely suggested that to use the existing expertise and resources of civic government licensing would be more efficient and cost-effective than setting up a separate framework to regulate the places in which marriages may take place. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities favoured that model and outlined how it might be done. Dumfries and Galloway Council—which conducts one in four of Scotland's marriages thanks to Gretna Green and the success of the tourism industry there, which brings people from all over Scotland and elsewhere to be married—has outlined how amending the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 would achieve that. It indicated that a minimal amount of legislation would be required if that alternative route was used. I am pleased to be able to support the policy intention of the bill. I note what the minister said about amendments. I am disappointed that he seems to be suggesting that the Executive will continue down the road of regulations, thereby limiting amendments at stage 2. I am also concerned about the mechanisms by which the Executive is attempting to achieve the policy intentions of the bill. All members support those policy intentions, but we are concerned about the mechanisms. We believe that the Executive has made the bill unnecessarily complicated and has not taken the right route. I ask the Executive to reconsider seriously its position on amending the bill and the regulatory framework before it comes back to the committee at stage 2. I also ask the Executive to consider carefully how the policy aims of the bill, which we all support, could be better achieved.

Does not the minister think that it is wholly wrong that most of the comments that have been expressed concentrate on the regulations? The  committees should not have been considering the regulations but the contents of the bill. Is not it the case that, because the draft bill did not contain important information, we were forced to consider the regulations and make the issue part of our stage 1 report?

I am interested to hear Nora Radcliffe talk about the Liberal Democrats' UK strategy for rail. How  much does that strategy suggest should be invested in rail in Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

Shame.

Presiding Officer, I am glad that you did not talk about the rivalry between Cowdenbeath and East Fife and some of the insults that are thrown back and forward between fans. I refuse to enter into that debate. I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and I thank Iain Smith for introducing it. As well as being consulted about the Scottish Executive's proposals, Fife Council consulted the community in Fife and community councils and other organisations the length and breadth of Scotland. It wrote:  "The outcome of that consultation has yet again reaffirmed a very strong Fife identity and a recognition that any consideration of strategic issues, such as the economy, environment, transport and housing were by no means confined to Scotland's city regions. The consultation reinforced the community view that it was necessary to have a strategic plan for Fife given the scale and diversity of the area." It is a feature of debates about Fife—whether about Fife railways or proposals for strategic planning—that we get MSPs from all parties in the chamber uniting. The one thing that ministers will see in the chamber is all Fife MSPs, regardless of their political party, fighting for Fife. That is one of the features of our expressing concerns on behalf of the whole of Fife. I have been at public meetings from Tayport to Dunfermline and points in between. What comes across clearly is that any decision to remove the strategic planning responsibility from Fife Council would be to the detriment of Fife. The pull of Edinburgh and Dundee will result not only in a loss of autonomy in Fife, but a loss of identity in Fife. That is a great concern. On the outcome of a decision such as is suggested, the council says: "It is considered likely that Fife's needs would be subsumed into a city dominated agenda. The regeneration issues which are socio-economically and geographically central to Fife would be peripheral to the new strategic planning areas. Locally-significant concentrations of deprivation and exclusion would require to compete for resources with deprived areas outside Fife. There is deep and universal concern amongst communities in Fife that they would be swallowed up in such a larger planning overview, contrary to the principles of subsidiarity." It is important to recognise, as Marilyn Livingstone and Iain Smith said, that Fife Council has the same boundaries as all its strategic partners: Scottish Enterprise Fife, Fife NHS Board and the Kingdom of Fife Tourist Board. Those are the circumstances in which Fife can develop its services, and they must continue to apply. The very idea that Fife may be split up and subsumed into two strategic planning authorities in Dundee and Edinburgh, with the wee bit in the middle just left to rot, is totally and absolutely unacceptable. I think that the minister is getting a flavour of the debate, and we hope that she will come forward with something positive at the end of it. We also need to consider the fact that Fife is one of the largest local authorities in Scotland in terms of population. Indeed, Fife is greater in population than either Dundee City or the City of Edinburgh. Given that, it makes sense for Fife to remain a large unit. Marilyn Livingstone raised the matter of the Rosyth ferry. Certainly it is well named.

Mr MacAskill speaks as a Lothian and Edinburgh MSP, not as a Fife MSP. If he had been speaking as a Fifer, I am sure that he would never have said what he did. Mr MacAskill is entitled to his views, as I am to mine, and it is my view that Rosyth will need to be marketed carefully. I am sure that we can do that, saying something along the lines of, "Rosyth: a few minutes from the historic Forth bridge, which will take you into the city of Edinburgh." Whatever marketing has to be done, the Rosyth ferry name should remain as it is. On that issue, as on others, Fife MSPs speak as one.

Is the member aware that Glenrothes, which is one of our new towns and has a fairly young population, for the first time in its history had more deaths than live births last year? Is not that a pointer for the future of Scotland?

The Kerley report—I refer to it a lot these days—concluded that "higher turnout could not be claimed as an increased democratic mandate for local government" if the two sets of elections are held on the same day. Does the minister agree with Kerley?

Although it is true that Labour fiefdoms still exist despite the fact that local  government elections have until now been held on a different day, the argument that the two elections should be held on the same day is bogus unless one supports PR. Does Bill Aitken support PR?

Although the bill contains a number of sensible proposals for piloting projects that try to encourage greater electoral participation, any good intention is completely undermined by the main principle of the bill—to hold council elections on the same day as parliamentary elections. The SNP opposed the bill at stage 1 and will oppose it at 5 o'clock today. I turn briefly to Tommy Sheridan's amendment and say that I am not particularly in favour of reasoned amendments. I believe that someone who is opposed to the bill should simply vote against the Executive motion. As a result, Tommy's amendment is unnecessary and the SNP will not be supporting it. The Executive believes that the bill will increase the turnout at local elections. That is no doubt true, as parliamentary elections currently attract larger turnouts. However, such turnouts will not confer any additional democratic legitimacy on local government. Confronted with an additional ballot paper in the polling booth, most people will simply fill it in not out of an interest in the affairs or the remit of local government, but because that is the most obvious thing to do with another ballot paper in the polling booth. The serious flaw in the Executive's argument is its naive suggestion that an artificially inflated turnout provides an increased mandate for local government. It is quite clear that the reverse is true, and that will have a cost in the form of a democratic loss for the very local authorities for whom the bill is intended. The local agenda will be overshadowed and overtaken by the coverage of national elections. No member of this chamber could seriously argue that local authority issues will even surface, far less be given a decent hearing, in the press mêlée of the parliamentary election campaign. Councillors will not be able to make their case for election or re-election as they will be completely displaced from the agenda by MSPs seeking to make their case. I make no apologies for returning to the Kerley report, although I know that members will find that uncomfortable. The report says: "However, the higher turnout could not be claimed as an increased democratic mandate for local government ... In fact, coincident elections would tend to reduce the electorate's focus on local government issues. Conversely, separate elections would ensure that local government issues are at the heart of local government elections: this seems to us an essential part of democracy and democratic renewal."  I see from press reports that the Executive parties are consulting on all the Kerley recommendations. It is a pity that they did not take note of his comments on coincident elections. The situation faces further confusion in 2003 with the prospect of a referendum on the euro being held on the same day as other elections. It is absurd for three totally different agendas to be considered in the same election campaign. Will national politics and personalities, the on-going question of the euro or local councillors and other municipal matters head the list of press priorities? As for the national agenda, local government will be relegated to the back burner and the gas simply turned off. This bill will diminish the local agenda and undermine local democracy; it is corrosive to the democratic legitimacy of our councils. I want to address one further point to the Liberal Democrat members of the coalition. The logical time for local government elections is the midpoint of the Scottish Parliament session. If the Liberal Democrats are so confident that they will deliver PR for local government elections, why on earth are they supporting this bill, which could delay the implementation of PR until 2007 when it could reasonably be introduced for elections in 2005? I see that Mr Rumbles is rumbling.

Mr Rumbles tempts me too far by inviting me to comment on the people who elected him. I am sure that those who did so will reconsider their position for the next election. I have no doubt about the intelligence of the electorate in Scotland—it is very sophisticated. However, that is not the issue. The question is whether real issues that affect local government will be examined under the system proposed by the bill. That is not going to happen. If the Liberal Democrats also support the Kerley recommendation of PR for local government elections based on the single transferable vote system, they should oppose the bill. It will mean two different elections with two different PR systems, one for the Scottish Parliament and one for councils in 2007. Such a position is illogical.  The SNP will oppose the bill, as it has already done, and I invite Liberal Democrat MSPs to do so as well.

Presiding Officer, you have given me my Sunday name again. I welcome the amendments. As the minister said, Keith Harding lodged amendments at stage 2 and I supported those. The minister has accepted the spirit of the amendments and the SNP will give its support. The minds of the local authorities and the returning officers will be focused on the need to encourage and increase accessibility for young and elderly people and people from ethnic minorities. However, I deeply regret the wording of amendment 2. I am sure that there are good legal and technical reasons for referring to "persons of a particular class" and "any class of persons", but that grates on me and on a great number of people. I accept the amendments and that there might be a legal reason for such definitions in this instance, but I sincerely hope that this is the last time that amendments come before the Parliament that mention classes of people.

Let me say at the outset that what I am about to say is no reflection on Irene Oldfather. However, the last time that Parliament addressed the issue, Tom McCabe, then Minister for Parliament, told us that the Executive nomination of MSPs to the Committee of the Regions was "a determined commitment to share power between our national and local authorities."— [ Official Report , 24 October 2001; c 3267.]  Iain Smith, for the Liberal Democrats said: "It is only right that the national Parliament of Scotland should be represented on the Committee of the Regions."— [ Official Report , 24 October 2001; c 3271.]  At the time, I made two points that are worthy of  repetition. The first concerned the Executive's myth about a determined commitment to share power with local authorities, which contrasts with the reality of its actions to date. The Executive deprived Scotland's councils of their full representation on Europe's regional body. There is no doubt that the Parliament needs more powers, but the powers that we require should not be taken from councils. Those powers are our national right, but they continue to be held at Westminster. The second, and more fundamental, point highlights the contrast between the poverty of ambition of the Lib-Lab Executive and the aspirations that the SNP has for our nation. Our Parliament is a national Parliament. Scotland is a nation. Contained within that nation are regions. It is right and proper that those who are elected at regional level should be represented on the Committee of the Regions. We have a tier of local authorities and it is logical that councillors are best placed constitutionally to provide regional representation. As Iain Smith said, our parliamentary representatives are national representatives. It follows that this Parliament should be represented at national level within Europe. This Parliament's focus should be on representation on the Council of Ministers. The Executive should allow our councillors to represent the regions at an appropriate level in Europe, and should focus this Parliament's attention on securing representation at the national level that is appropriate for a national Parliament.

Does the minister appreciate the concern about the fact that the Executive is examining a new option when there is a previously agreed option? Will the minister comment on the impact that that will have on the start date for the construction work? Will he make a commitment that work on the Clackmannanshire bridge will begin before 2003?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The First Minister is on record as saying that he would outline a timetable for progress on electoral reform before Christmas. There is no provision in business motion S1M-2548 for progress on electoral reform or for a statement to the chamber before the Christmas recess. Will you remind ministers that important announcements should be made first to the Parliament and not through the media?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

The member talks of the need to build a majority in the Parliament for PR. What have the Liberal Democrats done in the past two and a half years to build that coalition?

Does not Scott Barrie agree that the right to democracy and a fair voting system is a priority for people?

The member fails to mention that, in Fife, the Liberal Democrats have 27 per cent of the seats on only 21 per cent of the vote, whereas the SNP has 11 per cent of the seats on 26 per cent of the vote.

Will the member give way?

rose—

A few minutes ago, Mr Harding referred to STV as the SNP's system. Does he accept that the Kerley working group—which investigated STV—the Electoral Reform Society and most commentators agree that STV is the most appropriate system, as it retains the member-ward link?

As the minister who is responsible for local government in Scotland, can Mr Peacock tell me how many times in the past year he has met the committee that is progressing PR in local government?

In the spirit of consensus, openness and transparency for which I am well known, every member's researcher has received a copy of the SNP briefing paper. I hope that members read it and learn from it. It contains some good-quality information and I hope that the research produced by the SNP can be used to enhance the debate.

Indeed—the point is made. On 5 September, during the debate that followed the announcement of the Scottish Executive's legislative programme, John Swinney took Henry McLeish to task because the programme did not mention electoral reform or progress towards electoral reform. I commented that, for the Lib-Lab coalition, proportional representation is "the issue that dare not speak its name."— [ Official Report , 5 September 2001; c 2223.]  Recent events have underlined the stranglehold that Labour has on civic Scotland, from councils to the enterprise networks, health boards and all the other quangos. Iain Macwhirter of the Sunday Herald suggested that the Labour party should "liquidate itself on the grounds that it is manifestly the source of most of the cronyism in local politics." Not even I would go that far, but I agree with the almost universally held view that was expressed by Brian Meek, who is a columnist for The Herald and a Tory councillor. He said: "The best way to root out the cancer of unbridled power in local authorities is to change the voting system". I said that that view is held almost universally because, after my recent meeting with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, it became clear that Labour councillors are simply not prepared to accept a fair voting system for local government.

That is obviously why the Conservatives have so few councillors. I will come back to Phil Gallie's point later. Why should Labour councillors accept a fair voting system in local government? The Labour MP, Jimmy Hood, warned against PR. He said, with breathtaking arrogance, that party members "must defend democracy, and, more importantly, defend the Labour party". There we have it: defending Labour party interests is more important than democracy. But then, SNP members always knew that. Labour has a vested interest in retaining its entrenched power. It seems that the ability to reform the fiefdoms voluntarily is beyond even the most dedicated Labour modernisers. However, reform must come or local government in Scotland will die: controlled and directed from the centre, it will be airbrushed out of Scottish society in the same way as a minister for local government was airbrushed out of the ministerial portfolios that were announced yesterday. Unfortunately, the Liberal Democrats hold the key to PR in the Parliament. They prop up the Labour Executive. In a blaze of publicity, they trumpeted the partnership agreement of 1999, telling us: "We will ensure that the publication of ... McIntosh ... is followed by an immediate programme of change including progress on electoral reform." It is appropriate to ask what progress the Liberal Democrats have made since then. We had a year-long consultation, at the end of which Kerley recommended not only the implementation of the single-transferable-vote system but that the Executive should take "an early decision on the date of implementation of a new electoral system." Kerley anticipated that it would have been possible to implement a new system in time for the 2002 elections, never mind the delayed 2003 elections that we now face.

I do not agree with Mike Rumbles's premise, which I will cover later in my speech. I accept the points that he makes about the Labour party and the Conservatives, but the fact remains that the Liberal party is prepared to sell out its principles on PR.  It is clear that, after three years of consultation with literally hundreds of respondents, Kerley and Macintosh said that the STV system was best for Scotland. How much more consultation is needed? Not much, I suggest. As I said, the Liberal Democrats hold the key, but they stood back and let the Labour party kick the PR ball into the long grass with the promise of a ministerial committee to take matters forward. That was a year and a half ago and now we have an admission that not much has happened during that period. When the Liberal Democrats were confronted with the decision whether to support the third First Minister, did Jim Wallace, the bold Liberal leader, stand up for his party and his principles? Did he stand up to demand an end to cronyism and the one-party domination that, in the words of Ken Richie of the Electoral Reform Society, encourages "a political culture in which there is a danger of councils and councillors becoming arrogant, aloof and detached"? Even Jim Wallace said: "We must not underestimate the self-interested resistance from those fiefdoms which will be challenged by a fair voting system." What hard-nosed bargain was the tough negotiator, Mr Wallace, able to extract from the new First Minster? According to The Scotsman , the bargain was that they had "agreed that the next steps should be to agree the next steps". He could not even negotiate a decent excuse, never mind a decent bargain. Two and a half years after the coalition promised progress on electoral reform, we find that progress actually means agreeing the next steps to agree the next steps. According to a leaked report that appeared in The Times yesterday, Charlie Kennedy is worried that the Liberals at Westminster are perceived as Labour's poodles. However, poodles bark—sometimes—and the problem in the Scottish Parliament is that the Liberals are Labour's lapdogs: they have no bark, no bite and no backbone. It is frustration with that utter lack of progress that forced me to lodge a bill on PR, proposing the STV system. The Fairshare campaign and the Electoral Reform Society support both my bill and the STV system. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the many dedicated members of all political parties who work tirelessly to advance the campaign for a fair voting system, some of whom have joined us in the public gallery today. The events of the past few weeks have shone a light into the dark corners of Labour's crony networks. The networks of influence and cronyism  have begun to be exposed, from the legal firms that rent office space to the job creation schemes for Labour friends such as Esther Roberton. As the answer to a written parliamentary question lodged by David McLetchie showed, of those appointed under the public appointments system since 2000, 75 per cent who declared a party connection were members of the Labour party. It is no wonder that Angus MacKay was sacked this week—imagine a Labour minister letting that little gem into the public domain. The Parliament can clear up Labour's midden by doing two things. First, it can support Alex Neil's bill, which would give the Parliament power to scrutinise public appointments. Secondly, it can introduce fair voting for local government elections. It is appropriate for me to acknowledge at this point the many councillors in Scotland who want only to serve their communities and who put in long hours for little reward, beyond the satisfaction of doing their best for the communities and people whom they represent. A fair voting system would remove the unhealthy taint that Scottish local government has unfairly earned from the worst of Labour's rotten boroughs. It would restore public confidence and public interest in local government. Because a fair voting system would eliminate the wasted-vote syndrome, it is the single biggest step that could improve turnout. STV, which uses multimember wards, would retain the member-ward link. In England and Wales, 80 per cent of wards are already multimember. Northern Ireland already has PR. Let us not have specious arguments that a one-member-one-ward system is the only suitable system for local government in Scotland.

I was making the point that, although we often hear councillors saying, "This is my ward and these are my people," multimember wards already exist. The link between the councillor and the ward should not rest solely on one councillor. The current electoral system protects the Labour party to the extent that effective scrutiny and opposition is simply not possible. No one argues that the party that gains the majority of votes in an election should not have the majority of the seats on a council. However, it is quite unacceptable that a party that has gained only 46 per cent of the  vote should have 95 per cent of the seats. In the elections for Dundee City Council and East Ayrshire Council, the SNP polled more votes than the Labour party but ended up with fewer seats. A fair voting system in local government is now imperative. This autumn, the genie of Labour cronyism has been let out of the bottle and will not go back in. That cronyism is corrosive to democracy and poisonous to society. In the eyes of the people of Scotland, it undermines the work not only of the local authorities but of the whole political process. It is now imperative that the Parliament acts decisively and quickly. The universally agreed way to do that is to end the one-party states and destroy the fiefdoms by delivering a fair voting system for local government. Let me turn to the fig leaf—sorry, the amendment. The amendment does not advance the case for a fair voting system but merely allows the Liberals and the Executive to pretend that something is happening. It is widely speculated that the Liberals are looking for an excuse to parachute out of the coalition so that they are free to fight the 2003 elections as though they were independent of Labour. The Liberal Democrats are complicit in engineering the lack of progress on PR to give them just that excuse. If the Liberals want to play fast and loose with their principles and with the expectations of their supporters, so be it. However, they should not expect the rest of Scotland to sit back and accept the cynicism of a party that, like its coalition partner, puts narrow party interest above the interests of Scotland's democracy. Let me end on this note: a fair voting system for local government elections is supported by a majority of the supporters of each party in the Parliament. Contrary to Mike Rumbles's view, I believe that a majority of members in the chamber would, in a genuinely free vote, support such a system for local government in Scotland. The new First Minister, Jack McConnell, spoke about the need to deliver on the people's priorities. Fair voting is one of the people's priorities and a democratic imperative. It is time to deliver on it. I move, That the Parliament approves the principle of proportional representation for local government elections, as recommended in the Kerley Report.

I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on his appointment. We have known each other for a long time in different roles and I am sure that he will bring to the job his commitment to and passion for health and social inclusion issues. In the policy memorandum, it is made clear that most of the bill's provisions will have an impact on local government because of local government's central role in delivering social services. I am surprised and disappointed that I am the only member of the Local Government Committee who will speak in today's debate. The Local Government Committee took evidence and fed in to the Health and Community Care Committee's report. Local authorities expressed a number of concerns in that evidence. The minister acknowledged that there are challenges for local authorities in the bill in respect of joint working and resources in particular. I will perhaps address that later. My colleague Nicola Sturgeon addressed the need for a definition of personal care within the bill. The Local Government Committee also felt strongly that there should be such a definition and the social work directors of Perth and Kinross Council and South Ayrshire Council indicated in their evidence to the committee that there should be a base-line definition of personal care on the face of the bill. I welcome the minister's commitment to introduce an amendment at stage 2, because it would be quite unacceptable if such an important piece of legislation gave to present and future ministers the power to determine by regulation what personal care is. We cannot allow personal care to be a political football that is juggled between health and finance ministers, who will decide by regulation from year to year what constitutes personal care and what does not. Decisions should be made based on what the patient needs, rather than on what can be trimmed to accommodate the budget of the day. I welcome the assurances that the minister has given. An issue—which is not directly related to the bill and therefore cannot be removed by amendment—that came up in the Local Government Committee is the problem of dual financial assessments. Those assessments will be  required as a result of the different levels of capital assessment for income support and for home care. It is absolute nonsense that we should even consider putting elderly and vulnerable people and their families through two different assessments. Not only will that lead to increased stress and confusion, it will—to be frank—be a bureaucratic mess. Although I acknowledge that benefits and income support are a reserved matter, I would like the Executive to consider with colleagues in Westminster the possibility of a single assessment procedure. I would welcome an assurance from the minister that he will take forward that suggestion as a matter of great urgency. Local authorities will be pivotal in delivering the social work services and as many members have said, joint working will present many challenges to the culture, management, structures and accountability of local authorities and health boards. The Local Government Committee heard evidence of good practice out there, but we need to ensure that that good practice is the minimum that is required in joint working. My view is that much more work needs to be done before we can be confident that joint working arrangements are flexible and secure enough to ensure that the person who needs the service gets the service. We need to stop the turf wars that take place between health boards and local authorities. Local authorities are also concerned about the resource implications of aspects of the bill. It is vital that the necessary resources are provided to ensure that the bill has the opportunity to make the difference that we know it can make. The bill will be better when it is amended, but it must not be allowed to fail simply because there is not sufficient money to support it. I give a warm welcome to the bill and the amendments that the Minister for Health and Community Care said that he would lodge. However, it is vital to local authorities and health boards that the resources that are needed to fund the bill are put in place and that they work for the benefit of the people who need the bill.

Will the member give way?

Does Iain Smith agree that, in the 1999 joint elections, the propaganda issued by the Scottish Office did not even mention the local government elections? How much more evidence does he need?

Will the member give way?

Central to this bill is the assertion by ministers that only increased turnout in local government elections will increase democratic accountability, even if that increase is artificially manufactured. That is why the Executive claims that we need to synchronise the local government elections and the Scottish Parliament elections, which would mean postponing the 2002 elections. If 100 per cent turnout conferred on local government complete democratic accountability, we would not today be discussing a bill to synchronise elections. Instead, we would be discussing a bill that would make it compulsory for every adult over the age of 18 to vote. We are not  doing that, and I do not argue that we should. The experience of 1999, when the Scottish Parliament elections were held on the same day as the local government elections, was that local government issues were not discussed. Indeed, all the Scottish Office propaganda material ignored the fact that local government elections were taking place. Keir Bloomer, chief executive of Clackmannanshire Council, told the Local Government Committee: "Local government is an important part of the constitutional framework. The existence of separate elected bodies with their own democratic mandates at national and local levels is a critical component of any pluralist society." The SNP is committed to the objective of increasing voter turnout at local government elections. To ensure higher voter turnout, it is important that local government should be seen as relevant to the people whom it serves. The idea that artificially manufacturing turnout confers legitimacy is grossly misguided. After a year of consultation, Kerley concluded: "higher turnout could not be claimed as an increased democratic mandate for local government". What we need is an examination of the record of local councils and councillors and whether they have delivered for their communities. With synchronised elections, those issues will not be examined. Nobody in this chamber or beyond can reasonably argue that local council matters will even surface when Scottish Parliament elections are taking place. People can vote differently in Scottish Parliament and local government elections. They did so in 1999 and they will do so again. Their decisions in such elections would be taken without a full debate on or examination of local issues. The bill shows how little esteem Labour has for local government in Scotland. Local government is not an extension of central Government. It is not there simply to implement the policies that are dictated by the Government of the day. It has a responsibility to be relevant and to serve the people of particular local areas. We cannot begin to talk about relevance and legitimacy unless we deal with the one-party states that besmirch much of Scotland. What is missing, of course, is proportional representation for local government elections. PR for local government would ensure that every vote counted. It is obscene and, frankly, Stalinist for one party to gain 94 per cent of the seats on the basis of only 46 per cent of the vote. That system will continue unless we create the open, transparent and accountable Scotland that some of us aspire to.  That can be realised only through PR, which would ensure that every vote counts and that the electorate gets the council that it votes for. However, the bill is not about PR or about conferring legitimacy.

Thank you, Kenneth. The problem with the European elections is that people do not think that they are relevant. The fact that Scotland is only one constituency led to the low turnout more than anything else did. The problem is not PR, but the manufactured way in which the elections came about.

I can add nothing to John McAllion's comments other than to agree with them entirely. As I said, the bill is not about PR or about conferring legitimacy. It will not make local government more accountable and the SNP will oppose it at decision time. I have quoted McIntosh and Kerley on many occasions in the past few days. I make no apology for doing so again, because the minister said that the bill has wide support when, in fact, that is not the case. McIntosh and Kerley recently examined local government. McIntosh said: "We recommend ... that the local government elections should be timed to take place at the mid-point of the Parliament." Kerley said: "separate elections would ensure that local government issues are at the heart of local government elections: this seems to us an essential part of democracy and democratic renewal." The events of recent weeks have thrown into question the democratic legitimacy and practices that surround some of the worst examples of Labour fiefdoms. In many areas, there is a perception that matters are unclear. There should be an examination of the quango-council-Labour party network. Now, more than ever, there is a  desperate urgency for matters to be clarified and made open and transparent. I turn briefly to the measures in the bill that have found our support. We support four-year terms for councillors and the pilot voting schemes. However, it must be noted that the pilot schemes that may be trialled, to which the minister referred, will be trialled only for local government elections. They will not be trialled for the Scottish Parliament elections that are to take place on the same day. In other words, people might be able to go to their supermarket to vote for their local councillor, but they will still have to find a polling station to vote in the Scottish Parliament election.

I think I heard "Nonsense" from behind me. [Laughter.] They were referring to the nonsense that the Executive is proposing. I have said that the SNP opposes the bill. An imperative has been placed on every MSP and on all elected members of Scottish councils to engage in the debate, to explain and to do everything in our power to encourage increased voter participation. The bill is not the way to do that, and no one in the chamber should pretend that it is.

I will not take up too much time. First, I congratulate Bruce Crawford on securing the debate and I commend the support from so many people that has enabled us to reach the current stage in relation to the Rosyth-Zeebrugge ferry. In particular, I welcome the representatives of Fife Council who have worked long and hard for the ferry. Presiding Officer, you and I were in Estonia over the weekend and we were up until late last night. While I was there, I spoke to a Scot who owns an electronics company. He was excited about the possibility of the Rosyth-Zeebrugge ferry—he had not known anything about it. That backs up the need to market the service in the Baltic countries and the low countries, because many people will wish to use the service for export and import, as well as for tourism. I am delighted that, at long last, most of the necessary approvals have been secured. Full steam ahead to the continent next year!

The Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill is a small but beautifully formed bill. I congratulate ministers on listening to the good sense of the members of the Local Government Committee, whose suggestions have contributed enormously to the bill. Like Iain Gray, I think that we have perhaps had a bit too much heat in the chamber this afternoon, so I shall sit down. However, let me first congratulate ministers on the bill and thank everyone else who has put so much work into it.

Last month, I indicated the Scottish National Party group's support for the general principles of the Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill. We outlined a few matters of concern and called for amendments to be made. I am pleased, therefore, that the Executive has taken those matters on board and has returned today with a list of amendments that more or less address our concerns. The Executive's amendments are welcome and the SNP will support all of them. I am glad that the minister has listened to the points that the Local Government Committee and members of all parties raised. We are glad that the provision requiring ministerial consent for the carry-forward of small balances has been removed from the bill. However, we know that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities remains unhappy that the Executive is retaining a power of veto over police and fire boards accumulating surpluses of more than 5 per cent. Although I appreciate COSLA's concern about the matter, my concern is not the 5 per cent figure, but proposed new subsection (3AC), which gives the Executive the power through secondary legislation to vary the percentage at which consent must be sought. As such a provision is made in each of the groups of amendments, I intend to speak only on this group. I would be grateful if the minister assured us that it is not his intention to use secondary legislation except to increase the percentage at which consent might be sought in the future. It would be a matter of regret if secondary legislation were used for any other  purpose.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for a minister to misrepresent what another member has said and then refuse to give way to allow a correction to be made?

The SNP position on membership of the Committee of the Regions has been clear and consistent and is reflected in our amendment. We believe that members of the Committee of the Regions should be elected members of Scotland's local authorities, because we believe that that is the appropriate level for membership. Alex Johnstone and Iain Smith should note that the present Scottish membership of the Committee of the Regions is entirely made up of councillors—Hugh Henry was appointed to membership of that committee as a councillor. With that in mind, SNP councillors have been involved in a democratic process to elect one of their own as the SNP nominee on the Committee of the Regions. We are confident that Councillor Keith Brown will be a credit to the nation of Scotland. Tom McCabe said that the Parliament shares power with local government in Scotland. It is not the role of the Parliament to suck up powers and responsibilities from Scottish local authorities, yet that is what the Executive motion proposes. The Committee of the Regions has a vital role as a protector of the principle of subsidiarity. Policies should be developed and implemented as close to the citizen as possible. The Executive's motion to remove local councillors from the Committee of the Regions runs counter to the committee's legitimacy and to its role as a defender of local democracy. My final point addresses the proposal that two Executive ministers should represent Scotland on the Committee of the Regions—one as a full member and one as an alternate. We are led to believe that occasionally Scottish ministers will be allowed to lead UK delegations. Given that that is the case, it is a constitutional nonsense for Scottish Executive ministers to attend both the Council of Ministers and the Committee of the Regions, as that would mean that they were consulting themselves. Even at this late stage, I urge the Executive to put aside personal interests and to ensure that the level of representation for Scotland is appropriate—that is, at the local councillor level.

I refer back to ministerial control. If the minister is saying that that control is going to be informal, I am at a loss to understand why it must be enshrined in legislation.

I thank Trish Godman and the other members of the Local Government Committee, who have done far more work on the issue than I have—I have been a member of the committee for only two weeks. The report is a good one; it highlights the issues that need to be highlighted. The fact that the minister has acknowledged that amendments must be made is a testament to the committee's work over the past two weeks and, more important, over the past two years. I also thank those members of the Fife constabulary who have sat through the debate. I  am sure that they found it a bit more interesting than we did. We have raised issues of real concern, particularly about pensions. As Trish Godman said, that issue does not relate to the bill, but it is important and it is right and proper that the committee highlights it. We expect ministers to go away and give the matter some serious thought. They must ensure that pensions are secured now and in future and that money is not taken away from the reserve to do that. I hope that, even though he is not conceding it at the moment, the minister will accept an amendment at stage 2 on ministerial control. I referred to the fact that the bill does not directly affect Fife or Dumfries and Galloway, the two unitary authorities. If the minister is considering an amendment on the need for ministerial control, I hope that he will take into account the unitary authorities' specific needs. I refer the minister to paragraph 10 of the policy memorandum that accompanies the bill. It says: "Although unitary police authorities could use their 'general funds' to carry forward unspent police grant, a re-determination of that grant ... would require the repayment of any unspent grant. The intention is that any re-determinations will not require the return of unspent police grant that unitary police authorities wish to carry forward." It goes on to say: "Unitary authorities that wish to carry forward working balances will therefore need to have in place administrative mechanisms that show that any carried forward amount is spent only on eligible police expenditure. Such administrative mechanisms will need to have the approval of the Scottish Executive." If the minister accepts an amendment whereby joint boards are not required to seek ministerial approval for carry-forward, I hope that he will also consider the impact of that on the unitary authorities. I hope that he will not allow unitary authorities to be under a different regime from that governing the joint boards. We have only two unitary authorities in Scotland: Fife Council—my area—and Dumfries and Galloway Council. I hope that the procedures that will be in place will not mean that the two unitary authorities are disadvantaged in comparison to the joint board areas. I welcome the move forward by the minister today. However, there is work to be done at stage 2. I hope that the minister will look at the amendments and take on board the sincere comments that have been made, particularly about the pension funds. I look forward to stage 2 and a shorter debate at stage 3.

I am sure that members wish to welcome to the chamber representatives of the police service in Fife. It is a nice coincidence that they are visiting today when we are discussing the Police and Fire Services (Scotland) Bill. I am certain that they will find the proceedings of great interest, even though the two unitary authorities, Fife and Dumfries and Galloway, are not covered by the legislation insofar as it relates to the carry-forward of unspent requisitions. The bill is a sensible measure that will allow police and fire authorities to carry forward working balances from one financial year to the next. It offers greater flexibility and more prudent financial planning and, as the minister said, it will stop the rush to spend as the end of the year approaches. The SNP supports the general principles of the bill. I am pleased that the general principles of the bill command support throughout the public service spectrum. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has welcomed the principles of the bill because of the greater financial flexibility it offers; the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has stated that the bill would enhance significantly the efficient use of resources; and the Accounts Commission for Scotland believes that the bill will be helpful in assisting police and fire brigades to deliver better value for money. As the minister outlined, there are a number of concerns about the bill. I am grateful that the  minister has suggested, at an early stage in the debate, that he is willing to consider amendments at stage 2. It is important that during the debate we run through the reasons why many members feel that some parts of the bill need to be examined. The first concern is about ministerial approval for carrying forward working balances. Local councils do not require ministerial approval to carry forward their working balances and we believe that police and fire boards should have the same flexibility as local councils. We do not believe that additional bureaucracy and control is necessary and we do not understand why it is necessary to exercise ministerial control over the amounts in question, which will be modest. The minister indicated that ministerial approval will be dealt with by informal arrangement. If that is so, most of us are at a loss to understand why that informal arrangement must be enshrined in legislation. That control is unnecessary and it will undermine the modest provisions of the bill. Of greater concern is the requirement that joint police or fire boards have approval from all the constituent authorities to carry forward the underspent money. I am grateful that the minister has already acknowledged that that will be subject to amendment. Chief Constable Rae of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland highlighted his concerns about what would happen if one constituent authority refused to allow the carry-forward: "it is difficult for me to say that I will not send as many police officers to an incident because that authority has withheld a proportion of the budget."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 4 September 2001; c 2152.] That perhaps explains why there is concern and why we are grateful that the minister has indicated that that proposal will be amended at stage 2. COSLA believes that the proposal would undermine the basis of the current relationship between joint boards and the constituent members. It is appropriate to mention the democratic legitimacy of the joint boards. They comprise, after all, elected councillors and have been a standing feature of Scottish local government for many years. They must be free to determine their priorities, not just from the perspective of one authority, but from the strategic perspective of all the areas that they cover. It would be a matter of regret if amendments were not to be lodged that prevented that legitimacy from being undermined. That might also lead to delay and set council against council to no great purpose. In any event, the local authorities would take action to ensure that any joint police board or fire board that was building up unreasonable reserves would make the necessary  adjustments during the normal budgetary procedure. That is how the situation should be. I confess to having no strong opinion at this point on whether an upper limit of 3 per cent should be placed on the carry-forward. COSLA believes that the joint boards should decide the percentage of carry-forward by a normal consultative process with the joint bodies. Representatives from the Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers Association have expressed concern that the figure seems to have been plucked from thin air. I will now speak on an issue that is not specific to the bill—pensions. The intention behind the bill is laudable. It has found support throughout the public sector. However, the reality is that the benefits of the bill will not be felt for some time, because any underspends are currently used to fund the pensions of the fire service. On that point, Tim Stone of COSLA said: "A major problem with the increasing cost of fire service and police pensions is forthcoming. Those will increase substantially over the next 10 years and will somehow have to be funded. I suggest that that cannot be dealt with using the reserves with which the bill is concerned."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 4 September 2001; c 2141.] Although the bill will have a modest effect on underspends in the future, the reality is that it is terribly academic in the medium term until such time as police and fire pensions are dealt with. I urge ministers to address that matter with some urgency. All the representations that I have received indicate a belief that there is a time bomb under the pension schemes for the police and fire services in Scotland. I urge the minister to go away, think about that and find out whether we can put in place a better system. The principles of the bill are welcome. A number of issues should be addressed by amendments at stage 2. However, we need sufficient funding and resources for pensions in the first place. I congratulate the minister on the bill. It is modest, but it will make a real difference to the police and fire services in Scotland. The SNP welcomes the general principles of the bill.

The debate allows members to pay tribute to Scotland's voluntary sector—the paid workers and the volunteers without whom many services would grind to a halt or would never have existed. Just before the 1999 election, I was asked to address the SCVO on the voluntary sector and the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. If my memory serves me well, I think that Sarah Boyack spoke for the Labour party. At that time, I worked for Shelter. I said that the voluntary sector had a huge opportunity to participate, influence and act in partnership with the Parliament and its committees. The voluntary sector's policy development work is firmly rooted in practical concerns and action, which makes it uniquely placed to influence and inform debates, policies and legislation. I believe that the voluntary sector has done that. It is to be congratulated on engaging not only with the Executive and committees, but with MSPs of all political parties. However—there is always a however with me—in 1999, I said that the voluntary sector had to retain its independence from the Government, regardless of the Government's political complexion. I hoped that the SNP would be the Government. Despite that, I urged the voluntary sector to retain its independence, because its primary interest is the people whom it represents and those for whom it provides services. The  sector's primary interest is not simply in carrying out the latest Government initiative. It has a duty to speak out on behalf of the most vulnerable. I was concerned when I read the suggestion in the Finance Committee report that the voluntary sector's emphasis on meeting the Executive's priorities "leads to voluntary organisations distorting their work and organisation in fact or appearance, to make it appear that they are" making Government priorities their priorities.

I accept Johann Lamont's point that the Government often takes on board the priorities of the voluntary sector—and so it should. We also need to acknowledge that the Government's priorities are sometimes fed through to the voluntary sector and that that is a problem. I believe in partnership between the voluntary organisations and local government and central Government. I am in favour of complementary working. However, there is no excuse for leaving the voluntary sector to pick up the pieces that are left in the wake of budgets set by central Government and local government. I welcome the report of the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission, which I have already mentioned. I hope that, notwithstanding the minister's response to my intervention, we move quickly to introduce a regulatory framework for charities in Scotland. That is long overdue and has simply never existed before. Those of us who have worked in genuine organisations that particularly rely on fundraising know that there have been many scams in the past that the Scottish charities office has been absolutely unable to tackle. Such scams suggest that all charities are not quite kosher and are not quite what they claim to be. We need to take steps to root out those that are involved in scams and cons. I urge the minister to consider the time scale closely to see whether we cannot, in this first session of the Scottish Parliament, make a real difference to the charity and voluntary sector in Scotland.

I welcome the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission. Can the minister indicate when we might expect legislation to allow charity Scotland to be set up?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Parliament has just disagreed with the Rural Affairs Committee, which recommended that the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill could not be amended. In circumstances in which a committee has recommended that a bill cannot be amended but the Parliament does not agree, it is logical that the bill is not referred back to that committee for amendment at stage 2. I ask you to take the matter to the Parliamentary Bureau and ask it, and the business managers, where the bill should go at stage 2.

Before I start, I wish to advise the Presiding Officer that I will not take any interventions from those members of the Rural Development Committee who have spent the past two years delaying and seeking to destroy the bill. They have had their say. A majority of the people of Scotland oppose hunting for sport and wish to see it banned. To set one animal or more on another for entertainment or sport is a barbaric act that should be consigned to the past century and not continued into this one. I will not waste too much time on the amendments. Alex Fergusson's amendment adds nothing to the debate. It was lodged to maximise the speaking time for members of the committee who have already spent 18 months delaying the debate in the Parliament. Elaine Murray's amendment, I am afraid to say, is confused. It is not an alternative to the bill. It is designed to kick the bill into touch. It is no secret that I have had concerns about the wording of the bill—not because I disagreed with its aims or intentions, but because I feared that the apologists for hunting would use the imperfect drafting to tell lies, misinform and mislead. And so it came to pass—including the lie that someone out walking, whose dog chased a rabbit, would be liable to prosecution. It was hardly surprising that it was Mr George Lyon who raised that point today. The bill has three aims: to ban mounted fox hunts, to ban hare coursing and to ban fox baiting. When we discuss the general principles of the bill, it is incumbent on the committee members to pay attention to what the member thinks are the general principles instead of making them up to suit their own conclusions. Mike Watson's final submission said: "The first principle of my bill is to ban mounted fox hunting ...The second principle of my bill is stop hare coursing ...The third principle of my Bill is to ban fox-baiting". The Scottish Countryside Alliance paid Jack Irvine and Media House £250,000 to halt or significantly water down Mike Watson's bill. Let me quote from Media House's chilling account of how it set about doing that: "By providing the media with the 'sticks' with which to 'beat' the new Parliament we were able to capture the agenda and find a voice for pro-hunt arguments. An early  tactical decision was made not to address the issue of animal rights head on ... The SCA have been positioned as a formidable political force in Scotland and the delayed Bill is dogged with controversy. The conduct of the presenting member is in question". The Duke of Buccleuch and David McLetchie said that the Scottish Parliament should concentrate on matters other than fox hunting. As someone who has campaigned all their life for a Scottish Parliament, I am not about to take lectures about what the Parliament will and will not discuss from people who have spent all their political lives opposing constitutional change.

When Mike Watson made his final submission to the Rural Development Committee, he was quite clear that the third principle is to ban fox baiting. Let us move on. Is the bill a class issue? No, it is not. It is a cruelty issue.

It is not the intention of the bill to restrict the legitimate pest control activities of gamekeepers, landowners and organised hill packs. What the three general principles have in common is a desire to end cruelty to those animals that are ripped apart, maimed and killed for sport. Brian Adam asked whether it is right to impose the will of a majority on a minority. The answer is yes when those who indulge in barbaric acts for sport shame the rest of us. Society has a right to make that judgment, just as it did when cock fighting, badger baiting and deer hunting were banned. Surely no member is arguing that those bans should now be repealed. Is it not ironic that those who say that the majority should not impose their will on a minority are the same minority who imposed the poll tax on the majority of the people in Scotland? Mike Russell and Euan Robson said that it was the wrong time for the bill to proceed. If it is the wrong time for the bill to proceed, we should consider the activities of those members of the Rural Development Committee who have held the  bill back and delayed its progress. Christine Grahame raised the question of the Borders and regeneration. I have great sympathy for her point of view. I agree that much work needs to be done in that respect. However, I say to her that the future of the Borders economy cannot be based on a few full-time-equivalent jobs in hunting—there has to be much more than that. The bill is not perfect. It was drafted at a time when the Parliament gave members no assistance in drafting their bills. No bill is ever perfect. The Housing (Scotland) Bill had more than 500 amendments between stage 1 and stage 3, but no one argued that that meant that the general principles could not be met. The Transport (Scotland) Bill had a whole section on workplace parking removed, but no one argued that the general principles could not be met. Mike Russell asked about criminalising people. I quote Ann Widdecombe from the debate on Michael Foster's Wild Mammals (Hunting with Dogs) Bill: "If this democratically elected House decides that hunting is against the law, it is our right to exact penalties against those who fight the law. We will be penalising not the fact that they like to hunt but the fact that they break the law."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 28 November 1997; Vol 301, c 1251.] Finally, I quote Mahatma Gandhi: "The greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by the way its animals are treated." If members are opposed to the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill, they should have the moral fibre and honesty to say so and vote against it, but if they believe that fox baiting, hare coursing and mounted hunting for sport is cruel, they must support the general principles of the bill. If they believe in a civilised, more humane society and a more humane Scotland, they should support the bill.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is the member speaking as convener of the Rural Development Committee or is he speaking, as he just said, as a member for the South of Scotland? He is either speaking to a committee amendment  or he is not.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is important to clarify the matter of fox baiting. In his final submission to the Rural Affairs Committee, Mike Watson said—

I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing an opportunity for the Parliament to remember the mining communities and those who suffered because of the work that they did to build the communities that we now know. I also congratulate David Reid and all those who were involved in the memorial ceremony and the building of the cairn. I also pay tribute to Joe Paterson, the former Scottish National Party councillor who has been responsible for compiling the memorial book to all the men who have been killed in the Fife pits. I speak as one whose grandfather was killed in one of the Fife pits, as the daughter of one who was invalided out of the pits and the sister of a miner who was sacked from Seafield at the time of the strike. The Donibristle disaster of 26 August 1901 is etched deep into the psyches of all of us who were born and brought up in Cowdenbeath, including my good friend Dennis Canavan. All of us who come from mining communities lived with the mining disaster and the tales of our fathers and grandfathers. It is true that the heroism that was displayed in the Donibristle disaster was way beyond what any community could have expected. It is also significant that that heroism was rewarded with gold watches from a newspaper but that the same people received no reward from the establishment of the day. That probably indicates how little regard the establishment had for the mining communities. The Donibristle disaster led indirectly to the setting up of the mine rescue service 11 years later. That was set up in Stenhouse Street in Cowdenbeath. Dennis Canavan knows it as well as I do. It was a privilege and pleasure to be at the ceremony in Trinity church in Cowdenbeath. I saw miners, ex-miners and their families coming from all over Scotland, Yorkshire and beyond simply to  pay tribute to the many brave men of the disaster. Of all of the brave men, I will single out one—Robert Law. After people were trapped and when almost all hope was gone, Robert Law went down and led out some of the rescuers and other men who were abandoned in the pit. After Robert Law brought out the last of those men, there were still eight men trapped in the pit. Their bodies were recovered, as Helen Eadie rightly said, some months later. From the stories that I heard when I was young, it was not a quick or easy death. The fate of the men in the pit can only be imagined. It was quite horrible. I accept that we should pay tribute not just to the miners of Fife but to the miners throughout Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom who died to build the communities that we know. It is about time that we gave something back. Fife, like many other areas, was built on the back of the miners. The prosperity that we enjoyed for many years was built on the work of the miners. It is appalling that, after all this time and when we have only one deep mine in Scotland, there is no lasting memorial to the miners of Fife and that it is almost impossible for the miners of Fife to get the money necessary to build a heritage centre. We need to remember who we are and where we have come from. If we do not remember that, we will have no idea about where we should be going in future. I urge the minister—he is the minister with responsibility for culture—to give, in his closing speech, some hope to the ex-miners of Fife that their relics and artefacts will be preserved for eternity. I finish by welcoming those visitors in the gallery who have come from Fife. It is fortunate that business finished early, allowing Helen Eadie's members' business to be called and giving those people the opportunity to listen to the debate about Fife and our miners.

As one who is frequently held hostage on that service, I have listened with interest to the minister's response. Will the minister explain briefly to members such as John McAllion and me why, if electrification is a priority for the line from London to Edinburgh, it is not a priority for the line from Edinburgh to Aberdeen? No one is considering having alternative forms of transport instead of electrifying the line from London to Edinburgh, so why is the option of merely having a new generation of trains from Edinburgh to Aberdeen being considered?

Here we are, halfway through the first term of the Labour-Liberal coalition, and we wait in vain for progress on the issue that dare not speak its name. I speak of proportional representation in local government, of course—[ Interruption. ] I thank Mr Rumbles for his applause—it is always welcome. First, however, I will deal with the local government (timing of elections) (Scotland) bill. The Executive is hell-bent on holding the local elections on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections in 2003. Local elections should be about tailoring local policies to communities. They should be about scrutinising individual councils and making local councillors accountable. They should not be fought against a background of national issues, because that is not  in the interests of local government. The draft bill will allow the Executive to obscure the local government agenda to such an extent that no one should be surprised if the electorate decides that local government is simply not worth turning out to vote for. I have no doubt that, as Trish Godman said, the Executive will argue that that measure could increase turnout. I will be frank: that argument is spurious. The way to increase turnout is to ensure that local government remains relevant to the electorate. The draft bill does the opposite. I now turn to the absence of PR from the Executive's programme. What do the junior partners—the Liberals—have to say about that? Iain Smith asked the First Minister about McIntosh, but did not mention PR.

He did not mention PR by name. Tavish Scott also tried hard to get through his speech without mentioning PR.

Okay.

How grateful we are for Mr Rumbles's comments. However, it was a pity that, when the First Minister was asked the same question, he refused to say whether such legislation would be proposed in the period leading up to 2003. Perhaps Mr Rumbles is looking to become First Minister—perhaps he knows more. Let us remind ourselves of what Mr Wallace said two years ago when he picked up the keys to his ministerial Mondeo: "We will ensure that the publication of the final McIntosh recommendations is followed by an immediate programme of change" including progress on PR. In June 1999, McIntosh said that proportional representation "appears to command very wide support" and that it should be introduced immediately to local government elections. A year later, Kerley said: "We would urge the Scottish Executive to take an early decision on the date of implementation of a new electoral  system." There has been no progress—immediate or otherwise—no bill, no proposal, nothing. Today, we have heard hardly a word from the Liberal Democrat or Labour members about PR. Some Liberal Democrats claim that PR is the rock on which the coalition will founder. It seems that other Liberal Democrats want to use PR as the get-out clause to escape from the coalition. That would enable them to pretend to the electorate in 2003 that they are principled or that they have a separate identity and are independent from Labour. Is it any wonder that the electorate is cynical about politicians when Liberal Democrats are prepared to sacrifice PR for power? Let me now turn to the Labour party.

Twenty seconds is usually enough. A local government bill that omits PR, which is the single most important action that could revive local democracy, is a wasted opportunity. The SNP is determined to make a positive case for local government. That means giving councils strength, legitimacy and freedom to act. It means ensuring that local authorities are accountable to the electorate. Above all, it means putting power into the hands of communities with a voting system that ensures that every vote counts.

The debate has been useful and informative. MSPs from all parties have highlighted the increasing importance of lottery funding to communities throughout Scotland and the Government's increasing reliance on lottery funding to deliver its policy objectives. The SNP will support the Conservative amendment. The stated aims of the new opportunities fund are to address the needs of the most disadvantaged and to encourage community participation. It was good to hear members highlighting the awards in their areas, but I am sure that Cathy Jamieson will forgive me if I do not take up her invitation to jump into the open-air swimming pool, however warm it might be this summer. The projects that the new opportunities fund is tackling and prioritising are in health and education and include out-of-school learning and child care. The projects in the new round of funding include drug support, palliative care, sport and schools. All those projects are welcome and all are devolved matters. The new opportunities fund projects are meant to complement the national and local strategies. As many members have said, the new opportunities fund has no Scottish committee to provide a focus or to decide on Scottish allocations. The SNP agrees with the SCVO, which said: "SCVO would like to record its continued view that all decisions about the Scottish proportion of the New  Opportunities Fund should be the subject of scrutiny by the Scottish Parliament after wide consultation in Scotland". Elaine Murray said that the SCVO briefing had a fairly nationalistic tone. That notion would be rather bizarre to the authors of the briefing paper and I refer her to the report itself. Elaine Murray also mentioned additionality as a concern. Donald Gorrie said that the current system is not working. I will return to that later. Ian Jenkins said that we should look at some of the problems. Despite all the welcome news and the individual projects throughout the country that members have highlighted, the current system is failing in some areas and the basic aims of the new opportunities fund are not being met. I will expand on the point that I made to the minister. Some of the most deprived areas in Fife—the ex-mining communities—have missed out completely. Not a penny has gone to Kirkcaldy, Levenmouth, Cowdenbeath, Methil or north-east Fife. There is not insufficient funding; money is simply not being accessed. I welcome the minister's comment that that issue has been considered and I would like him to expand on that when he sums up. The Parliament has no role to scrutinise or oversee the new opportunities fund. We cannot find out why in some areas new opportunities fund money is being accessed and organisations are receiving it while other areas are simply losing out. Robert Brown delivered a well-argued speech, which deserves further consideration. He made several valuable points. As I said, there is a problem with the new opportunities fund in some areas. Perhaps that is owing to lack of publicity or lack of support and assistance from the local authority. We must examine the new opportunities fund to find out where the problems are. That can be achieved only if this Parliament examines the matter, but it has no remit to do so. That is a failing. The Parliament should rise to the challenges of the new opportunities fund. This is a useful first debate, but we must have more debates on the matter. There must be greater scrutiny in the Parliament about where the funding is going. More consideration must be given to the priority areas, which should be decided here in Scotland. We should not shy away from our responsibilities. It is our obligation to say that we know that there is a problem and that we want to provide a solution. The problem can best be addressed by this Parliament.

I cannot agree more with what the minister says about the fact that disadvantaged areas are losing out on new opportunities fund money and money from other sources. However, there is a lack of support given to projects when applications for funding are being made. What does the Executive intend to do to support the organisations in developing programmes to enable them to get grants?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Andrew Wilson had been paged and he has asked me to convey his apologies to the minister. I am in the process of writing a note to the minister to that effect.

rose—

It is commonplace.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Robert Brown talks about the SNP over-egging the debate, but the real over-egging started with the Executive's press release of 23 February, which stated that it would provide central heating for "140,000 households, over half being pensioner households"— and that all would benefit. We have just taken part in an election in which  the turnout was the lowest since 1918. There is a cynicism about politicians and the Government that is hardly surprising, when ministers cannot tell the truth about a modest scheme that will improve the lives of some people in Scotland.

No. Instead, we get spin, hype and, more cruelly, raised expectations that the Executive was never prepared to meet. I ask the minister to confirm that the central heating scheme was really about the headline, "Central heating for all". In that first press release of 23 February, the minister assured us that "all pensioner households and tenants in the social rented sector will live in a centrally heated and well insulated home by 2006." She went on to say that she wanted to ensure that "everyone is Scotland has a warm dry home." On 23 February, the Executive trumpeted that 140,000 households would benefit. However, in reply to my written question, the minister admitted that she had not asked the local authorities for an estimate until 26 February. Although the minister announced that 140,000 households would benefit, she could not have known the correct figure, as she had not asked local authorities for an estimate until three days after the press release had been issued. During the debate on fuel poverty in March, Elaine Smith and I questioned the minister on who would be eligible for free central heating. I said: "The Executive's scheme specifically excludes householders who have been saddled with old, unaffordable, inefficient, outdated heating systems. For those tenants, the prospect of affordable heating is as distant as ever."— [ Official Report , 1 March 2001; Vol 11, c 185.]  The Official Report records that the minister indicated her disagreement to that statement.

I see that Elaine Smith is not here today.

No doubt, Elaine Smith has been gagged by the Executive, otherwise she might have made some of the same criticisms today that she made during the debate in March. Surely, even if the Executive had the most limited insight into housing, it must have been aware of the huge number of houses in Scotland that have  ruinously expensive electric underfloor heating, inefficient warm-air heating or dilapidated storage heaters. Those houses would never have met the Executive's criteria and would therefore never have been part of the central heating programme. When the scheme was announced, Shelter Scotland said that it would be "very concerned if the Executive think their central heating scheme will be a major step in eradicating fuel poverty."

Four months later, Highland Council said that the scheme was "a cruel deception". I welcome the commitment to extend the scheme that the minister gave today. However, she was dragged to that position kicking and screaming because of the embarrassment caused by the scheme.

In February, the minister said that money was available to tackle 140,000 households. I ask the minister to give a guarantee to the chamber that the central heating scheme will cover at least 140,000 households—not 8,000 households, as claimed by local authorities, or 29,000 households, as the minister claimed today.

I shall be brief, as the minister's response deserves only a brief reply. I find it difficult to debate a housing bill that goes nowhere near ensuring the minimum standards of housing in which people should be living in the 21 st century. The minister said that she does not want to be rushed, and that the bill is not the opportunity to address the tolerable standard. I wonder whether four years is rushing consultation. The consultation concluded in October 1998. What about the responses? The Executive has been considering them for almost three years, yet it has done nothing. It has wasted this opportunity to put into statute that which should be a basic right in housing. The minister says that there is to be an index of housing quality. I said in my opening speech—and I wish that Karen Whitefield would pay attention, instead of talking to her colleague—that an index of housing quality will not give tenants a statutory right to have their houses dealt with. That is the difference between an index and a tolerable standard in legislation. The Executive talks about minimum standards and aspirations. The SNP wants the Executive to aspire to a minimum standard for housing. The minister responded to Robert Brown's question about the time scale for the present review, but by the time the Executive deals with housing that is below the tolerable standard, the pyramids could have been built. There has been considerable concern among members about housing that is below tolerable standard and the lack of a response from the minister. I therefore urge members to support amendments 10 and 11, which would give tenants statutory rights that the Executive is prepared to deny them.

Amendments 10 and 11 are exactly the same as amendments that I lodged and that were disagreed to at stage 2. I look forward to the minister addressing the amendments this time, which she failed to do at stage 2. The tolerable standard for Scottish housing was set over 30 years ago. In England, housing has to meet a fitness standard, which, in terms of quality, is set far higher than the standard that we have in Scotland. In October 1997, Malcolm Chisholm, when he was the Scottish Office minister with responsibility for housing, said: "it is clear that too many people in Scotland still live in poor housing conditions. ... A further cause for concern is that so many houses fall 'Below Tolerable Standard', even though that Standard was set almost 30 years ago and is now out of date."  If it was out of date in 1997, it is even more out of date now. A Scottish Office consultation was concluded in 1998. Since then, there has been barely a cheep from the Executive about what it intends to do with the responses that it received to the consultation document. Indeed, it was clear at stage 2 that the Executive still does not intend to act on the tolerable standard in Scotland. It prefers to kick the whole matter into touch with the housing improvement task force and an index of housing quality. The tolerable standard is, and should remain, a minimum standard below which no house should fall. It is not an aspirational standard that sets the optimum housing standards, nor should it be. The minimum standard has three purposes, as the Scottish Office outlined in its 1997 consultation paper: to identify defects that unless remedied could result in the loss of the house to the housing stock; to identify issues of health and safety of the occupants; and to target resources. I agree with those three purposes. In its report, the committee recommended that a wider definition of tolerable standard be introduced. Amendments 10 and 11 are very modest and do no more than adopt the English fitness standard, which is under review. The wording of my amendments was chosen with great care. Amendment 10 inserts the phrase: "and is free from serious disrepair". At stage 2, the minister said: "Considerable subjectivity is involved in measuring serious disrepair."—[ Official Report , Social Justice  Committee , 15 May 2001; c 2438.] What a lot of mince. The wording in amendment 10 is exactly the wording of the English fitness standard. If serious disrepair can be understood by our friends and colleagues in England, it can also be understood in Scotland.

In England, there appears to be no great difficulty with the term "serious disrepair". If the Scottish ministers cannot even accept that wording as a measure, they are suggesting that they can do nothing about the tolerable standard. I do not accept that. Amendment 11 specifies that housing should be "free from dampness prejudicial to the health of the occupants".  Again, that is the wording of the English fitness standard. No doubt Cathie Craigie will tell me that people up and down the country do not understand what it means. The Scottish Executive is still dragging its feet on the tolerable standard in Scotland. The Labour Government has been consulting since 1998 and is still consulting. In evidence, Glasgow City Council said that "the tolerable standard is not adequate for today's housing."—[ Official Report , Local Government  Committee , 23 January 2001; c 1447.] The Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland called for early action to raise the tolerable standard. In its briefing, Shelter Scotland—I agree with it sometimes—said that it was ironic that an amendment had been adopted to eradicate fuel poverty in 15 years, yet condensation, dampness and disrepair were not addressed. I find it hard to believe that we are debating a housing bill—the Executive's flagship policy—that will do nothing to target for improvement the worst housing. The bill will not give to tenants the statutory right to live in a house of decent quality. That is a disgrace and a wasted opportunity. It is intolerable that in the 21 st century we have a standard for Scottish housing that has its roots in the 19 th century. Even at this late stage, I urge the ministers to accept the minimal amendments that I have lodged. I move amendment 10.

Will the member give way?

I thank my colleague for giving way. In 1987 and in 1988, Henry McLeish and I campaigned against the Conservatives' privatisation of the new-town housing stock. If Henry McLeish, who is now the First Minister, thought that that was privatisation, why is wholesale stock transfer not privatisation now?

Will the minister give way?

Will Cathy Jamieson acknowledge that what I was trying to say was that the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 acknowledges that young people under the age of 18 are children? I was not referring to the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 and the duty of care on local authorities. I was suggesting that while we do have a duty of care for young people who leave care, there is no duty of care on homelessness authorities to look after 16 and 17-year-olds who have never been in social work care.

Amendments 2, 3, 4 and 5 all seek to extend  priority need categories. I will address the amendments individually. I am aware that the homelessness task force is examining the issue—as the minister said—but that is not an excuse for doing nothing, nor is it enough for the minister to say that ministers can introduce the amendments through secondary legislation. The minister has the opportunity to do something now. The matter has needed to be addressed for many years. It is no great secret that the homelessness task force will seek to recommend amendments that are similar to my amendments and I see no reason for further delay. Indeed, the Social Justice Committee recommended at stage 1 to extend categories of priority need to include single young women who have been abused, people who have institutional or care backgrounds, and all 16 or 17-year-olds. My amendments seek to do those things. Amendment 2 concerns young people between the ages of 16 and 18. It is astonishing that the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 accepts that all young people under the age of 18 are children and are therefore vulnerable, but that a number of other pieces of legislation—including homelessness legislation—and now the Housing (Scotland) Bill do not accept that young people under the age of 18 are vulnerable by virtue of their age. It seems contradictory that the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 accepts that people under 18 are children, but that proposed homelessness legislation does not. We all recognise how vulnerable young people are. We need to give them support and I urge members to reject the minister's advice and make a commitment to young people—particularly to 16 to 18-year-olds who might end up on the streets with very little support from local authorities. I will deal with amendment 3 very briefly. Amendment 3 seeks to give priority need to those who have left care institutions, other institutions and the armed services. Currently, those people have no priority under homelessness legislation, despite the fact that research shows that people who leave the armed forces are more than likely to end up on the streets. We have a duty to support them. Amendments 4 and 5 deal with violence and the fear of violence. They are particularly relevant to this Parliament and to the support that it can give to women who are trying to flee from domestic violence, and to people who are in fear of violence, which is generally external violence that is perpetrated against them. Many people leave their houses because of the fear of violence. Unless we accept that they have priority need, we will not be able to address their problems. Finally, I acknowledge that local authorities must have regard to the present code of guidance.  However, having regard to a code of guidance is not the same as adhering to statutory rights. The amendments seek to give very vulnerable people statutory rights. At the moment, not only are there postcode waiting lists in Scotland, but there is postcode treatment of homeless people. The code of guidance is merely guidance and has no statutory force. Unless local authorities act in concert throughout Scotland, people in parts of Scotland will be treated differently from those in other parts. That is why we need statutory rights, rather than codes of guidance. I urge members to support amendments 2, 3, 4 and 5.

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1O-3462 by Susan Deacon on 24 May 2001, whether it will ensure that every patient who is assessed as potentially benefiting from beta interferon is prescribed it. (S1O-3554)

Two weeks ago, the minister said that cost was not a factor in determining whether patients with MS are prescribed beta interferon. Will Susan Deacon explain why 52 people in greater Glasgow have been clinically assessed as requiring beta interferon, but have not been prescribed it because the funding has not been made available? Will she also explain why no new prescriptions for beta interferon have been issued in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area since November 1998? Will she explain why she has constantly claimed that cost limits are not being applied when she knows that that is not true?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. May I quote the minister, who said in the Official Report —

I welcome the strengthening of the duties to be placed on local authorities, particularly those with regard to young people leaving care. Cathy Jamieson knows from her background and experience how difficult it is for young people to make that transition. When the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 was passed, most of us had great hopes that there would be an end to young people being abandoned at the age of 16. The fact that that has not happened has led to difficulties—and to amendments being lodged today. There is one more thing in relation to young people leaving care that the Executive should take on board. Stage 3 consideration of the Housing  (Scotland) Bill is coming up. I would like Malcolm Chisholm to urge his ministerial colleagues to make provision for 16-year-olds and 17-year-olds to be considered as in priority need in the context of housing and homelessness.

In recent written answers, the minister has stated that the Executive has no plans to find out how many people are being deprived of beta interferon, even though they have been clinically assessed as needing it. When will the Executive end the misery of the postcode lottery and the cost limits that determine whether an MS sufferer can get the drug?

I add the thanks of committee members to those of Patricia Ferguson for all the support that Sam Jones and Jim Johnston gave us when we were reaching our decisions. On behalf of my colleagues on the Standards Committee, I also thank members for their contributions to what has been an interesting, if short, debate. It is clear that the committee's proposal for a standards commissioner has cross-party support and has been widely welcomed by members across the Parliament. That constructive approach reflects the consensual way in which the committee has sought to develop its policy in this area, and we welcome the Executive's support for our proposals. The overwhelmingly positive response to our proposals reflects the extent of the commitment of members of all parties to ensuring that we maintain the highest standards of probity when we conduct our business. It is clear that the issue of standards in public life remains topical and we are all aware that we are constantly under the microscope of the press and other media as we carry out our parliamentary duties. By recommending the appointment of a standards commissioner, we send the right message. That message is that we take the issue seriously and are wholly committed to ensuring the robust investigation of complaints against members. By so doing, we hope to reassure the people of Scotland that their new Parliament will not be afflicted by sleaze and corruption. Rather, members are bound by the key principles of the code of conduct, which set the tone for the relationship between members and those whom they represent. We believe that the proposals strike a balance between ensuring that complaints are dealt with in a rigorous and transparent manner and making certain that members are not unjustifiably exposed to malicious or ill-founded complaints. In short, we aim to ensure that complainer and member alike can be confident that they are being treated fairly and justly.  I want to pick up on some of the key elements of the proposals. First, the bill will contain powers to enable the commissioner to summon witnesses and to compel the production of documentary evidence. Those powers will underpin the independence of the post, and that independence will be a critical guarantor of the confidence of the Scottish people and of members of Parliament in the complaints process. Secondly, I want to highlight the commissioner's relationship with the committee and with the Parliament. As Mike Rumbles explained earlier, the commissioner will be responsible for carrying out investigations in private and independently of the Standards Committee. However, the committee will continue to be responsible for recommending whether the sanctions that are set out in rule 6.5 of the standing orders are appropriate. The commissioner's role will be restricted to a consideration of and decision on the facts of each complaint. It will be for the committee to scrutinise the commissioner's findings and to make the appropriate recommendations to the Parliament. Thirdly, a decision on whether to impose sanctions on a member who has been found to have breached the code of conduct will be taken at a meeting of the whole Parliament. We believe that that is fundamentally important. It will also give the member the right to come before the Parliament to put his point of view. On behalf of the committee, I commend to members the proposal for a standards commissioner committee bill. We are convinced that the appointment of a commissioner will be an integral component and demonstrate the Parliament's commitment to ensure that there is the highest order of probity in our affairs. The introduction of legislation to appoint a commissioner will mark another important milestone in our commitment to maintaining and strengthening the public's trust and confidence in the integrity of the Parliament and its members in conducting public business.

Scotland's new towns are not often mentioned in the same sentence as the words "architectural excellence". The maisonettes and flat-roof, back-to-front and upside-down houses are all testament to some of the worst examples of municipal architecture—at election time, canvassers and leafleters find a ball of string an essential campaign tool. However, the new towns also contain some architectural gems. For example, St Paul's Church in Glenrothes, which was designed by Gillespie, Kidd and Coia, has been hailed as a modern-day masterpiece and described as the most significant piece of modern church architecture north of the English channel. I urge  members to visit it. There is one area in which Scotland's new towns and Glenrothes in particular, led the way: public art. The beautiful and powerful Benno Schotz sculpture, "Ex Terra", was unveiled in 1967. It is a 23ft bronze of a mother and six children, which is designed to represent the growth of a town while recognising where Fife came from and to whom we owed the strength of the community—the miners who hewed the coal. The sculpture has pride of place at the bus station, where everyone can see it as they come into Glenrothes. Glenrothes Development Corporation, with remarkable foresight, appointed the first-ever town artist. Over the years, David Harding and Malcolm Robertson delighted, amazed and amused children and their parents with huge stone creations. Glenrothes was the template for the appointment of town artists in other towns across the UK and beyond. My one regret about the demise of the Glenrothes Development Corporation is the loss of the town artist. I recognise that these are difficult times for local authorities and the arts and that priorities need to be established. However, it cannot be beyond local authorities to encourage the inclusion of a work of public art in medium-scale building developments. The legacy of the town artists remains. In every precinct of Glenrothes, there is a piece of public art to admire or to be amused by. The giant blue and yellow irises, which were such a hit at the Glasgow garden festival, were repatriated back to Glenrothes and now nestle among the real spring flowers. There are also the horse and chariot in Caskieberran, the giant hands at Collydean, the chairs and television at Pitcoudie, and the totem poles and the old man and woman having a blether in the town centre. Everywhere there are giant stone mushrooms. We all have favourites. I have two. Who could fail to love the family of hippos that inhabits the town park. They amble out from the River Leven to wallow in the paddling pool, sometimes sharing it with the local children. Then there are the poetry slabs, with snatches of verse by some of Scotland's finest poets: Bud Neil's sad tale of wee Josie's skintit nose; and the works of Joe Corrie, the miners' playwright and poet. In passing, let me say that it is beyond time that the arts establishment in Scotland recognised Joe Corrie's enormous contribution to Scottish literature. Corrie was referred to by T S Eliot as "the greatest Scots poet since Burns", yet he is all but forgotten. I will wind up with a small snatch from Joe Corrie's "The Image o' God", which is etched into  the stone slabs in Glenrothes and into the hearts and minds of miners and their families everywhere. "Crawlin' aboot like a snail in the mud, Covered wi' clammy blae, Me, made after the image of God— Jings! But it's a laughable tale." I urge the minister to promote public art works and to encourage local authorities, developers and architects to work together to achieve that end.

I agree with Karen Whitefield that no one should have to live in a cold, damp house. Does she agree that, during stage 2 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill yesterday, the Executive missed a chance to set minimum standards that would have achieved that aim?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it plans to publish its review of the progress made to date in ending mixed-sex wards in hospitals. (S1O-3371)

Will the minister confirm that more than half Scotland's hospitals still have mixed-sex wards? Will she also confirm that the Executive does not have a clue where the £4.8 million has gone, which trusts have received it or what it has been spent on? Will she give an assurance that the unsafe, undignified mixed-sex wards will be replaced as a matter of priority?

The minister said that COSLA is the umbrella organisation for Scotland's 32 local authorities. However, he is well aware that three local authorities are now outwith COSLA. How does he intend that, in future, those authorities will be represented?

To ask the First Minister what proposals the Scottish Executive has to help those affected by multiple sclerosis. (S1F-1008)

The First Minister is aware that the SNAP report concluded that services for people with MS are inadequate, fragmented and vary from health board area to health board area. Malcolm Chisholm, in a letter today to the Multiple Sclerosis Society in Scotland, said: "MS specialist nurses have enormous potential to improve patients' quality of life". He went on to say: "They are probably the quickest way to bring a demonstrable improvement for individual patients". Therefore, will the First Minister consider submissions from the Multiple Sclerosis Society and encourage health boards to provide specialist MS nurses in every health board area in Scotland?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Following the partisan remark that the Minister for Transport and Planning made to Bruce Crawford during question time, will you remind the minister—

—that she is equally accountable to SNP members—

They were.

Further to that point of order. I ask the Presiding Officer to study carefully the Official Report  of today's proceedings.

Will the minister give way?

Will Margaret Curran give way?

I thank Keith Harding for initiating the debate. I declare an interest, because when I worked for Shelter Scotland I was responsible for collating the homelessness figures for Scotland, so the homelessness statistics are very familiar to me. First, I begin by offering a health warning on whether the number of applications should be used as a measure of homelessness. That is a dangerous thing to do, because although local authorities are supposed to record every homelessness application, many do not. I remember that, at the time of local government reorganisation, there was an outcry in the Borders when Shelter produced its figures, because homelessness seemed to have risen by something like 2,000 per cent. In fact, when the district councils came together they adopted the best practice of recording every application to them, which other authorities did not do. That gave the impression that there was a huge increase in the number of applications in the Borders, but in reality that was not so. It is therefore extremely dangerous to measure homelessness solely by the number of applications. Secondly, what worries me more about homelessness is not the number of homelessness applications that are made, but the number of homelessness acceptances. Current homelessness legislation places barriers in the way of helping people, because they can be accepted as homeless and allocated a house only if they jump through a number of hoops. The hoops are that the person must be in priority need—they are if they have children—and they are not intentionally homeless. That means that a lot of people who have no home are not eligible under the homelessness legislation. That is why we see on the streets so many young people who  have no dependants. It is a matter of regret that we are seeing more young folk on the streets. That can be linked back to the removal and discontinuation of benefits.

I will wind up by talking about temporary accommodation, because its use in Fife is too high. The use of bed and breakfasts for family accommodation is unsuitable. It is to be regretted that Fife has the highest percentage of households in temporary accommodation in Scotland. I hope that the minister can address that.

Will the minister explain what use the leaflets will be to the many thousands of families with outdated, inadequate and unaffordable heating systems, who will be excluded from the scheme? The minister's written answers to me have been inadequate, so will she now take steps to identify and quantify how many families will be excluded from the central heating scheme?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to provide insulation and draught-proofing for homes in the socially rented and private sectors. (S1O-3102)

If a house has an old or inefficient central heating system, and so fails to qualify for the heating system that was announced on 23 February, will the minister clarify whether it will also fail to qualify for the insulation and  draught-proofing that is outlined in the package?

When the Parliamentary Bureau met on Tuesday, I made a formal request that the First Minister make a statement to the Parliament to outline the detail of how he intended to implement the will of the Parliament as expressed in the vote on Thursday last week. The Labour business manager indicated that there was no plan for such a statement. It is something of a surprise to discover that 24 hours is a long time in politics. Mr McCabe's proposed change to the business bulletin falls a long way short of what the Parliament expected and what Scotland demands. The issue is clear and simple. When the Parliament makes a decision it is, as the First Minister acknowledged on 25 January in the chamber, incumbent upon the Executive to take heed and to take action.  The chamber decided last Thursday, not on one vote, not on two votes, but on three votes, that there should be a tie-up scheme for Scotland's fishermen. The Parliament demanded such a scheme and the whole of Scotland expected that a democratically elected Executive would honour that decision. What happened following the vote? The Executive went into a huddle and sent the fisheries minister out some hours later to say that nothing had changed. Labour sought to justify its intransigence by blaming everything from the wrong type of voting system to the wrong type of coalition colleagues. Contrary to the Parliament's standing orders and to common democratic practice, the Executive blamed the Presiding Officer. The business motion proposes a debate tomorrow in which the Executive will seek to rerun history. In keeping with the tradition of the 1970s trade union barons, it will keep on holding the vote until it gets the answer that it wants—or gets its people into the chamber. That is not democracy—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. That is not democracy. The losers are not only Scotland's fishermen and Scotland's political parties, but the whole idea of a new, accountable Scottish democracy. If the Executive refuses to acknowledge the will of the Parliament, the very idea of the Parliament is brought into disrepute. If the Executive fails to acknowledge that it is one minority among several minorities in the Parliament, it shows contempt for the voters of Scotland who put us here and who can remove us from here. If this is new Labour in action, it smacks of nothing more than old Labour in the council chambers of South Lanarkshire and Fife, which brooks no opposition and tolerates no dissent. That time is past and the Executive's time is drawing to a close, hastened by actions such as those we have seen in the past week. I oppose the business motion, because to allow the business motion to pass would be to accept that all the institutions of the Parliament, including the Parliamentary Bureau, are mere creatures of the Executive and that they will in the end do the Executive's bidding—no matter the vote and no matter the view of the people of Scotland. I oppose the business motion because it demeans the Parliament; by its actions today, the Executive demeans the Parliament. The motion tells the people of Scotland that, no matter whether the Parliament exists, democracy does not exist in Scotland.  I ask the chamber to oppose the business motion. In doing so, I renew the call of all Scotland for the Executive to honour last Thursday's vote. I call on the Executive to bring forward a business motion that includes a statement from the First Minister on how he intends to honour last Thursday's vote and also indicates how the Executive intends to return to the standards of democracy that Scotland expects and demands from its new Parliament. [Interruption.]

Like many members today, I am angry and sad that the minister has failed to understand and has failed to act. Action is needed now; without it, there will be no long-term future for the fishing industry. I will concentrate on the fishing industry in the East Neuk of Fife and on the communities throughout Scotland that are dependent on the fishing industry. Richard Lochhead and David Davidson spoke about the effect of displacement. I am disappointed that Iain Smith has looked to his long-term future as a minister instead of speaking up for his constituents in the East Neuk of Fife. I  thought that his remarks were appalling. If there is displacement, it will mean that the East Neuk fishermen who need to fish for prawns will find that others are coming in and fishing them. He fails to understand and fails to act. I am extremely disappointed with his remarks. The dignified way in which the whole fishing industry has conducted itself deserves to be recognised. The Government has ignored the industry's representatives, who have fought not for higher wages but for the future of their industry and their communities. Theirs is a just case. A relatively modest amount of money to support them through a tie-up scheme would have assured a future. In some communities, up to 60 per cent of all employment is fishing related—there is no other employment. Whether it is the delivery vans that deliver fresh fish from the East Neuk to the rest of Fife and beyond, the fish processing industry or the shops that serve the communities, all are dependent on the men who fish our waters. There used to be two great industries in Fife: one was mining, the other is fishing. If action is not taken now, the First Minister and I will have witnessed in our lifetime the demise of both of them. Henry McLeish and I are both Fifers, born and brought up in mining communities. We have seen the destruction of the mining industry and of the communities that went with it. We know the effect of the pit closures on the strong, independent and proud mining communities. We see the effects today on communities that were dependent on the pits: high unemployment, loss of amenities such as shops and, most critical, loss of hope. Henry McLeish may not have been in a position to save our mining communities, but he is in a position to save our fishing communities and our fishing industry. I urge him to act and to act now—it is obvious that the fisheries minister will not. Tomorrow, my colleague Mike Russell and I will visit the wonderful Scottish Fisheries Museum in Anstruther, which is dedicated to an industry that is the life-blood of so many of our coastal communities. Museums help us to understand the past. It is the job of the Parliament to ensure that the fishing industry has not only a present, but a future. Little in what the minister said today gives fishermen in the East Neuk and throughout Scotland confidence that they have a present, let alone a future.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Any initiative that addresses the problem of cold, damp homes is welcome, but the minister should not suggest that the proposals that she has outlined will lead to the eradication of fuel poverty, as they will not. Shelter Scotland wrote to me today to say that it "would be very concerned if the Scottish Executive think that their Central Heating Scheme will be a major step in eradicating fuel poverty in Scotland"  and that it is concerned that the scheme will not "effectively target households in fuel poverty." Three quarters of a million households suffer fuel poverty, but Shelter Scotland estimates that, at best, the Executive's scheme will be able to target only 275,000 homes.

No, I will not. I want to address two specific problems. The minister has stated that the three groups of priority households are those over 75, the elderly living alone and disabled people and the long-term ill. We all agree with that, but I am disturbed that the minister does not regard children living in poor housing to be a matter of priority. I have spoken before in the chamber about the effect of cold, damp housing on children and I have no doubt that I will do so again. I cannot begin to express my dismay at the fact that children's lives will continue to be blighted by respiratory disease and asthma caused by their housing conditions. I am further dismayed by the thought of the children who will lose time from school because of illness or who will be shunned by their classmates because their clothes stink of dampness, despite the efforts of their parents. So much for social inclusion. The UK fuel poverty strategy considered children to be a priority group, but the Scottish Government does not. We have a Scottish Parliament. Devolution means that we can act differently from the rest of the UK. In doing things differently, however, we must aspire to do things better, not make things worse. The Scottish Government must not condemn 400,000 children—the future of our country—to suffer in cold, damp housing because it does not consider them to be a priority.

No, I will not. Secondly, I want to deal with the central heating scheme. As Elaine Smith said in an excellent speech, the minister's letter said that the scheme will cover only dwellings that lack any form of central heating.

No, I will not. Let me remind the minister about the nature of Scotland's public sector housing stock, which was built in the 1960s and 1970s, when the misguided fashion did not stop at flat roofs, but extended to warm-air central heating or underfloor heating. The First Minister can update the Minister for Social Justice about the communal heating system in Woodside, in Glenrothes, a very expensive and inefficient  system that has caused misery for years. Under the proposals that the minister is outlining, because there is a semblance of a central heating system there, the tenants and owners will not be eligible for the central heating that will be made available to anybody else. The Executive's scheme specifically excludes householders who have been saddled with old, unaffordable, inefficient, outdated heating systems. For those tenants, the prospect of affordable heating is as distant as ever.

The minister shakes her head, but I can quote from her letter, in which she says that the only people who will be eligible for central heating will be those who live in "dwellings which currently lack any form of central heating." I would welcome it if the Deputy Minister for Social Justice—

I am just closing. I would welcome it if the minister could make a commitment on this. Perhaps Elaine Smith and I have misinterpreted the advice, but it says clearly that the scheme will apply only to those households that have no central heating at all. The proposals are limited, but they are welcome. However, they will not eradicate fuel poverty. The minister should not pretend that they will.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last made representations to the Department of Social Security in connection with compensation for ex-miners in Scotland. (S1O-2973)

I am totally underwhelmed by the extent of the minister's representations. Not content with robbing £250 million a year from the miners pension fund and not content with using the pension fund to pay for the miners compensation scheme, the Labour Government has now changed the rules to allow the Department of Social Security to claw back the compensation that has been paid to the miners. Is the minister aware that the DSS has received millions more in clawback than the Scottish miners have received in compensation? What representations does she intend to make about that?

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that only one member may speak against the motion. However, I add my voice to what Lord James has said.

The SNP also has serious concerns that back benchers are being disadvantaged.

I will respond first to Helen Eadie.

My colleague says that there is no point in doing that, but I will. Helen Eadie made an impassioned plea on behalf of people who have been cheated by fraudsters. It is right and proper that such matters should be addressed. However, if she is so passionate about the issue, why does she not think that she should carry out her job in this Parliament by making legislation for the benefit of the very people whom she purports to represent? Annabel Goldie raised an important issue. We are dealing with a private member's bill that could inadvertently change criminal law in Scotland, and we are being asked to do so on the basis of a two-page memorandum and a bill that refers to no Scottish legislation. We do not know the impact of the bill on Scottish legislation. I urge the Executive to consider closely the implications of what it is asking the Parliament to do. We need far more scrutiny of the bill and I urge members to support my amendment so that we can give the issue the scrutiny that it deserves. The memorandum does not say exactly what the bill covers. Duncan Hamilton made some important points. There are issues that the minister must address in summing up. He must tell us what discussion there has been with his Westminster colleagues. He must also tell us whether there has been discussion with the member who introduced the bill. He must explain the meaning of this statement by Margaret Beckett: "The Government is likely to oppose any private Member's bill which seeks to alter the law on devolved subjects in Scotland or Northern Ireland. It will remain a question of judgment for individual Members"— that is, back-bench Westminster MPs— "whether to introduce legislation on an issue which Parliament has already decided should be devolved, unless it is clear that the proposal has the support of the devolved body concerned." That is the important issue. It is about the Westminster MP finding out, before he introduces a bill, whether it is clear that the Scottish Parliament will support it. We were not asked for our views prior to the introduction of the bill. The first reading has already taken place and the second reading is scheduled for 12 February. It is vital that such issues are addressed. That does not take away from the fundamental issues in the bill. We can do both: we can consider the way in which the issue affects people in Scotland and debate a similar Scottish bill. If, as the minister suggested, the matter is such a priority, there is no reason on earth why the Executive cannot introduce similar legislation. I urge the minister to answer the questions and to reconsider the Executive's whole position on the matter.

At the outset, I wish to make it clear that the SNP has no objections to the aims of the bill. Protecting the public against the cheats and fraudsters whose business is to con money from would-be workers, many of whom can ill afford to lose any money, is an objective with which we can all agree. It is a matter of regret that, under the terms of the Executive's motion, the Parliament will be deprived of the opportunity to discuss how to tackle the issues raised in the bill. Members will be  unable to scrutinise the bill and we will be unable to propose or discuss amendments. In short, we will be unable to tailor the bill to fit Scottish needs or to consider whether any extensions to it are required. There is a more fundamental issue for the Parliament: whether a Westminster MP should legislate for Scotland on wholly devolved matters by means of a private member's bill. The Outworking Bill was introduced by the member for Birmingham Northfield. I quite understand that the UK Government wishes to legislate for Scotland on devolved matters when a wider UK bill is under consideration. However, a private member's bill, by its nature, is neither Government legislation nor a Government priority. Notwithstanding the long-standing commitment that the minister claimed the Government has had on outworking, the Government has not introduced a bill on the issue. Private members' bills and their implications for devolution have been examined previously. Margaret Beckett, the Leader of the House of Commons, made that clear in a memorandum to the Procedure Committee of the House of Commons, in which she said: "The Government is likely to oppose any private Member's bill which seeks to alter the law on devolved subjects in Scotland or Northern Ireland." When the late Donald Dewar addressed this chamber on 9 June 1999, he was of the same mind. He said that "the Scottish Executive expects that the UK Government will oppose any private member's bill that seeks to alter the law on devolved subjects unless it is clear that the proposal has the support of the relevant devolved body."—[ Official Report, 9 June 1999, Vol 1, c 358.] Given the views expressed by Donald Dewar, the chamber should expect two things: the UK Government should not support the bill and the Parliament should oppose it today. Support from the devolved body should be informed, rather than based on a half-hour debate. The UK Government has not yet expressed a view on the bill, as the bill's second reading does not take place until 12 February. We must ask the minister why the Scottish Executive is in such a hurry to transfer its responsibilities over devolved matters by means of a private member's bill promoted by a back-bench MP who represents an English constituency. Why is the Executive seeking this Parliament's consent? Has the Scottish Executive discussed the bill with Westminster colleagues? Does the Executive no longer expect such private members' bills to be opposed by the UK Government? Why have not representations on behalf of this Parliament been made before now?  Those are serious and important issues for the Parliament. The Outworking Bill is the first private member's bill that has been the subject of a Sewel motion and I do not believe that we should even be considering it today—the convention that has been agreed should be adhered to. I notice that the Presiding Officer wants me to wind up, so I will do so. I ask the Executive to reconsider its position on the bill, even at this stage, and to support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S1M-1596.1, to leave out from "as set out" to end and insert: "and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to bring forward legislation in Scotland to achieve these aims of the UK Outworking Bill."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Executive has had three opportunities in the past two days to make its position absolutely clear. There was yesterday's statement, then a debate today, then First Minister's question time— [Interruption.]

If the Executive statement has any material bearing on today's debate, I ask the Presiding Officers to reconsider their decision. Unfortunately, we are not party to what the statement contains, but if it affects the debate materially, I argue that the Executive has had plenty opportunity to make its position clear to the chamber.

rose—

On a point of order.

It is a different point. You have indicated that the Presiding Officers have agreed that the statement is of an urgent or emergency nature and that, under standing orders, you will take it. Do I therefore take it that you have knowledge of the statement? Can I ask the Presiding Officers whether the statement relates to the debate that we have had today? What is it about this emergency statement that makes it so urgent that you have had to take it?

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We are in your hands on this matter. Will you confirm that the content of the emergency statement could not have been given during the debate today?

Will you repeat that?

The First Minister will confirm that it is not inefficiency that has resulted in the job losses at Tullis Russell or the crisis in the paper industry in Scotland. The paper industry in Scotland is imploding. Profits have dropped by £70 a tonne in the past 18 months because of the exchange rate differential. Does the minister propose to take any action to relieve that situation, or will she sit back and wring her hands in the hope that her colleagues in London—who are trusted with Scotland's economic levers—will somehow make things better?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Yet again, we have seen a ministerial statement widely trailed in the press. It has been trailed in The Scotsman and, at 7.30 this morning, there were details of it on Ceefax. I am talking about specific details in the press before the minister has made his statement to the Parliament. I have asked the Presiding Officers many times—and I am asking again—whether you will require ministers to look at this matter closely and whether, in your view, the ministers are in contempt of the Parliament by giving information out to the press before they do so to the chamber.

rose—

Mr Canavan raised an important point. The complaint that the SNP and the Conservatives have had since the inception of this Parliament is that information is going to the media before we get a chance to ask questions about it. This is a farcical situation. Details were reported in the press, but we are still being denied the opportunity to ask the minister questions and to have the minister answer them. It seems to me that ministers are happier to have information in the public domain than they are to answer questions in the Parliament.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you confirm that when you were selecting amendments for the debate, you saw one SNP amendment?

rose—

Well, well, well, here we are. Today, just 18 months into the lifetime of the Scottish Parliament, the recommendations of the consultative steering group—the touchstone of the Parliament—have been torn up to facilitate a grubby little backstairs deal between the Labour, Tory and Liberal Democrat business managers. To remind them of the CSG report, I have brought a copy for them to look at before they finally bin it. The debate is not about which party should hold the convenership of the Justice 2 Committee, but about which party should hold the convenership of the 17 th committee of the Parliament, and whether the convener of that committee should be selected in exactly the same way as the previous 16 were selected. As Tom McCabe well knows, I was prepared to negotiate on the SNP convenership of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee—I offered yesterday to do so. I would also have agreed to go back to first principles and have a complete pick of all conveners, if the other parties, too, had agreed.

If Mr McCabe will withdraw his motion, the SNP is prepared to negotiate the convenerships of all the committees. I hope that the Liberal Democrats and the Tories will give a similar undertaking.

No. I will continue, as there are things that I want to say about this grubby little deal, in which Johann Lamont has had a part. The Scotland Act 1998, the CSG report and the standing orders state clearly that in appointing conveners, the Parliamentary Bureau should have regard to the balance of political parties in the Parliament. That statement was included deliberately.

Sit down, Duncan. That was intended to avoid the worst excesses of the one-party state that Labour operates in councils the length and breadth of Scotland. The d'Hondt system, which was used to elect the previous 16 conveners, should be used to select the 17 th convener. Instead, Labour wants the convenership for itself and, because it can get it, is determined to have it. What we have seen is reminiscent of the worst excesses of the Labour one-party state in councils the length and breadth of Scotland. The carve-up by Tory, Labour and Liberal Democrat business managers could hardly have been bettered by the inhabitants of Tammany Hall. The mechanism that was agreed at the beginning of the Parliament should be applied now. No matter what method of proportionality is applied, the 17 th committee of the Parliament should have an SNP convener. Tom McCabe does not agree with that. As Mike Russell said, Labour has 43 per cent of the members in the Parliament, yet currently holds 50 per cent of the conveners. If the motion is passed, with 43 per cent of the members, Labour will have 53 per cent of the conveners. The SNP has 27 per cent of the members and 25 per cent of the conveners, but after today will have 23 per cent of the conveners. The appointment of a Labour convener is not maintaining the political balance; it is making the situation worse. This is about principle. If we choose to break the principle that conveners should be appointed with due regard to the political balance of the Parliament, there is no going back. I will talk briefly about the Tories and the Liberal  Democrats.

I will be brief. The Tories have been bought and sold for a deputy convenership. How cheap their price, but the Tories and Scottish democracy have never gone hand in hand anyway. I understand that Tavish Scott's Liberal Democrat colleagues are outraged by his conduct. No wonder—this shabby little deal goes right to the heart of the Liberal Democrats' commitment to proportional representation and what they fought for in the Scottish Constitutional Convention. Last week, Henry McLeish said: "we are a Government."—[ Official Report , 11 January 2001; Vol 10, c 165.] It is not enough to mouth those words—you have to act as if you are fit to govern. After today, it is clear that Labour is not. I move amendment S1M-1555.1, to leave out from "the Convener" to end and insert: "the founding principles of the Parliament as established by the Consultative Steering Group must not be undermined; that those principles have as their bedrock the fair representation of the parties in the Parliament, on parliamentary committees and in the role of Convener and Deputy Convener of those committees; and therefore instructs the Parliamentary Bureau to bring forward a proposal to allocate the Convenership and Deputy Convenership of the Justice 2 Committee according to the system that has been successfully applied since the establishment of the Parliament and which has to date commanded all party support."

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have received your response to a point of order that I raised this morning about an article in The Herald , which contained details of the ministerial statement made by Wendy Alexander about the careers service. In your letter, you agree with me that almost all the information in the article was later contained in the minister's statement. I  accept that there was no Executive press release, but the information came from somewhere. I urge you to seek an assurance from the minister that she did not give out the information or cause any of her colleagues or officials to do so on her behalf. Do you agree that ministerial statements in the chamber should have the same standing as unpublished committee papers, the leaking of which is a serious matter?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No. I have given notice that I was going to raise this point of order.

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer. The amendment in the name of Fergus Ewing is a reasoned amendment. It has already been accepted by the Presiding Officer as competent. It would be wholly inappropriate for it to be withdrawn at this stage. The debate should take place now. We have accepted the Presiding Officer's judgment in the past and we should do so now.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given that we are at the beginning of a new year, I would have hoped that the Executive would have made some new year resolutions. I am concerned about the fact that  The Herald today carries most of the details of the statement on the careers service that we are about to hear from the minister—the details are already in the public domain. Will you look at that article and, on behalf of the Scottish Parliament, have a word with the Executive about the practice of giving information to the press before making a statement in the chamber, which is unfair on the Parliament?

Will the member give way?

The SNP has tried hard to achieve consensus on the proposals to restructure the committees. It is therefore with regret that I must say that it has proved impossible for the SNP to agree to the latest proposals. The SNP group will vote against them. Consensus cannot be assumed, regardless of the proposals on the table. As Tom McCabe said, the process of reviewing the committee system began so long ago, and there have been so many changes to the original proposals, that this final proposal has lost sight of what we were trying to achieve. The start of the process was a genuine attempt to make our committee system work more effectively. It was begun in response to concerns from members of all committees. Last October, John McAllion wrote an excellent article, which appeared in The Herald . He said: "There are 16 different committees in the Scottish Parliament. Budgetary constraints mean that committee clerks have to double up and serve at least two committees. This not only stretches, but weakens the ability of each committee to establish itself as a power in its own field . . . many MSPs now find themselves having to serve on two committees at the same time. This is an enormous workload in Parliamentary terms and is unheard of in Westminster." There was unanimity throughout the parties on the need for change. The decisions that established our current system were based not on experience, but on a best estimate of how a modern committee system would work in a 129-member Parliament. The committee system was expected to be dynamic, as it has been. The challenge for all members is to ensure that it continues to be. It was initially envisaged that the committees would meet once a month and that being on more than one committee would not be an onerous commitment. What was unexpected was the work load of the committees and the dedication of the MSPs to making the committee system the powerhouse of the Parliament. MSPs have been committed to scrutinising legislation, holding  ministers to account for their departments and actions, conducting investigations and inquiries and submitting legislation. The work load has increased beyond expectation and it is a tribute to the commitment of members to making Scotland more democratic than ever before. Eighteen months on, we know that scrutinising a bill or taking part in an inquiry does not mean one meeting a month; it can mean two or three a week. When the review process first started earlier this year, the proposals—not only on committee numbers—were radical, as it was proposed that the whole structure of the committee system should be altered. Changes were to be far reaching, with some committees to be combined with others and some to be split, while the remit of some committees was to be absorbed into others. Those proposals found almost universal condemnation within the party groups. What we are left with—after all that time, all those months and all those permutations—is the proposal to create two justice committees. That is the one proposal that the Scottish National Party has objected to from the outset. The SNP has argued consistently that there should be only one justice committee and that two such committees, with identical remits, would create an inherently unstable situation. I accept Tom McCabe's assurances that decisions on what legislation goes to which committee would be decided by the conveners of the two committees. He acknowledges that, when there is a dispute between the two conveners, the bureau, with its built-in Executive majority, would decide which committee the legislation should go to. However, he has not said what would happen if the two committees decided to hold similar inquiries. That is not a matter for the bureau and it is one of the reasons why we are unable to support the proposals.

I will continue, as I am struggling for time and there are points that I feel I must make. The SNP believes that all subject committees should be the same size, apart from where minority party representation makes that impossible. The problem that we now face is a series of subject committees of different sizes, not because of work load or need, but as a result of the concessions negotiated between the parties for party political interests and the need to get some form of committee changes through the Parliament today. Party political interests should not be allowed to dictate committee numbers. Organisations and individuals outwith the Parliament might assume  that the bigger the committee, the greater its importance—that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and the Rural Development Committee, with their 11 members each, are more important than the Social Justice Committee or the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. No one in the chamber believes that that is the case, but we must face the fact that that will be the perception. Without a logical reason for the difference in committee sizes, we will be open to a public perception that the priorities of the Parliament are misplaced. At the outset of my speech, I underlined the need for reform and the expectation that reform, drawing on the strength of our collective experience, was essential. The procedure to date has involved extensive consultation with all the party groups and has had to take into account 129 different experiences of the working of the parliamentary committee system and 129 different opinions about how that system could work best. Within every group, there have been arguments for and against, with different emphases and focus. The fact that there is no unanimity today suggests that we are too tightly bound up with the system and that it is now impossible for us to take an impartial, independent view of what the committee structure and the committee sizes should be. We are all committed to the strong committee system, but we bring to the debate our own perceptions and experience and remain unable to reach universal agreement about how what we want can best be achieved. I suggest that consideration be given to an independent review of the committee system—my colleague Kenny MacAskill will expand on that. I hope that that will ensure that we have a solution that fits and that is genuinely impartial—a solution that will allow our committees to lead the way in a modern, democratic Parliament.

Before the minister moves the motion, would he care to reflect on the fact that it does not mention the Public Petitions Committee? I know that, in all our discussions, it was assumed that there would be a Public Petitions Committee.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Later this morning, the Minister for Health and Community Care will make a statement to Parliament on the health plan. I understand that, following a briefing on Friday, details of that health plan were carried by the media. Only this morning, the Minister for Health and Community Care gave an interview on "Good Morning Scotland". Presiding Officer, once again I urge you to intervene. As you are well aware, the Parliamentary Bureau agrees to give the Executive parliamentary time to make ministerial statements. In future, unless the SNP can be guaranteed that those statements will be made first to Parliament, we might be forced into an opposing position.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Will you remind the minister that this is a debate? In any debate, there is usually some engagement.

Yesterday I indicated to the other business managers that I could not support the business motion that is before us today. On behalf of the SNP, I recorded my group's objections with the bureau and advised that today I would move an amendment to the business motion. The purpose of my amendment is to allow the reports by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to be debated fully by the Parliament. Last week the Parliament approved a business motion that provided for a debate lasting almost three hours. Today the Parliament is being asked to agree to a motion that would slash an hour off that time. The effect of that would be to deny 15 back-bench members the opportunity to contribute to the debate on the SQA and the exams crisis. If the debate was important enough last week to warrant three hours, it is important enough this week to warrant three hours. The Executive will claim—Tavish Scott already has—that the SNP motion of no confidence has impacted on the time available for the SQA debate. Let me deal with that charge right now. What has impacted on the time available for the SQA debate is the sheer intransigence of the Executive. The standing orders of the Parliament are clear. When a motion of no confidence has been lodged and has attracted 25 signatures, it must be debated by the Parliament—no ifs, no buts, no maybes. The role of the Parliamentary Bureau is to find the time for that debate. It was the Executive's business managers who timetabled the two debates to run consecutively this morning. As I could not accept that one hour should be slashed from the SQA debate, I offered the business managers two other options. The first was that this morning's business should continue until 1.30 pm, to allow one hour for the debate on the motion of no confidence, which would be followed by the previously agreed three-hour debate on the committees' reports. That offer was turned down. I then suggested that the SQA debate should take place this morning, as originally timetabled, and that the SNP group would give up an hour of its Opposition time on Thursday morning so that the motion of no confidence could be debated. That suggestion was also rejected. I do not intend to speak about the debates that will follow. However, we all recognise the work that has been done by the committee conveners, Mary Mulligan and Alex Neil, by the members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, and by the clerking staff. I pay tribute to them for that.  They have investigated the debacle of the past year and have made important recommendations for next year's exam process. The Executive has let down the two committees, which have worked tirelessly on behalf of the Parliament to take evidence and to produce their reports. Those reports deserve to be debated properly and thoroughly. According to one commentator, they are reports that "made this Parliament worth having." Students, teachers and parents will not understand why the Executive has prevented a full debate today. The message that will go out from the chamber is that the agony and heartbreak of the summer are worth only two hours of the Parliament's time. That is a shameful message. Thousands of young people are relying on the Parliament to make things right for them this year and next year. I say this to the Executive, as gently as I can: by its actions today it has not even begun to put things right. I urge members of all parties to support the amendment and to extend the SQA debate until 1.30 pm to allow a proper debate of the issues. The committees and Scotland's young people and teachers deserve no less. I move amendment S1M-1457.1, to insert at end: "and after the 'Education, Culture and Sport Committee and Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Debate on SQA Inquiries' insert to be concluded at 1.30 pm".

As Mike Rumbles pointed out in his opening speech, the report is the outcome of a major part of the Standards Committee's work over the past nine months. It is a substantial report that deals with several complex issues, which I and my colleagues on the committee have enjoyed grappling with. Our thanks go to the committee clerks for their guidance and unfailing good humour. Much of the committee's work to date has been about laying the foundations for the future conduct  of Parliament and its members. The recommendation to create the post of independent standards commissioner is another example of that work. I hope that the appointment of a commissioner would emphasise the Parliament's commitment to the highest level of standards in public life—the public have the right to expect such a commitment. We believe that the report's proposals on the independent and thorough investigation of complaints about members' conduct will go a long way towards convincing the Scottish people of that commitment. The report proposes a clear set of investigative procedures, which are fair and robust. The committee recognises that, in the interest of fairness, it is essential that members and the public are fully aware of the procedures that should be followed when investigating complaints. It is fair to say that, when the committee started the inquiry, a number of colleagues shared my view that the Standards Committee should continue to investigate complaints on its own. Having dealt with lobbygate, we felt that we had demonstrated the committee's capacity to carry out an investigation thoroughly, speedily and independent of our political affiliations. However, having taken evidence from several witnesses, we accepted that the investigation of complaints could become substantially time consuming and could compromise the committee's other work. We came to the unanimous view that such a proposal was not compatible with our emphasis on the need for an independent element in our investigative model. At the same time we were conscious of the committee's remit as prescribed in the Scotland Act 1998 and Parliament's standing orders. The commissioner would therefore report to the Standards Committee and the committee would review the commissioner's conclusions before it decided whether sanctions were appropriate. However, Parliament would make the final decision, on a case-by-case basis, on the extent and duration of any sanctions. The Scotland Act 1998 (Transitory and Transitional Provisions) (Members' Interests) Order 1999 (SI 1999/1350) enables Parliament to prevent or restrict a member's participation in proceedings when he or she has failed to register or declare a registrable interest. Certain breaches of the members' interest order on the registration and declaration of interests and paid advocacy could constitute criminal offences. In such cases, the complaint would be referred to the procurator fiscal. Members will wish to note that the committee has agreed to conduct a review of the members' interests order. As the first part of that process, we will consult colleagues widely. Members will  receive a consultation paper presently. I urge all members to take time to input into the process, because the members' interest order has an important bearing on us all. It is vital that we understand it fully. The Standards Committee's inquiry is aimed partly at improving its clarity. The Standards Committee remains fully committed to developing procedures that reflect the Parliament's commitment to the highest level of probity in our affairs and to fairness for members. I have no doubt that, in recommending the proposals that are set out in our fourth report on the investigation of complaints and the appointment of a standards commissioner, we will add to the previous building blocks that the committee has recommended.

Will the minister give way?

Does Malcolm Chisholm accept that, despite all the money that he claims is going into services, home help services in Fife and throughout Scotland have been slashed since the Labour Government came to power?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order. The Presiding Officer gave us clear instructions on where we should not stray today. Hugh Henry is in serious danger of straying from the motion. He is getting into other issues that are not part of this debate. Given that time is short, could you ask him to concentrate his remarks on the debate that we are having?

Before I deal with the home help service, I want to respond to Mary Scanlon. The Health and Community Care Committee might have been conducting an inquiry for the past 10 months, but I recall that, on 28 September, we debated a Conservative motion that called for the implementation of free personal care, in line with the Conservative party's policy. I do not think that Mary Scanlon is in a position to castigate the SNP for its choice of debate. I see that Margaret Smith has such concern for the debate that she has left the chamber. She, and all other members, should bear in mind the fact that the SNP and the other non-Executive parties have certain days when we can debate subjects of our choice. Our choice of subject and the timing of the debate on that subject is a matter for us alone. We will not be dictated to by any other party in the chamber.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I wish that Mr Henry would acquaint himself with the facts before making a point of order. The fact is that the SNP and other parties in the chamber have the right to call debates on subjects of their choice. That has nothing to do with other parties. The home help service is vital in allowing people to remain in their homes. The Labour MSPs turn their back not on the debate and not on the SNP, but on some of the most vulnerable people in Scotland. I am hardly surprised that they do not have the guts to come here and say that. Sometimes, I think that the Executive ministers live in—

I will.

I am speaking in the debate not as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, but as a member of the Scottish Parliament. Other members care as much as members of the Health and Community Care Committee about home care services, home helps and all the rest of it. The SNP is having this debate to give MSPs who are not members of the Health and Community Care Committee the opportunity to debate issues that are of concern to us all.

I would like to, but I have not even started my speech yet. Sometimes, I think that the Executive ministers live in a parallel universe. We heard Malcolm Chisholm say that extra money has been put into council services and home care, but those services have experienced cuts in every year that the new Labour Government has been in power. That is what I am being told every day of the week—I suspect that Labour back benchers are being told the same thing—by senior citizens, their families, doctors, nurses and home carers. Is it just possible that all of those who provide the services, all of those who need the services and all of those who use the services are wrong and that ministers are right? I do not think so. I will quote from a letter that was written last year by a Fife Council official: "We fully appreciate the importance of providing a service to the perceived low need category and there is much researched evidence to support this view. However, in the current financial climate, I am unable to respond to these situations as we have done in the past." That is a direct reference to the fact that Fife Council now prioritises home help services to different groups. The only people who can get home help services now in Fife are those who are terminally ill and have been discharged from hospital. All the rest are on a waiting list. For the first time, Fife Council has a waiting list for home health care services. That is a disgrace—even under the Conservative Government we never had a waiting list for home helps. Fife Council is a Labour council, and we have a Labour Executive working to a Labour Westminster Government. When I visited a group of general practitioners in Fife, I was told that the situation was totally unacceptable and that patients were already suffering because of a lack  of social care. Malcolm Chisholm and other ministers have to address such issues now, not at some time in the future. They have to address the real health care needs of people in Fife and elsewhere in Scotland.

I welcome the minister's announcement and her reminder that homeless people are not just for Christmas, but are there in January, February and beyond. I thank the minister for condemning the remarks that were made by Louise Casey. Will she go further and assure Scottish charities that criticism of the Scottish Executive will not lead to the withdrawal of funding, as Louise Casey threatened that criticism of the Government would result in in England?

The minister will be aware that Fife has fewer police officers per head of population than any other region of Scotland. Will he give an assurance that, at the very least, the review of funding will allow Fife to employ the additional 28 officers who are needed to bring the number of officers in Fife up to the national average?

On a point of order. The ministerial code is not yet a matter for this Parliament; it is a matter for the First Minister and for Downing Street. We have a  code of conduct for members, but that code does not extend to ministerial responsibilities, which the Executive and the First Minister have said in the past are a matter for the Cabinet alone. If there are problems, I suggest to Mr Home Robertson that he take them up with the First Minister so that we can get the changes that he wants.

It is with regret that I shall move this amendment to the business motion today, particularly as it is one of my first actions as the SNP business manager. It is not something that I intend to make a habit of, but I warn the Executive that I shall do such things if necessary. Yesterday, I notified Tom  McCabe and other members of the Parliamentary Bureau that I would be lodging such an amendment. I am not confrontational by nature and I would have preferred that the business managers could have agreed that question time and First Minister's question time be held this week as normal. However, we could not agree. That is why the SNP has been forced to lodge this amendment. The SNP has no wish to delay or stop the election of the First Minister, but there is a key point of principle involved in all this: accountability. The consultative steering group report, the touchstone document of this Parliament, states that "the Scottish Executive should be accountable to the Scottish Parliament and . . . to the people of Scotland". The CSG report went further, detailing how that could be done. It said:  "Oral . . . Parliamentary Questions . . . will provide an important means for individual Members to obtain information from the Executive and to hold the Executive to account."

I will go on to talk about the precedent that is being set today. The role of the Parliament, of the Opposition parties and of individual members of all political parties is to hold the Executive to account. Question time has been designed to enable us to do that. If question time has to be abandoned, there should be an overwhelming and compelling reason for doing so. There is no such reason. The SNP amendment will allow question time to take place on Thursday and will provide more than sufficient time for the election of the First Minister. The action by the Executive is an affront to the Parliament and it flies in the face of the key principle of accountability, as agreed by the CSG. Indeed, as Henry McLeish underlined in Parliament on 9 June last year, "all ministers, including the First Minister, should be fully accountable to the Parliament . . . I hope that that will be the case in question time".— [ Official Report , 9 June 1999; Vol 1, c 368.]  The abandonment of question time sets a dangerous and unwelcome precedent, which should be resisted by members of all political parties. The Parliament is not a plaything of the Executive; it is far too precious for that. Nor is it  there simply to serve the needs of the Labour party. There has been no question time for two weeks while the Parliament has been in recess. It is more than three weeks since some of the questions in the business bulletin were lodged. Ministers have been running the country; they have been making decisions. An acting First Minister is in place, as Alasdair Morgan said. In view of the impending Cabinet reshuffle, some ministers will not be here next week; therefore, this is the final opportunity to have questions answered before portfolios are shuffled or ministers are dumped. Has nothing happened in the past two weeks that has required attention? Are not Nicola Sturgeon and Gordon Jackson entitled to ask the acting First Minister what he has done about the Govan orders? Are no members for the north-east and Inverness entitled to ask about the abandonment of Great North Eastern Railway services north of Edinburgh? Are not Kenny Gibson and Paul Martin, who have questions 1 and 2, entitled to a response about fireworks and property factors? Of course they are. Tom McCabe says that the selection of a First Minister should be a parliamentary occasion. The SNP does not disagree with that. Apart from anything else, it will give the Parliament an opportunity, I hope, to show off how a modern, democratic Parliament should go about its business, in stark contrast to the mother of all farces witnessed in Westminster this week. Who knows? Members might follow the example of the good people of South Parks and Macedonia, by voting for an SNP candidate. This Parliament has to be more than just a Parliament of occasions. It has to be about more than capturing live television opportunities. It has to be a Parliament that works, which fulfils its functions and hold ministers to account. That is what is expected of us, that is how the Parliament was designed to work and that is what we should do tomorrow. I move amendment S1M-1275.1, in point (a) of the motion to leave out from "2.30 pm" to "Minister" and insert: "2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Selection of the Parliament's Nominee for First Minister"

I said no.

Earlier today, we met some remarkable people—including my next-door neighbour—who came from Shetland to Dumfries to lobby us; I thank all the MSPs who spent time in the Hub listening to their lives and experiences. For many of those people, getting here was not as simple as it is for the rest of us, because they have multiple sclerosis. At this point, it is appropriate to thank all the people who made what was in many cases a difficult journey to lobby MSPs today. I also thank the Multiple Sclerosis Society in Scotland, which organised such a successful lobby. It is also appropriate to thank the staff who have made our Parliament accessible to the people here today and who have helped them to take part in this evening's proceedings. The people with multiple sclerosis told us how difficult it is even to get out of bed in the morning, let alone travel to Edinburgh and get into the visitors gallery for this debate. Moreover, they have to fight for services that ought to be freely available. They might have to wait six months to see a neurologist; they might be told that there is no money in this year's budget to put a ramp at the front door; and they might be denied the only drug that can moderate the effects of the disease  because they have the misfortune to live in Edinburgh and not Aberdeen. This is an important debate and I am grateful that the minister—not the deputy minister—will reply, which shows the importance that she places on the subject. The debate gives us an opportunity to turn our attention to a condition that affects more than 10,000 people in Scotland. Multiple sclerosis is an incurable and progressive disease of the nervous system. It affects different people in different ways. A significant proportion of people end up in wheelchairs, and there is no known cure. In Scotland, we have the unenviable distinction of leading the world in the incidence of MS. The incidence of MS is far higher the further north one goes. People are twice as likely to have the disease in Orkney than elsewhere in Scotland. As with many other aspects of the disease, the scientists do not know why that is. The Executive is not funding any research to find out why Scotland has the highest incidence of the disease in the world. If we are the world capital of MS, we must start to lead the world in the standards of care that we give to people with MS. We in this Parliament must strive to set those standards of care and to provide the best care that is available. I draw members' attention to the final report of the Scottish needs assessment programme—SNAP—which is about to be published. The report was commissioned before the current Administration took office, but its conclusions are vital to those who make decisions about the treatment of MS and the care that is given. The report says: "Current care is substantially sub-optimal, inadequately resourced and unacceptably fragmented." It states: "There is an urgent need to develop properly resourced services in MS care." It also states: "Health boards should urgently develop strategies for the achievement of good practice outlined in the MS Society's standards document." The extensive report does not paint a picture of satisfactory MS services in Scotland. There are seven specialist MS nursing staff in Scotland, but 10,400 people who have MS. We have some way to go before we can be proud of the standards of care that we offer to people with MS in Scotland. It is time that we considered how to improve the level of service—how to change the sub-optimal, inadequately resourced and unacceptably fragmented situation that we have at present. One drug—beta interferon—has been proved to moderate the course of MS in some people. The drug is widely available in every developed health  service bar Britain's, but it is in danger of not being available at all to people with MS in Scotland. It is easier to be prescribed beta interferon in Turkey than it is in Tranent. I am aware that the National Institute for Clinical Excellence believes that physiotherapy could be seen as an alternative to beta interferon, but I point out to the minister that that view is not supported by the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy, which rightly states that physiotherapy should be part of an overall programme of treatment and not a cheap substitute for drugs. The Health Technology Board for Scotland is about to conduct its own inquiry into the availability of beta interferon in Scotland. In doing so, it should bear in mind the fact that beta interferon is widely held to be of assistance to as many as a fifth of MS sufferers. Why then are only 1.5 per cent of Scottish MS sufferers prescribed the drug? We have a responsibility to represent the interests of all our constituents and to ensure that the drug is far more freely available. I am delighted that this debate is taking place, because it will bring hope to many thousands of people in Scotland. It will bring hope to the many people here today—and those who have never spoken to a member of the Scottish Parliament or, indeed, any elected representative—who have come to highlight their condition to us. They want a positive response from the minister.

Will the member give way?

This will be funny.

Friends?

Bristow Muldoon has spent an awful lot of time asking what the SNP would do. Has not he read the motion? Is not it about time that he started defending his Government's record?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Executive has indicated that it is not putting up a minister to respond to this debate. It is putting up a junior minister— [Interruption.]

In view of the seriousness of this debate, do you view the decision of the Executive not to put up one of their front-line ministers as a gross discourtesy to the chamber and to the SNP?

On behalf of my colleagues on the Standards Committee, I thank members for contributing to the debate, although I am sorry that there were not more contributions. I shall address Pauline McNeill's point later in my speech. The report that we recommend to Parliament today is another building block for the Parliament. The proposals of the Standards Committee are aimed at further enhancing the transparency and openness of our proceedings and at increasing public confidence in our work. Although the report  places an onus on members to ensure that their staff comply with the registration requirements, our proposals should not be seen as a burden on staff or on MSPs. As Mike Rumbles said in his opening remarks, the report is also intended to provide protection for members and their staff from allegations of undue influence. The Standards Committee report represents the culmination of a lengthy process in which we sought the views of those in the Parliament who will be directly affected by our proposals. The committee was keen to get it right and I believe that, with the help of those who responded to the consultation exercise, we have done that. I particularly want to thank the staff associations and trade unions that contributed to the process. Although we have not taken on board all their concerns, we have certainly considered them very carefully. I think that the committee has got the balance right, for the staff and for MSPs. If staff still have concerns, members of the committee have made it clear that they are more than willing to talk to them if they are still not clear about the burdens that they feel may have been placed upon them. It is important that staff do not feel that they are singled out in a way that employees in other industries or workplaces are not. We want to ensure that we have happy staff, who understand why those burdens might have been placed upon them. We have clarified who is covered by the proposals by using the definition of parliamentary duties set out in the members' allowances scheme, with which we are all familiar. In the previous debate, Richard Simpson raised that problem, because he wanted greater clarity about who was covered—we were asked about volunteers, people who came into the office or folk who put posters up on lampposts. By pinning it down to the duties of the parliamentary allowances scheme, we are all much clearer about which staff or volunteers are covered by the report. I am sure that Richard will agree that we have clarified that point for him and for other members. We also reviewed how the register will be published, taking on board concerns that it should not be on the internet. That is something that concerned an awful lot of staff. The committee considered that carefully and concluded that the staff were right and that it would be unfair to place all those details on the internet. However, we have taken the view, all along, that a public document would be required. That document will be available for inspection in the chamber office. We have also set out the rationale behind the requirement to register gifts or hospitality with a value in excess of £50. If any member feels moved to make an  intervention, I would be more than happy to accept. [Laughter.]  When we debated the subject in March, some members felt that we had moved a bit too quickly and that MSPs and their staff had not had sufficient time—

Thank you.

The reason is quite simple: the Standards Committee is responsible for the behaviour only of MSPs. During the lobbygate inquiry last year, when we were interviewing members' staff, we realised that, at the end of the day, we had no sanction over them. If we truly want to be open and accountable, we must put the burden on somebody. If we cannot put the burden on the staff, we must be able to say to MSPs that they employ staff and that those staff work on an MSP's behalf in their constituency office; they also work on the MSP's behalf, and sometimes instead of the MSP, in the Parliament itself. Those members of staff are in contact with a great number of people and there is a possibility that they could be under undue influence. The Standards Committee can take no sanctions whatever against staff. The sole reason for placing the burden on MSPs is that MSPs do the employing. We are responsible for the behaviour of our staff and everything that they do in carrying out their duties on our behalf. The committee decided that it was not fair to put all the details on the internet, but a copy of the register of interests will be placed in the chamber office. As I was saying before Pauline McNeill's very welcome intervention, members felt in March that we had moved a bit too quickly. We realised that perhaps we had not got it quite right the first time, so we embarked on the consultation exercise,  which attracted a fair amount of comment, both from members and from the staff associations. We tried to allow the maximum period after publication of the report for members to come back to us with comments. The report has now been published for four months and no one has expressed any concerns either to the Standards Committee clerks or to committee members. As a result, we feel that we have got it right this time. As Mike Rumbles said, the proposals are evolutionary; they are not set in stone. Perhaps we will need to adjust the requirements, and the convener and members of the Standards Committee have made the commitment that they will be more than happy to consider the matter again, if people think that that would be desirable. The case for the disclosure of the interests of members' staff is powerful; in March, there was cross-party support for that principle and for the establishment of a register. MSPs' staff have the potential to exert influence over members and, indirectly, over the Parliament and the conduct of its business. The committee's experience in mounting the lobbygate inquiry and its work on developing the code of conduct have convinced us that it is right that appropriate information about staff interests should be disclosed and made publicly available. The £50 threshold on gifts and hospitality has attracted some concern, when compared with the requirements that apply to MSPs. In preparing the report, the committee closely examined the issue.

Although the member will need to seek detailed guidance from the committee clerks on that point, I do not consider that to be hospitality and, as such, it does not need to be registered. In preparing the report, the committee explored the whole issue of costs and hospitality and we remain convinced that gifts or hospitality to members' staff of a value of more than £50, which are connected in any way with the Parliament's work, are a matter of legitimate public interest. As other committee members have pointed out, the £250 threshold on gifts and hospitality for MSPs not only covers all such gifts and hospitality; it is a statutory responsibility imposed on us by the Scotland Act 1998 (Transitory and Transitional Provisions) (Members' Interests) Order 1999. As Karen Gillon and I have said on many occasions,  any gifts costing more than £250 that our husbands might be moved by generosity to give us must be registered. Jackie Baillie raises her eyebrows at me; however, it is entirely true that she has to register those gifts. Who knows—she might get lucky. Any breach of those rules by an MSP could lead to a criminal prosecution. However, under our proposals, no such sanctions will apply to members' staff. Tokens of gratitude such as flowers, chocolate, whisky and modest hospitality will not come within the rules. Furthermore, our proposals will not prevent staff from accepting gifts and hospitality in connection with their work that are in excess of £50, providing that they enter receipts in the register itself. As for the publication of the register, there will inevitably be a conflict between individual privacy and public access to information of legitimate public interest. The committee does not approach that dilemma lightly, which is why we have listened to the concerns of MSPs and their staff and have decided against publishing the register on the internet. Nevertheless, it is important that, in the interests of transparency and openness, the register is available in hard copy.

I commend the report to the Parliament. I am sure that, after this lengthy interlude, members will vote to agree the register of staff members' interests.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reconsider, in the light of the current fuel situation, the advice it gave to the shadow strategic rail authority about the franchise bids for the east coast main line between Edinburgh and Aberdeen. (S1O-2289)

I thank the minister for his most electrifying answer. In response to my letter of 28 June, Sarah Boyack stated that diesel engine trains were a serious competitor with electric trains "especially with regard to cost". Bearing in mind that, even in the short time since my letter was written, the cost of a barrel of oil has increased by $1.21, will Mr Galbraith support the recommendation that electrification of the east coast main line between Edinburgh and Aberdeen is a necessity?

Does Mr Wallace agree that we have heard a lot of spinning in the chamber today from the party of spin, but that the real spinning that is going on is that of socialists such as Aneurin Bevan, who are spinning in their graves because of what Labour members have said today?

Malcolm Chisholm spoke about his preferences and about trying to balance central heating against long-term care for the elderly. Does he acknowledge the fact that the chancellor has a huge war chest? Why does he have to decide between one priority and the other, when both are important?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is a convention that interventions are not permitted during ministerial statements, because those statements are generally of a factual nature. It will not have escaped your notice that the minister's statement is starting to be of a party political nature—

Will you consider advising ministers—

This is not a ministerial statement.

On a point of information. Will you advise me what is a ministerial statement? Is it a statement that is truly factual in nature and ministerial in tone, or is it a party political rant? If it is a party political rant, why are we not allowed to make interventions?

On a point of order.

On a point of order.

I hope that my point of order does not take time away from a supplementary question, Presiding Officer, as the minister has singularly failed to answer the original question. On a point of order—

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Robert Brown give way?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will meet the request made by Fife Council to provide extra money to tackle its estimated £70 million repair costs for Fife schools. (S1O-2054)

In that case, does the minister agree that Councillor Helen Law has asked the Scottish Parliament to discuss getting extra resources from the Scottish Executive? I am sure that the minister will want to take this opportunity to welcome to the Parliament teachers and pupils from Auchmuty High in Glenrothes, which has a repair bill of £2 million over the next five years. Will the minister explain why some of the £89 million that was saved last year from underspend in education and industry could not have been used this year to meet the £1 billion repair costs for all of Scotland's schools? Will he also explain why he is prepared to sit back and watch Scotland's schools crumble to the ground?

I thank the minister for her courtesy in providing an advance copy of her statement and I welcome her appointment as the active communities champion because I know of her personal commitment to the voluntary sector. As the minister said, volunteering has always been an important part of community life in Scotland; from those who help out in charity shops to those who offer specialised help to voluntary organisations, or those who simply go for the messages for an elderly neighbour. The active communities scheme is about more than just  individual action; it is about how people get involved in all areas of community life. One of the criticisms of the draft strategy was that it took a top-down approach that focused particularly on the role of statutory organisations, and that the majority of those on the working group were not from the voluntary sector. I am pleased that the minister has announced that she will set up an active communities forum to monitor the progress of the scheme, but will she guarantee that the forum will have a majority of voluntary sector participants on it? The minister also announced funding of £650,000 to take the strategy forward. Will she confirm whether that is new money? Finally, there was much criticism that the lines of communication between London and Scotland were not clear. What is the minister doing to address that criticism?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Did Murray Tosh listen to the speech?

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive intends to take in response to the recent UNICEF report on child poverty. (S1F-415)

The report indicates that Britain has one of the worst records of childhood poverty in the industrialised world. Given the important role played by local authorities in Scotland in combating child poverty by providing hot school meals, grants for uniforms and free school travel, will the minister tell us whether he agrees with his colleague, Mike Rumbles, that the local government settlement was damaging, or with Donald Dewar, who said that it was satisfactory?

Will the member give way?

Does the Presiding Officer not think it a bit worrying that a minister is sitting here who does not seem to understand the difference between civil and criminal law?

I understand what Dr Simpson says about good practice; I welcome that and I know that great strides have been made. However, good practice is not the same as a legal right, which is fundamental.

I add my congratulations to the Executive and, in particular, to the minister on producing the document "The same as you?" I also congratulate all those who contributed to the document. I acknowledge that the Executive is committed to bringing people with learning disabilities out of the shadows and giving them their place, if not in the sun, certainly in society, where they belong. I want to raise three specific issues, which may not have been addressed fully or at all in the report. The first is housing. People who rent a house have a secure, assured or short-term tenancy. However, only a small minority of people living in supported accommodation have such tenancies. Instead, they have occupancy agreements, which offer many fewer rights and are intertwined with the relationship between the occupant and the service provider. A 1999 Scottish Homes research report concluded: "There is nothing in the nature of supported accommodation which prevents the legal use of tenancies even in shared accommodation or dual agency situations." However, only 16 per cent of people in supported accommodation have assured or short-term tenancies. In other words, 84 per cent of people in supported accommodation have fewer rights than  people in mainstream housing. That is not acceptable. If we want people with learning difficulties to be the same as you—as the document has it—or the same as me, we must address the most basic issues: their right to a home and to legal rights. They must have no less protection than anyone else renting a home. A housing bill is soon to be introduced in the Scottish Parliament. I understand that, although there is to be a single social tenancy, the specific issue of supported tenancies will not be addressed. I would be grateful for an assurance from the minister that he will discuss that with the Minister for Communities as a matter of urgency. My second point is about the quality of care for people with learning disabilities. The SNP has long supported the concept of community care. I share the joy of those who have escaped incarceration in long-stay hospitals and are now, perhaps for the first time, enjoying a quality of life that was unthinkable only a few years ago. However, I am concerned that nurses qualified in caring for people with learning disabilities are finding it difficult to gain employment because local authorities and the voluntary sector are employing social workers and care workers in community homes, rather than using the much-needed expertise that is available. I know that resources are limited, but the many welcome recommendations in the report cannot be implemented on the cheap or by reducing the level of expertise. Finally, I come to a problem that has not been sufficiently addressed—the facilities available to people who have what is referred to as challenging behaviour. There is a real need for specialised support for that group of people. In particular, I understand that in most health board areas, no accommodation exists for youngsters with learning difficulties who are sexual offenders. That is something that we should address honestly. This is the first review to be undertaken in 20 years. It will bring the learning difficulties service in Scotland up to date. However, I urge the minister to go further and to ensure that the service is the envy of the rest of Europe.

On a point of order. Helen Eadie seeks to withdraw this amendment, but I object to that. According to the standing orders, I suggest that this amendment go to a vote.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I am sure that it is the intention of everyone in the chamber to make sure that the rough sleepers initiative works and that the money is targeted where it is needed most, but it will take more than hostel places to achieve the target of ensuring that no one sleeps rough by 2003. Most people know about my role in Shelter in bringing a rough sleepers initiative to Scotland, but I am concerned by the announcement of £6 million to tackle the problem of families who have to live in bed and breakfasts. I say to the minister with respect that that is nothing to do with rough sleeping; it is to do with homelessness. We need to separate in our minds what we are talking about: homelessness is not rough sleeping and rough sleeping is not homelessness. However, the target date of 2003 is a realistic one and it can be met. I am concerned, and concern has been expressed to me, about the interim research to which the minister referred. That research showed that between 8,000 and 11,000 people are sleeping rough in Scotland. The concern is that those figures are on the high side. I hope that they will not be used as a baseline against which to measure the success of the rough sleepers initiative in the future. It is fundamental that we deal with figures, but it is more important that we deal with people and that we do not get into games with statistics. The RSI is only part of a homelessness strategy; it gives immediate help to those who are most at risk—the folk who are sleeping on the streets because they have nowhere else to go. We need to ensure that people do not end up on the streets in the first place and that, after they come off the streets, we put in place not just permanent accommodation, but the necessary support to help them to put their lives back together. I will specifically discuss permanent accommodation, because we will ultimately tackle homelessness only by investing money in housing—there is no other way. The pity is that the Executive is cutting money for housing. Wendy Alexander has cut £85 million since she became Minister for Communities a year ago.

In March 1999, Donald Dewar published "Serving Scotland's Needs", which was in effect Labour's manifesto for the Scottish Parliament elections. It showed that Labour intended to spend £1,764 million on the five major  housing budgets from 1999-2000 to 2000-01. A year later and a year since Wendy Alexander became the housing minister, the Executive published "Investing in You"—a misnomer if ever there was one. Those same five housing budgets show planned expenditure of £1,679 million.

Let me continue. I want to make this point; I promise that I will let Jackie Baillie in. Those five housing budgets show planned expenditure of £1,679 million—that is a cut of £85 million. The minister, who tries to get away with recycling previously announced money as new money, is the same minister who has agreed to cut housing budgets by £85 million. Where has the money gone? Into a black hole? Who knows? Perhaps the minister does—will she tell us?

In the planned spending on the five major housing budgets from 1999-2000 to 2000-01, there is a cut of £85 million from "Serving Scotland's Needs" to "Investing in You". Wendy Alexander said that the Labour party was responsible only for what had happened since it came to power. This is a minister who wants to be judged on her successes. If Wendy Alexander is as successful in the next three years as she has been in the past year, we will have lost £340 million from housing since she came to power. That is not just careless—careless is losing a handbag—but wilful when families are living in damp-infested houses and people are sleeping on our streets.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to make resources available to local  authorities to allow security upgrades of schools to be made. (S1O-1830)

Following the Dunblane tragedy, it was agreed that all schools should have a security audit. The minister is bound to be aware of the Educational Institute of Scotland report that revealed that 20 per cent of all schools have still had no security audit and, worse, that a quarter of those that have had an audit have not had the work carried out. What steps will the Executive take to ensure that the audits are completed and that the resources needed to carry out the work are made available?

Will the minister explain to the parents of Kennoway Primary School pupils why Fife Council has told them that there is no money to carry out the security work that has been identified as necessary?

Although I acknowledge the minister's points about the need to make decisions at the lowest level—that is, at Fife Council—the real issue is resources. We need £1.3 billion to tackle repairs to Scotland's schools, with £70 million needed in Fife alone. Will the minister give a commitment not just to Fife Council but to every council in Scotland that the money will be available to tackle that problem? Perhaps we can then debate the issue locally.

I congratulate Keith Harding on his motion, which has given us this opportunity to have a short debate about the problems of Bell Baxter. Like Iain Smith and Keith Harding, I pay tribute not just to  the school board, but to the staff and, in particular, the rector of Bell Baxter, who are working in intolerable conditions. The school has a good record of achievement and it is important that we give it the support that it needs. As Keith Harding mentioned, he and I visited the school. Frankly, I was appalled by what I saw: a two-site school that is joined by a very busy road. When my children were at school in Fife, they had to have permission from me as a parent to step outside the school or to go on a school trip. I am seriously concerned about young schoolchildren walking up and down a busy road many times a day. There is an accident waiting to happen. If I were the parent of a child at the school, I would be very concerned about the regime, which has existed for a long time. The road is extremely busy, the pavement is extremely narrow and the children have to walk half a mile between the sites. I will talk about the physical conditions of the school. The physics laboratory is like a school museum. When I was at school, a bit before Iain Smith, the conditions in my school were far superior to those that I saw at Bell Baxter. There is what is known as hut alley—where children are taught in 40 huts, which are falling apart—and there is a dining hall in which I would not allow my children to eat. The health and safety issue has to be addressed urgently. Iain Smith is quite right that Fife County Council, Fife Regional Council and Fife Council have given no priority to Bell Baxter. Nobody denies that improvements have been made, but it is unacceptable in this day and age that school pupils should have to go to two sites. I know that the problems of Bell Baxter are replicated throughout Scotland. The Executive will have to address urgently the recent report that showed that repairing Scotland's schools would cost £1.3 billion—it is estimated that it will cost £70 million to repair schools in Fife alone. I leave members with this thought. Every week, the schoolchildren at Bell Baxter spend an hour travelling back and forward. That is a week a year during which those children are denied an education because of the circumstances in which they find themselves. That is not acceptable. Something has to be done—and soon.

Further to that point of order. A minister, Mr Alasdair Morrison, today answered a question with a question back to the questioner. Will you give the minister some guidance about how he conducts himself in the chamber and how he should answer questions in future?

Did Mr McLetchie listen to a word of what Roseanna Cunningham said in her speech?

On a point of order. During question time today, the First Minister's press officer was on the floor of this chamber wearing what appeared to be a Labour party neck cord. Will you comment on the appropriateness of a civil servant, who is paid out of the public purse, parading his party loyalties? Will you refer the matter to the head of the civil service, with a view to considering whether the special advisers code of conduct has been breached?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We reached question 13 during open question time—

The Minister for Health and Community Care took six minutes to answer question 1. Next week, will you instruct ministers that their replies to members' questions should be brief so that as many questions as possible may be asked during open question time?

The minister talks about joint working and working together and says that we all acknowledge the need for resources. Will she make representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown—her colleague at Westminster—to open his war chest and provide the resources that we need for community care?

Will the member join me in regretting the fact that Fife Council could not find the resources to support the linking education and disability—or LEAD—project in Glenrothes, which provided services to allow people with disabilities  to get back into education?

Will the member give way?

I will start with a familiar quotation from the document, "Modernising community care: an action plan": "Most people want home-based care. We need to shift the balance of current funding and target new resources to increase home-based care" Home-based care is an essential thread of the strategy that takes people out of institutions and allows them to be part of their community or helps elderly people to remain in their homes. We still have too little sheltered housing, too little furnished accommodation and too little accommodation for people who need support. Millions are being siphoned off from private sector grants to home owners, which would allow people to live in their own homes. "Modernising community care" was described as "an action plan". Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that, having identified weaknesses, the Executive would be tackling those weaknesses and making improvements, rather than lodging  self-congratulatory motions. The things-can-only-get-better Government is now the Government where things could hardly be worse. Between 1998 and 1999, the number of hours of home care services provided dropped by around 7 per cent. Since this year's local government settlement, things are getting worse rather than better. In my own area of Fife, where Labour runs the council, home care services have been cut to the point where there is simply not enough to go round. I am sure that Hugh Henry should be talking to his colleagues about how Renfrewshire Council is able to save its services while Fife Council has had to make cuts. Someone, somewhere is simply not telling the truth. The cash constraints placed by the Executive on Fife Council's budget mean that 1,600 hours of home care services will be lost to vulnerable communities in Fife—that is a cut of 5 per cent on an already overstretched service. In the past, I have spoken at length about housing waiting lists. Now there are waiting lists for home helps. Iain Gray said that the Executive is doing things that were unthinkable; waiting lists for home helps are unthinkable. How old, infirm or vulnerable does one have to be before one can get one's name on the list? How much older, more infirm or more vulnerable does one have to become before one reaches the top of that waiting list? What is the motivation behind the change in Fife Council's policy? I will quote from a press release from that council: "An increased demand for the service, limited resources plus more complex needs have led us to the introduction of waiting lists." The council has done that to patch a huge hole in its budget—a hole such as has been made by Jack McConnell and the Executive in social work budgets throughout the country. The Labour party—which makes all those recycled announcements—is the same party that tries to spin a reduction in services into a good thing. Fife Council's press release says that home care services should focus on those who need it most, but it makes little mention of the fact that such services are being cut. Has the Executive ever considered the burden that is placed on carers—the relatives and friends who are left to look after older and vulnerable people when the state has given up on them? The Executive has again produced a glossy document that talks a good game, but I will quote from Fife Council's press release again. Councillor Irene Connolly said, when commenting on the changes: "This is the first time we have had to introduce a waiting list for this service."  I will repeat that to the Labour party: "This is the first time we have had to introduce a waiting list for this service." That did not happen through the long years of Tory government—throughout those years, Fife Council did not have to introduce waiting lists for home help services. In the first year of the Labour Executive, there are waiting lists for home care services in Fife. Elaine Smith said that the Tories have a brass neck. They have, but the Labour party should be black affrontit that the day has come when waiting lists that affect the most vulnerable people in our society have been introduced in Fife.

Will Hugh Henry give way?

Will Mr McLeish give way?

Will Mr McLeish give way?

On a point of order. Some months ago, the Presiding Officer made a ruling that only those members who had sat through the opening speeches were allowed to take part in the debate. I respectfully suggest, Presiding Officer, that you do not call Mr Robson, who has not had the courtesy to sit through the opening speeches and some of the other speeches. It is an outrage that he is allowed to speak.

There is no bill more fitting than the one that we are debating to be the first member's bill in the Parliament. It underlines the determination of our Parliament to change Scotland for the better. It is right that one of the first acts of the Parliament should be to abolish the draconian and barbaric system of poindings and warrant sales, which have been used to terrorise and intimidate the poorest and most vulnerable people in Scotland for generations. It is an outrage that the Labour-Liberal Executive should come forward at this stage with an amendment that will change the principles of a member's bill. The time for amendments is in committee at stage 2. As I said earlier today, if the Executive wins this vote, it will mean that no member's bill will ever become law unless it has the support of the Executive—that is an intolerable situation. Evidence to the committees has shown that warrant sales are not an effective means of collecting debt. Of the 23,000 poindings that took place last year, only 503 resulted in warrant sales. Poindings and warrant sales are not about collecting debt. They are used to intimidate and humiliate. In many cases, all that working-class families have is their pride and dignity. They may  be in straitened financial circumstances and in debt; pride and dignity is sometimes all that remains. Poindings are used to humiliate and degrade them. They are used to strip away that dignity and reduce people in the eyes of their neighbours. The people of Scotland will be astounded and appalled that the Labour Executive, which moved with such alacrity over the abolition of section 2A, should now seek to put a brake on an issue that goes to the heart and soul of the decent and civilised society that we wish to create in the 21 st century. I do not seek to rerun the debate on section 2A, but the people of Scotland will be angry and mystified at why that issue should have been progressed so quickly, with so little discussion, debate or detail, yet on warrant sales and poindings, which were dissected by three committees of the Parliament, the Executive claims that it needs more time. The Executive has known about this bill since August. This is the day on which MSPs must stand up to the Executive and stand up for the committees and the people of Scotland. All of us who are in political parties recognise that there are times when we have to trim or rationalise on a personal position. Today is not one of those times. I tell Labour members that they cannot, in good conscience, rationalise support for poindings and warrant sales, as this amendment asks them to do. This is the time not for Executive diktat but for individual conscience. They will never be forgiven if they vote for the Executive amendment to maintain poindings and warrant sales in Scotland.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order similar to that raised by Tommy Sheridan, I would like you, Presiding Officer, to address the wider issue of whether the key principles of the constitutional steering group report, which underpins the ethos of this Parliament, have been breached. The CSG report is clear that "the Scottish Parliament should embody and reflect the sharing of power between the people of Scotland, the legislators and the Scottish Executive." The effect of accepting the Executive's amendment will be that no member's bill will ever become law unless it has the explicit support of the Executive. That is unacceptable, intolerable and flies in the face of what the CSG anticipated and what the people of Scotland expect. Like Mr Sheridan, I do not believe that under standing orders it is competent to accept an amendment that changes the general principles of any bill.

I accept that an amendment such as that lodged by the Executive is not explicitly ruled out by standing orders. However, it is my view that, for all the reasons given by Tommy Sheridan and me, it should be. Will you therefore, Presiding Officer, raise this matter with the Procedures Committee as a matter of urgency so that the Parliament can have confidence in itself and its procedures, and so that the spirit of the consultative steering group report is upheld?

Presiding Officer, will you refer the matter that I raised to the Procedures Committee?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I understood that the minister's response would be concerned with whether we should have the debate. Instead, he is entering into a debate—

On a point of order.

Nora Radcliffe's point about architects and builders is true, but will she accept that 70 per cent of Scottish housing was built before any insulation was required? The result is that 70 per cent of our housing stock was built pre-insulation.

As other members have said, there is an unacceptable level of fuel poverty in Scotland. I want to thank Shelter, Energy Action Scotland and the Scottish Warm Homes Campaign for providing MSPs from all parties with briefing papers. Nobody in Parliament will dispute the conservative estimate that a quarter of our population is too poor to keep warm, or that those who are poorest—pensioners, single parents and the chronically ill—are the same people who are forced to live in the poorest and worst housing. Investment in housing is essential if we are to make a serious attempt to tackle fuel poverty. The Government's pensioners bonus is welcome, but it is sad to see—as Robin Harper said—that the money is escaping from the purses of our pensioners to the profits of the fuel companies. The extent of the problem is that there are half a million households in Scotland—the most energy-rich nation in Europe—that cannot afford adequate heating. Surely that should have put fuel poverty at the centre of the Executive's programme. The SNP hoped that that would happen.  When the Executive launched its flagship social inclusion document, "Social Justice . . . A Scotland Where Everyone Matters", in a blaze of publicity last year, we might have expected that the fuel poverty problem would be addressed, but how disappointed we were. Instead of addressing fuel poverty, the document sets out an impressive list of targets, milestones and statistical indicators, from the number of mothers who smoke during pregnancy to the number of people who draw an old-age pension and still take exercise. Such precision and attention to detail might have inspired confidence, but anybody who looked for hope for those who are in fuel poverty was sorely disappointed. Rather than setting a target, the document simply says that the Executive will increase "the quality and variety of homes in our most disadvantaged communities." There is no mention of how many homes that means, how quickly it will happen or when it will happen. Why? The same answer is repeated time and again—we are told by ministers that the warm deal will meet Scotland's needs with a budget of £12 million per annum. Looking back through the answers and exchanges on the matter, I was astonished to see the range of needs that the £12 million warm deal is meant to address. Until now, the warm deal has been the minister's stock answer to questions on matters that range from provision for the elderly to the time scale of a fuel poverty review. As Frank McAveety said today, the warm deal can be used to tackle draught-proofing and insulation; it can be used for lagging pipes and tanks; it can be used for advice; and it can be used to buy energy-efficient light bulbs. The warm deal, however, will not install any new heating systems and it will not install a single new boiler or radiator. Such things are beyond the parameters of the warm deal in Scotland—in contrast with the situation south of the border. Even if the Government had a 100 per cent take-up rate, the warm deal would affect only one sixth of the families who are unable to afford heating. It is not a warm deal—it is a raw deal. It is a raw deal for the people who need things to get better. Perhaps that is why the Executive has not included fuel poverty in its glossy list of targets and milestones. Theirs is a Scotland where everybody matters—unless one is old, ill, cold or poor. I welcome Frank McAveety's honesty in acknowledging the limits of the warm deal. The warm deal is not a panacea for fuel poverty. Perhaps for the first time, we can have the kind of debate that we need to have, so that we can genuinely tackle fuel poverty and bring hope to the  half a million people in Scotland who are suffering. The time is now—Parliament can do something about alleviating the problem, but we must all get together to achieve that. The first step towards achieving that will be admission by ministers that the warm deal, far from being commendable, has not solved and will not solve the problems of fuel poverty in Scotland.

When I spoke in the stage 1 debate in December, the areas I drew attention to are those that are the subject of Michael Matheson's amendments. At that time, the Minister for Justice undertook to consider those matters and said that he would take steps to allay the concerns that had been expressed by many individuals and organisations. The fact that those concerns have not been allayed causes me great disquiet. Like Michael Matheson, I urge members of the Parliament to vote as their conscience tells them. I accept that it is not and never has been the Executive's intention that the bill should allow euthanasia, but I do not believe that the Executive has moved sufficiently to convince genuine and sincere people that euthanasia will not be possible if the bill is passed without amendment. The main problem, as Michael Matheson says, is that benefit is not defined. In the absence of a definition in the bill, it is likely that the meaning given in the Law hospital judgment, that the continued existence of a patient with persistent vegetative state "was not a benefit", will prevail. That wording was also used by the BMA in its recent guidance, in which it advised doctors that "treatment", including nutrition and hydration, may not benefit patients with advanced dementia and stroke. The BMA guidance goes far beyond the Law hospital judgment, which concentrated on the very few patients with PVS. During evidence-taking sessions held by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee at stage 1, I was struck by the fact that the BMA's evidence about current practice flew in the face of the guidance given by the Lord Advocate following the Law hospital judgment. It is worth repeating Lord Hardie's statement at that time. He said that he "would not authorise prosecutions of qualified medical practitioners who, acting in good faith and with the authority of the Court of Session, withdraw life-sustaining treatment from a patient with PVS, which results in the patient's death". In evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, the BMA representatives said that it was not necessary to go to court to get permission for cessation of treatment for every case of PVS. At the moment, the law and the practice are not the same. An examination of the bill's guiding principles and common law makes it clear that, if the bill were enacted in its present form, it would be almost impossible successfully to prosecute a proxy or doctor who caused the death of a person with incapacity by withholding or refusing treatment. I am not a vitalist. I do not believe that doctors should strive to keep alive every patient no matter  what, but I cannot accept death being caused by withdrawing nutrition and hydration. I cannot accept circumstances that would allow people to die from starvation. The Executive has claimed from the outset that the bill will not permit euthanasia. My concern is that the bill, if not amended, will not prevent it from happening. We will have a lot of important debates in this chamber, but I truly believe that none will be more important than this. This is not a party political issue; it is a moral issue, an ethical issue and one that we must get right. I urge members to support amendment 145.

The minister will be aware that in rural Scotland, 43,000 homes are damp and 90,000 homes have condensation. Will she outline the targets and time scales that she has set to tackle those problems?

On behalf of my colleagues on the Standards Committee, I thank members for their welcome contributions to the debate. As Mike Rumbles said, we are a listening committee and we are always keen to hear the views of our colleagues. I am sorry that Richard Simpson has just left. He is—

I am sorry. It was Tom McCabe who left. Richard is fortunate that he has 50 helpers and his extended family. It is clear from the report that staff are those who help members carry out constituency or parliamentary duties. Any person who helps an MSP carry out the duties for which  the MSP was elected is a member of staff. We could sit all day and talk about who helps and when, but at some point common sense must come into the debate. I hope that we can approach the debate in that spirit. Good points have been raised in speeches, but the Standards Committee believes that the report is good. It continues the important work of seeking to achieve as open and transparent a system of government as possible, which the Scottish people can trust and have confidence in. It is important to remind MSPs and their staff at this juncture, that the register of staff interests is not to be taken in isolation. It is part of a package. That package started with the code of conduct for MSPs. We will also be looking at how lobby companies and others engage with Parliament. The report is good and we have heard nothing to contradict that. In summarising the debate, I believe that it is fair to say that colleagues in all parties have no problems in principle with the introduction of a register of staff interests. At a meeting on 23 February, the Standards Committee took the view that the proposed register should be introduced as a priority—that was based on our experience of drawing up the code of conduct for MSPs and on our previous inquiries. As Standards Committee colleagues have emphasised, MSPs' staff might be in a position to exert influence over members and—indirectly—over Parliament and its business. Given that potentially influential position, it is right and appropriate that information about staff interests is disclosed. I would like to refer to some other comments that have been made today. There is concern about whether staff details should be made publicly available, and representations have been made to me on that issue. The committee needs to revisit the matter, because staff members are MSPs' civil servants and we must ensure that we safeguard them. Members have mentioned the threshold of £50 for gifts, benefits or hospitality. Although, as Mike Rumbles pointed out, the same threshold for MSPs is £250, it covers all sources such as gifts from spouses, as Karen Gillon and I well know. We were both disappointed that we had nothing to declare after Christmas. The threshold for staff members is lower because it does not cover tokens of gratitude such as chocolates, flowers or modest hospitality. Furthermore, I have to say that I do not know how many people are invited to clubs; I have never been invited to one myself.

Everyone heard that offer.

John Swinney tells me not to go; I will wait for a better offer from him. Members have raised concerns about the lack of consultation on the report. The proposals for a register of staff interests have been well documented, and the committee's intentions were clearly stated in section 7 of the code of conduct, which was agreed by Parliament on 24 February. However, we accept that it might have been better to have had a longer consultation period with members' staff, and that there has not been sufficient time between the report's publication and this debate to enable full consideration of the committee's proposals and an explanation of all the details. Perhaps there has not been enough opportunity for members of the Standards Committee and staff associations to explain some of the report's points.

As usual, Mike Russell makes a fair point. We should consult staff, and I am hopeful that we can do so in the future. However, although there must be consultation, some explanation is also needed. A few of the concerns that were raised today could have been very easily dealt with if certain details had been explained.

I agree with Patricia Ferguson. As Mike Rumbles emphasised in his speech, the proposed arrangements are evolutionary and we are committed to reviewing all aspects of our work. Although we believe that the report is good and that the principle of a register of staff interests is sound, we will continue to listen closely to colleagues' concerns.

I was concluding. I thank Mike Rumbles for his intervention. I concur with him and believe that that is the right way to go forward. I am sure that at the next committee meeting we will consider methods of consulting colleagues and members of staff.

rose—

Could I persuade Alex Neil to comment on a minister who accuses the SNP of scaremongering, but in whose constituency 40 per cent of the income of 10 of its 20 post offices is based on benefits? One of the people who have made representations on the matter is the executive officer of the National Federation of Sub-Postmasters who lives and works in Methil, in the minister's constituency. Will Alex also comment on that?

Will the minister detail the actions that she has taken and the instructions that she has given to Railtrack to ensure that the renovation and maintenance work on the Forth rail bridge will be carried out without further delay? What assurances has she sought from Railtrack to secure the long-term future of the bridge and the future of the Edinburgh to Aberdeen line?

I thank Tom McCabe for his comments about the Standards Committee and the work in which we have been engaged since we were all elected. I would particularly like to thank members of the Standards Committee's clerking team for their advice, good humour and hard work in helping to bring the code of conduct before members today. The need for a code of conduct was identified as a priority at the first meeting of the Standards Committee last June. Work was started almost immediately. I point that out to members and to the media to remind them that work on the code was already under way at the time of the so-called lobbygate inquiry, and was not developed as a response to it. Why do we need a code of conduct in the first  place? During the referendum campaign, I was struck by the number of people who said that not only did we need a Parliament, but it must be different from Westminster, from the sleaze, lobbyists, cash for questions and the general feeling that all politicians were somehow at it. That all contributed to the general belief that the Scottish Parliament could and should be different. The code draws on the recommendations of the consultative steering group and is consistent with the principles that were set out by the Nolan committee. It was drawn up for this Parliament and I hope that members will give it their full support today. No one claims that the code is perfect; as Mike Rumbles said, it is an evolutionary document and much more work needs to be done. For example, a number of points in the members' interests order need to be addressed from a legal perspective, particularly the difficulties that we have experienced relating to the rule on paid advocacy. While we are satisfied with the current interpretation, clarification might be needed in the future. As has already been mentioned, there are problems with the registering of gifts from spouses, which was a matter that greatly exercised Karen Gillon and me during the Christmas period. Members will note that we made no declaration and can take it from that that we were disappointed that our gifts were less than £250. The Standards Committee will review and revisit such legal matters. The committee has tried to be as pragmatic as possible and has set out standards of behaviour while trying not to constrict the ability of members to do their jobs. On lobbying, we have restricted the code to dealing with how MSPs should conduct themselves in relation to lobbying organisations. We will start a separate inquiry at Easter into how lobbyists and lobbying companies interact with the Parliament. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, we will hear evidence on registration and regulation and a report will be brought back to the Parliament. It is vital that people know how to engage with their Parliament, that everyone who approaches MSPs is treated in the same way and that there is no question of organisations or individuals getting preferential treatment. The lobbygate inquiry was a searing experience for most of us. The procedures for carrying out an inquiry were not in place, but the inquiry was carried out swiftly and professionally. We have all learned from that experience. Jack McConnell said a few weeks ago that the inquiry made him grow up. It made us all grow up. Indeed, it made the Parliament grow up. It established the right of the Parliament to conduct its own inquiry and we now have in place procedures for inquiries, although  we hope and pray that they will not be needed. The Standards Committee has still to consider the possible appointment of a standards commissioner for the Parliament. Lord James outlined some of the arguments for that. It will be a matter for discussion in the near future and we will come back to the Parliament with our recommendations. With regard to Dennis Canavan's amendment, it is no secret that I opposed the inclusion of the oath in the code of conduct. I believe that the code should deal with MSPs' behaviour, not their beliefs. Scottish National party members of the committee in particular expressed concern about how that part of the code would be interpreted and enforced by the Standards Committee. I appreciated Mike Rumbles's swift reply to the SNP on the matter of enforcement. I welcome the fact that MSPs who do not stand for the national anthem or who express republican views will not be in breach of the code. That is a sensible and pragmatic response and is typical of the way in which the Standards Committee has acted. Section 2.2 of the code makes it clear that the primary duty of members is to act in the interests of the Scottish people and their Parliament. The code of conduct has been drawn up to assist members in their duties, not to prevent them from carrying out those duties. It will change and evolve as the Parliament does. The document belongs to the Parliament and it is important that MSPs take ownership of it by supporting the motion.

Towards the end of the 18 th century, John Rickman, clerk to the House of Commons, outlined 12 reasons for conducting a census. He said that the intimate knowledge of any country must form the rational basis of legislation and diplomacy. He also said that a census would encourage the social sciences to flourish. We can discount some of his other reasons for a census, such as planning the corn needs of the population, but I commend another of his reasons to the Government. He said: "In a time when many fear the dissatisfaction of the people, doing a census would improve Government's image, as setting out to promote a public good." We will see whether the census has that effect on the popularity of this Government. Somehow I doubt it. A memorandum from the Scottish Executive, dated 1 February, states "The 2001 Census, the first to be held under the auspices of the Scottish Parliament, offers a unique opportunity to collect information which can shape the policies aimed at improving social and economic conditions in Scotland." We are all agreed about the need for the census. Where we have differed is on the kind of questions that need to be asked. The census is a unique document. It will be pored over by researchers, local authorities, central Government and health service providers  for the next 10 years. The census is also a historical document that will provide a snapshot of the Scottish people at the beginning of the third millennium. That is why we must ensure that we include the proper questions in the census. We need questions that will reflect the ethnic, religious and social diversity of Scotland. I urge members to support the SNP motion on Scots, which was so eloquently presented by Irene McGugan. I welcome the Pauline conversion of the Minister for Justice to some of the concerns expressed by the Equal Opportunities Committee about the type of questions to be asked in the census. Many organisations and individuals made representations, such as the Commission for Racial Equality, leading academics and researchers and the Medical Research Council. For several years, all those organisations have made representations to the minister and to the registrar general. The Minister for Justice failed to listen, just as he failed to listen to the concerns expressed by the Equal Opportunities Committee from early January. Only last week he met the committee and said that there would be no questions on religion, on income, on languages spoken at home or on Scots. There was no question of him doing anything that would meet the concerns of the committee. He said that it was too difficult, it would make the form longer, the census was not the best tool and there was little demand from service users. There was plenty of demand from service users for an income question, but he ignored that. Michael McMahon said that Jim Wallace's reasoning was bizarre. He was right; it was bizarre. Now he has brought the same motion here today but he has said that he will concede a question on religion and will consider a more detailed breakdown of ethnicity. Of course, that is not new information. Mr Wallace's conversion was widely trailed in the press at the weekend. He now accepts the arguments not because he is persuaded by those arguments but because the motion on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee was finding back-bench support and there was a risk that the motion would be defeated.

Sorry, I am almost at the end. Since when would a motion from a parliamentary committee represent a defeat? What happened to new politics? I welcome Mr Wallace's remarks today. I urge him to follow through on the assurances he has given today. The SNP will give every assistance in ensuring that the primary legislation needed to allow the question on religion to be put receives a  speedy passage.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that motion S1M-519 in the name of Kate MacLean has been withdrawn.

I move without notice, That motion S1M-554 be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.  Motion agreed to.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recognition and support is being given to the voluntary sector to ensure that its work is able to continue and be developed over the coming year. (S1O-1080)

If the Executive's policy and the much-vaunted compact are so successful, can the minister explain why local authorities are having to decide which voluntary sector projects should be cut? Will she explain why Fife Council is being forced to choose between East Fife Women's Aid, the Drug and Alcohol Project in Leven, the Fife Racial Equality Council, and Fife Furniture Stockpile for funding next year?

Is the minister aware that in most local authorities in Scotland, the restraints and pressures that have been placed on their budgets by the Minister for Finance mean that there is a shortfall in the amount of money that is available to the voluntary sector? She says one thing here, but the reality—

Like Des McNulty, I find it strange to be debating a Conservative motion that draws attention to the problems facing Scotland's indigenous industries and the consequences of unemployment associated with the decline of that industrial base. I shall come back to the Conservatives' record a bit later. It is not possible to tackle unemployment by examining the enterprise network in isolation. It must be set in the wider political context and must work as part of our overall co-ordinated strategy. The potential for job creation cannot be viewed in isolation from the new deal, for example. As Henry McLeish pointed out, under the Conservatives, the nation witnessed the politically engineered destruction of coal, steel and shipbuilding, and the doors clanged shut on  industry after industry. The Tories' response at the time was quite simple; they did not want to deal with those who were unemployed, so they simply stopped counting them. We all remember that the local enterprise companies scheme was drawn up on the back of a fag packet by Bill Hughes, as the Conservatives' answer to investment in employment. It is hardly surprising that the LECs were not the answer then and are certainly not the answer now. It is only right that we should study and review the enterprise network. The world is changing and we are operating in a global economy. The empty Hyundai plant in Dunfermline is the living legacy of the folly of placing all the enterprise eggs in one basket. Let us consider Henry McLeish's constituency, Central Fife; what a pity he is not here to listen to this list. There have been 60 job losses at Anderson paper mill, 65 at Fraser Gray, 200 at Bekaert Handling and Display, 70 at Methil power station, 40 at Balfour and, in the past few weeks, 25 at Central Farmers and 35 at Glencast. Those jobs have been lost in his constituency in the past year. If some of the millions of pounds that were thrown at Hyundai had been used to support our existing companies and the start-up of new indigenous companies, our communities would not now be suffering such devastating job losses. I mentioned that the enterprise network alone cannot create prosperity, so I will refer to the Government's main initiative to cut unemployment. Tony Blair promised the best of the American slogans, and hailed a new deal and a promise of jobs. Blair hijacked the idea of Roosevelt's new deal, but he sold out on the ideal. Under the new deal, there are a number of different assessments on those without work, but in itself it does not create jobs. More than three quarters of new dealers have left the scheme without going into a marketplace job. Industry is not impressed by the scheme. Only 6 per cent of Scottish businesses have signed up to the new deal. Roosevelt's new deal created the Tennessee river valley project, which provided flood control and navigation to satisfy a national need, electricity, and jobs for the unemployed. Blair's new deal has done none of that. Tennessee got a dam, but all that we got was a dome. I believe that restructuring the enterprise network is not enough. We welcome it, but the goal of full employment can be achieved only if our Parliament is allowed to take responsibility, and not just for the enterprise network, because that is only part of the budget. The £200 million for the new deal should be handed over to this Parliament to allow us to succeed where Westminster has  failed. We need to put together all the pieces of the jigsaw, combining the strategies of promoting enterprise, investing in communities, creating jobs and businesses, and getting people back to work. We can restructure the enterprise network, but we are having to watch while millions of pounds are squandered on the new deal, and while people are pitched between the scheme and the dole, creating work only for those involved in the resulting paper chase. While I welcome the measures that were announced by the minister today, they do not go far enough. Tackling unemployment should be at the heart of this Parliament, not at the whim of Westminster.

Will Scott Barrie join me in condemning the actions of Fife Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, which has betrayed the staff and patients of Fife by seeking to introduce car parking charges at the Queen Margaret hospital in Dunfermline and at the Victoria hospital in Kirkcaldy? Will he also condemn the fact that the trust claims that it needs the £300,000 that it will raise through those charges to pay for vital patient care? Does he agree that it is a betrayal of the low-paid workers of Fife Acute Hospitals NHS Trust that they must now pay for car parking?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer by Lord Hardie to question S1O-619 on 18 November 1999, whether it will now make representations to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority about delays in handling claims on behalf of victims of crime in Scotland. (S1O-852)

I thank the minister for that  reply, which contrasts with the complacent and arrogant response from his colleague the Lord Advocate, on 18 November. Will he comment on the fact that some victims have been waiting nine years for a hearing? In the year to March 1999, only 6 per cent of cases were dealt with within a year. In contrast, during the final year of the previous Conservative Government, 63 per cent of cases were dealt with within a year. Does the minister therefore agree that new Labour's slogan should be "Tough on crime—it's tough for the victims of crime"?

In Fife, our problem is that the level of service that we get is not reflected in ScotRail's figures. The appalling nature of the service in Fife is hidden because ScotRail also runs services in Glasgow, Falkirk and so on. I would like ScotRail to carry out a survey, particularly on the peak-hour trains from 7 o'clock to 9.30 in the morning, and from 4 o'clock to 7.30 at night, and to measure the effectiveness of that service. If ScotRail does that, we will get a better service in Fife. At the moment the failings are hidden because ScotRail prefers it that way.

Before I begin, I should declare an interest. In an attempt to follow the best and friendliest environmental practices, as promoted by the Parliament, I am a rail commuter. I travel every day from Markinch and have done for many years. I have travelled the railways of Fife before, during and after privatisation. The rolling stock on which Fifers are expected to travel predates even my first rail journey. Indeed, I suspect that the rolling stock is almost as old as I am. I have never before suffered the sustained delays and the shoddy standard of service which we have had to put up with in Fife during the past few months. After standing on a cold platform in a futile wait for a train that simply does not arrive, we are offered platitudes, not reasons. Sometimes we are even offered apologies. Such is the anger of the commuters in Fife that at my station the clerk has the complaint forms ready for us before we ask for them. On the occasions when the long, cold wait yields a result, an old, dirty multiple unit from the 1950s rattles and belches its way through Fife.  Ancient rolling stock running on lines that have been starved of investment for years is not a recipe for a punctual or comfortable journey. Sometimes the problem is the wrong kind of snow; sometimes it is the signals, the track, the points, engine trouble, the fact that there are no staff to man the station or a slow-moving train in front of us. Always, the problem is uncertainty, delay or cancellation. By the time that the trains pull into Inverkeithing, they are so overcrowded that they closely resemble cattle trucks. Helen Eadie has already mentioned the problem of people at South Gyle and Dalmeny who simply do not get on. People from Inverkeithing stand in the aisles, because there is no space. They do not fall down, because so many people are jammed up against them that it is impossible to move in any direction—sideways, upwards or downwards. Initial relief at the eventual arrival in Edinburgh is tempered by the inevitability of the return journey. It is little wonder that ScotRail bosses declined my invitation to join their customers on the journey from Markinch to Edinburgh. Among the platitudes that pass for excuses for the service, we are told that Fife is suffering because of a delay in getting new trains for the Edinburgh-Glasgow line. What is the relevance of that? The answer is that Fife is waiting patiently for the cast-offs from that line—the trains that are currently running between Edinburgh and Glasgow. The message from the Parliament to ScotRail and Railtrack is that while we may not be the flagship Edinburgh-Glasgow line, we are not second-class commuters. It costs £46 a week for the privilege of travelling from Markinch to Edinburgh. We do not want second-hand rolling stock, nor do we want a second-class or, more likely, a fifth-class service, which is what we get at the moment. I expect my work in the Parliament to be challenging. I do not expect the 25-mile trip home to be even more challenging. We cannot expect people to move from using their cars to using the train when the journey home at the end of the night is a fraught and uncertain experience. I urge the minister to make representations to Railtrack and the operators about the service. Otherwise, commuters will vote with their feet—or their cars—and the already overcrowded Forth road bridge will be more congested than ever.

I am particularly grateful to all the witnesses who gave their time to present evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. That evidence helped me to understand some of the bill's technicalities—or at least I thought that it had until today. The prospect of the minister's summing-up gives me a frisson of pleasure and I look forward to hearing what he has to say. I agree with the Scottish Law Commission that the feudal system is "an anachronism which needlessly complicates the law" and that "abolition is an essential first step in any more general programme of land reform". Terms such as "superiors" and "vassals" have no place in a modern system of land ownership. However, I wish to raise some matters which I hope that the minister will address today and which the committee should consider carefully at the next stage of the bill. During evidence  sessions, it became clear that no research had been done to find out just how many properties are still subject to feudal duties and how many people are affected. It is reasonable to assume that many occupants are elderly and are living on fixed incomes. I am concerned that superiors who have not bothered to collect in the past will now demand payment of arrears. I would welcome a statement from the minister that the issue will be investigated to ensure that elderly people in particular, who have not asked for this legislation, will not be placed under financial penalties that they simply cannot meet. As the minister said, commercial companies have made many representations about section 65 of the bill, which prohibits a lease of more than 125 years. I share the Executive's concern that, without a statutory limit, such companies could introduce leasehold arrangements every bit as restrictive as the current feudal system. However, although I am mindful that we should not create disincentives to investment, I am not persuaded by the companies' argument that any such restrictive arrangements would be a consequence of a statutory limit of a 125-year lease. Roseanna Cunningham and Christine Grahame touched on my final point about the need to retain some public interest in land. Some witnesses argued that the Crown's role as paramount superior creates a public interest. There have been real difficulties in considering this bill in isolation from other parts of the Executive's legislative programme. The minister may be able to give members some indication of where, if anywhere, the public interest will lie. Following the submission today, I have no doubt that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee will consider the matter in much greater detail. The bill is long overdue—probably by a couple of hundred years. I agree with the general principle of the bill, but look forward to the minister's response to the points that I have raised.

Cross-party groups provide a framework that allows the participation of civic Scotland in parliamentary matters. They are headed by MSPs and help us to be better informed about the issues that are important to the people of Scotland. It is fair to say that organisations outside the chamber are anticipating this document more eagerly than some of our colleagues. For civic Scotland, cross-party groups represent one of the routes by which access to Parliament can be gained. Many of those groups have emerged and represent issues as diverse as oil and gas and the elderly. Such groups are important to the ethos of the Parliament. In order for them to remain valuable, they must be regulated. Cross-party groups are important to the transparent, open and accessible culture that needs to be fostered in the Parliament. I think it has to do with putting one's money where one's mouth is. The recommendations of the consultative steering group set out that the Parliament should be open, participative and democratic. The group paid particular attention to the role of civic Scotland in terms of the sharing of power. Paragraph 17 of the group's report states: "Power-sharing is not only about the balance of power between the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament, but also about the empowerment of external groups and individuals in all sectors of Scottish society." Cross-party groups as well as committees contribute to the ethos of our Parliament and provide a channel for information, criticism and advice. More important, the groups allow MSPs to explore longer-term policy direction on a cross-party basis and to use the expertise that members of the group can bring. Cross-party groups are also useful in areas where the Scottish Parliament does not, as yet, have legislative competence. That means that there can be debates on issues that are outside the parliamentary remit. That feature of cross-party groups is particularly welcomed by those organisations in civic Scotland whose interests are not devolved matters. In order to remain valuable, however, cross-party groups must be regulated. Mike Rumbles has already outlined the features of such regulation. Everyone must be clear about the purpose of the groups and who is responsible for  them. The groups must remain essentially parliamentary in nature. That is why the Standards Committee has insisted that MSPs should take up the senior positions in the groups. The groups have been the subject of much debate in the Standards Committee, and I am pleased that members of the committee from all parties have unanimously agreed the report. The subject of this debate is important, as the Parliament was set up to be inclusive. Cross-party groups are a method of ensuring that the Parliament is so, but they will work only if they are properly administered. Cross-party groups are a framework to encourage participation in Parliament, but they are not the sole method of influencing the Parliament. There is a danger that the existence of the cross-party groups could be used as an excuse to ignore the rest of civic Scotland and the other groups that are involved. Parliament could consult the cross-party group on the elderly and claim that it has consulted widely, as that group could be seen to be representative of all the elderly groups. That cannot be allowed to happen. The cross-party groups should not become exclusive. The Parliament's members should be open to all views, regardless of where they come from. In short, while I appreciate that cross-party groups are an important mechanism of participation, they are only one of many. In order that we get the best out of the cross-party groups, it is important that we have a framework of regulation. The Standards Committee has achieved the right balance in the document. I ask members to give it their support.

I want to concentrate on two areas of the bill that have been the most contentious: the inclusion of hydration, nutrition and nursing care as medical treatment and the role of proxies in deciding whether medical treatment can be withdrawn. I welcome the minister's opening statement that those areas will be subject to amendment. However, we will need time to consider whether the amendments deal with the concerns that have been raised or whether new amendments will be necessary. The minister has made it clear that the bill will not change the current position—euthanasia is illegal. The problem is that there are widely differing interpretations of the current law, or rather ways in which it is carried out in practice. Following the Law hospital case, the Lord Advocate stated that he would not authorise prosecutions of qualified medical practitioners who, acting in good faith and with the authority of the Court of Session, withdraw life-sustaining treatment from a patient in a persistent vegetative state, which results in the patient's death. In its evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, the British Medical Association contended that it is not necessary to go to court to get permission for cessation of treatment for every case of PVS. It further said that it believes that the law is more flexible in Scotland than in England. It said that the Executive's interpretation—and, by definition, Lord Hardie's statement—would cause it concern. It also said that it hopes that the general principle of withdrawing and withholding treatment from a wider group of patients who are similarly incapacitated will operate with the same flexibility. It is against that background that alarm has been raised about the intentions behind the bill and what will happen in practice. The inclusion of nutrition, hydration and ventilation as medical treatments, with the power of proxies to deny medical treatment, has led a number of witnesses  to suggest that the bill would allow euthanasia. Professor Sheila McLean said that the bill gives positive powers to treat people who are incapable and that the concerns of other witnesses should be assuaged because of that. She drew attention particularly to the fact that everything that is done under legislation should be governed by the general principles set out in part 1. I believe that the Executive, ministers and many organisations genuinely wish to modernise the law and to bring benefit to perhaps 100,000 people in Scotland. I also believe that there is no intention on the part of ministers to make euthanasia possible. However, many witnesses have expressed sincerely their view that the law is confused. The Executive has a responsibility to reflect on and to allay all such concerns. This Parliament has a responsibility to produce legislation that is unambiguous. While I welcome the minister's statement today, we need to wait until we see the amendments that will be lodged. I would like to hear that the concerns of the people who made representations to the committees have been assuaged by those amendments. These issues will continue to be highlighted at the next stage of the bill. I hope that the minister will reflect on the evidence that has been given and accept that further changes may be needed to allay the genuinely held concerns of many people.

I also congratulate Bruce Crawford on lodging the motion. I regret Keith Harding's mean-minded and mean-spirited comments. If ever there was a reason for proportional representation in local government, he has just outlined it. As he well knows, the Scottish National party in Fife has more votes than the Liberal Democrats.

I am terribly sorry, Keith—I meant Keith Raffan. I humbly apologise for that mistake. A European freight and passenger service from Scotland to Europe is a project that is viable, in demand and would be of long-term benefit to the area. Before the war, a ferry service operated from Scotland to the European continent. However, that service ceased when the boats were commandeered for the war effort and was never re-established. There is a demand for that service today. Once the stock of roll-on-roll-off ferries on order comes into operation, the capacity of UK ports will increase. It is estimated that within the next 10 years, the capacity for freight transport at UK ferry terminals will rise by 32 per cent. There is also a great demand for that service from passengers. Most passengers in Scotland would prefer to travel to a port within two hours of their home. As Bruce Crawford said, almost half the passengers who travel to Hull come from Scotland. It also works the other way. The local tourist board whole-heartedly supports the proposal, and estimates a massive influx of tourists directly into Scotland from the continent. In the current absence of a ferry link to Europe,  there are two options for market access: a 500-mile drive to channel ports or a 250-mile drive to Humber ports. However, current trends are making those journeys less viable—we have already talked about the difficulty for lorry drivers of having to remain within the legal time limits. The solution is a ferry terminal at Rosyth, which would reduce pressure on existing ports, increase accessibility to Scotland from the continent, increase tourism and create jobs. Rosyth is the ideal location for such a terminal. As a former naval base, Rosyth could offer riverside berths, a deep-water channel and direct access to trunk road and rail networks. Rosyth also has close at hand a plentiful supply of land for expansion. Most important, a terminal would create jobs in an area that has been devastated by job losses. In short, the whole of Scotland would benefit from the ferry port. Not only is there demand for the terminal, but it is viable. Rosyth is an ideal location for a ferry port and Fife could certainly use the extra jobs. However, if Rosyth is to be established, it must survive in the commercial environment. Rosyth will face a hard world. If the project at Rosyth is to be launched and is to sail, not sink, the Executive must provide support and assistance to ensure a safe landing for a Scottish sea route to the European continent. The Executive has the power at its fingertips to write the memo and to sign the cheques for freight facilities grants. That would launch the ferry from Rosyth with certainty of a fair-weather passage, rather than with a photo call, with a minister cracking open a bottle of champagne on a departing ferry and then leaving it to face unaided the storms of the wild commercial seas.

Will Margaret Smith join me in condemning the Executive for not setting a target to deal with fuel poverty in Scotland?

But what about fuel poverty?

I am the youngest.

I look forward to John McAllion and those of his colleagues who applauded his speech joining the SNP in supporting the motion. In his opening statement, the minister said that pensioners wanted to stay in their own homes. He is absolutely right. He did not address the fact that 119,000 pensioners in Scotland live in cold, damp homes. It is a pity that he is leaving—he could learn something if he stayed.

Fuel poverty is a particular problem for elderly people. According to the Scottish Poverty Information Unit, Scottish pensioners make up almost half the fuel poor. The reasons are twofold: first, household incomes are not enough to pay for adequate heating; secondly, the condition of houses means that they are almost impossible to heat. Elderly people die of cold in winter in Scotland; every year, more people die in winter than in summer. A glance at the columns of death notices in local newspapers between November and March reminds us of that. We seem to accept that, somehow, it is inevitable. The annual cull of people in Scotland is something like 2,500, most of whom are pensioners. That does not have to happen. In places with colder climates, such as Scandinavia or Siberia, those excess winter deaths do not occur. Energy Action Scotland reported that in Siberia, despite an outside temperature of minus 25 deg, there is no increase in winter mortality rates, because indoor temperatures are kept at a consistent level. In Scotland, more than 100,000 pensioner households have no form of central heating. Fuel-poor families spend a higher than average proportion of their household income on fuel, but the heat goes out the doors, windows and roofs—that makes for nicely warmed pigeons but freezing cold pensioners. Fuel poverty must be tackled on two fronts: first, housing must be improved, so that it is energy efficient; secondly, incomes must be increased to make fuel affordable. The Executive has paid little more than lip service to the first issue. Its warm deal programme is inflexible; it allows expenditure on insulation, but not to tackle problems such as dampness. As John McAllion and others have said, that is in contrast to the situation in England, where the home energy scheme allows for grants for central heating. Until the basic problem of inadequate pensions is tackled, any measure to provide a winter heating allowance will be undermined. An increase in investment in housing is necessary to tackle fuel  poverty. Given the number of people who live in fuel poverty in Scotland, it is hardly surprising that last week the Executive disgracefully refused to set a target for tackling fuel poverty in Scotland. It recognised that, if it set a target, it might have to do something about it, which would cost money—God forbid, it might mean opening Gordon Brown's war chest. We need to raise our ambitions and Scotland's horizons. We need to raise our pensioners out of poverty.

Will Robert Brown give way?

The current system of land tenure and ownership is a barrier to housing people in affordable homes. Land reform is necessary to allow communities to survive and grow. Land reform is the single most important tool that we have to address the rural housing crisis. The population of Scotland as a whole may be falling, but Scotland's rural population is growing. Housing waiting lists have grown by 45 per cent in rural areas, compared with 35 per cent in urban areas. Rural  homelessness has increased by something like 70 per cent. In some areas, almost a quarter of the housing stock is below tolerable standard. There is a desperate shortage of affordable housing. That shortage can be traced back to bad management. Specifically, it can be traced back to a lack of available land for new housing, which is nonsense in one of the most sparsely populated areas of Europe. Access to house building is restricted by whether a landowner will sell, the price at which he is willing to sell and the conditions attached to the sale. I agree with Rhoda Grant that we need to create a register of land interests. I am pleased that the Executive is watching the Scottish land information system pilot, but I am disappointed that the scheme will only ever be a non-authoritative database. I would like the Executive to go a step further and use legislation to make land traceable and owners identifiable. In rural Scotland, land ownership is concentrated in the hands of a few. I am disappointed that Alex Johnstone is not here to hear that 80 per cent of private land is owned by 0.8 per cent of the population.

Much more than is cultivated at present. Shelter Scotland has said that that concentration gives a small number of landowners a prominence that is unmatched in any other European country. I am pleased that the Executive is considering legislation to give communities powers to purchase land when it comes up for sale. However, what about the communities that need only a handful of affordable new houses to prevent youngsters from having to sleep in caravans? I welcome the minister's commitment to examine whether community organisations will be able to register an interest, which is particularly important for housing associations, but I would like a more explicit guarantee that housing associations and those who seek to build houses in rural Scotland will be given registration. I urge the minister to allow organisations that act on behalf of communities to be able to bid for parcels of land that can be made available to the community as housing needs arise. If we cannot use land reform legislation to secure access to housing; if we cannot resolve the situation in which 10,000 houses in the Highlands and Islands lie empty and 9,000 people are on lengthening housing lists; and if land reform cannot meet the most basic need of our fellow citizens—housing—this Parliament will have failed.

rose—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority about delays in handling claims from Scottish victims. (S1O-619)

Will the Lord Advocate tell me what length of delay he considers acceptable?

Is the Lord Advocate aware that a client of Charles Wood & Son in Kirkcaldy has been waiting since May 1996 for a hearing day? Does he consider that three and a half years is acceptable, and will he now make urgent representations on behalf of Scottish victims?

The minister has ditched the long-promised improvements to the Preston roundabout in Glenrothes on the A92 to Balfarg. She claims that there are more appropriate alternative measures. Has she spoken to Tullis Russell and Company Ltd, the town's largest employer, whose factory gates open out on to the A92? Has she spoken to the local MP, Henry McLeish, or to anyone in Glenrothes? Will she outline the appropriate alternatives and the time scale for their implementation? When will something be done about this death-trap road?

On a point of order. You have indicated, Presiding Officer, that Mr Tavish Scott is next to be called. I recall that you called him about three speakers ago and he was not in the chamber because, I understand, he was doing a television interview. There are many members who have sat throughout the debate—

—who are waiting to be called and there is a possibility that they might not be called. It is a gross discourtesy—

On a point of order. Is it in order for one member to abuse another in the way that Mr MacIntosh has done without the abused member being given the right to reply?

I would like to express my support for the rough sleepers initiative and I welcome the minister's announcement yesterday that she will find a further £6 million to fund it. It is not surprising that I would say that—when I worked for Shelter, I campaigned for a rough sleepers initiative. The initiative was first introduced in 1989 in London, but it was not until winter 1996 that Michael Forsyth agreed that we needed a rough sleepers initiative in Scotland. That was because of the shaming spectacle of people dying on our streets, which I think shocked even Michael Forsyth into  action. I share Fiona Hyslop's concern that the Executive is trying to redefine homelessness. Rough sleeping is the most visible form of homelessness, but it is not the only form. Wendy Alexander was reported in the press today as saying that rough sleeping was not a housing problem. If the press report was accurate and that is what she thinks, she does not understand how homelessness occurs. Of course rough sleeping is a housing problem. It is also a poverty issue. Government policies are responsible for the increase in rough sleeping in Scotland. The most recent statistics indicate that around 1,000 people sleep rough on the streets of Scotland every night of the year. Ten years ago we rarely saw people sleeping rough, except for a hard core—usually old men with an alcohol problem. The increase in rough sleeping in Scotland in the late 1980s can be traced back to three factors: the removal of benefits for 16 to 18-year-olds; the reduction in the amount of money for council housing; and care in the community, which was underfunded and left vulnerable people without the support needed to sustain their tenancies. Every one of those three factors was a Tory policy; every one of them was opposed by Labour in opposition; every one of them is embraced by new Labour in government. We need a commitment from the Executive to tackle not only rough sleeping, but homelessness in its wider sense. That means money to build new homes and to improve damp homes and houses that are lying empty because councils do not have the money—

I accept that young people are being put on to new deal programmes, but I am sure that the minister would agree that there are still 16 and 18-year-olds who are excluded from all benefits and who are destitute. On Glasgow, if the minister genuinely wants to ensure that all our people are housed, she must ensure that there is Government money as well as private finance. In the first three years of the Labour Government, less has been spent on housing than the Tories spent in their final three years—there is no point in the minister shaking her head at that. We have record levels of homelessness, record housing waiting lists and the lowest amount of money spent on council housing in Scotland since  the war. That is a disgrace. If the Executive is serious about tackling homelessness, it must find the money for housing. It is not enough to help people who are on the streets. We must ensure that people do not end up on the streets in the first place and we need to make sure that they have long-term or permanent homes. Much good work has been done in the voluntary sector but much more needs to be done. As Wendy said, some local authorities still do not have a rough sleeping strategy and it is only fairly recently that some councils have even acknowledged that they have rough sleepers in their area. The rough sleepers initiative will not succeed without a commitment to a wider housing policy and a social security system that does not leave young people destitute. Those points must be taken on board if we really want nobody to be sleeping rough on our streets by 2003. We must look at the wider issues if we are to make representation for the young people who have no money to live on.

I agree with Mr Aitken that the age of those sleeping rough on the streets has fallen, but will he accept that there are young people on the streets as a direct result of changes in housing benefit and other benefits for 16 to 18-year-olds, which were brought in by the Conservative Government in the late 1980s?

I am reassured to know that the minister spent the summer visiting hostels and the like. I recall that the minister's predecessors—Calum Macdonald and Malcolm Chisholm—made those same visits. Were they not listening? Did they not learn anything? They set the target of 2002, but the minister is now saying that the target is 2003. What great insights has the minister had in the past few months that her predecessors did not?

Will the member give way?

rose—

May I intervene?

It is a matter of courtesy. It is perfectly proper for Henry McLeish to write to Margo MacDonald, because she asked a question, and to Scott Barrie, who is the constituency MSP. However, can the same courtesy be extended to all MSPs who represent Mid Scotland and Fife, not just to the constituency MSP?

I am grateful to Nick Johnston for lodging today's motion. He has suggested a few solutions; I also welcome those of my colleague, George Reid. Most of the debate has centred on Clackmannanshire, as it should, but Scott Barrie should realise that the problems in west Fife affect places other than the villages.  Unemployment in Clackmannan and Fife is disgracefully high—almost double the UK average. If Scott can take comfort from that, he is probably the only one. The responsibility for structurally high unemployment rests with Nick Johnston and the Conservatives' scorched-earth policy in the coalfields. That is where our high unemployment came from, along with the discrimination against Rosyth. I accept that.

No, I am not giving way, Scott. Recent events have not covered the Executive in any glory. The Executive has sat back and allowed indigenous, well-run companies to go to the wall. It has invested all the enterprise eggs in Fife in the Hyundai basket. Hyundai has created few jobs apart from in construction, and most of them were not in Fife. I give fair warning here and now on Rosyth. I accept that we have known about the problems of Rosyth and its contracts for a long time. However, it is the Labour Government that is responsible for allocating those contracts. Rosyth has the best workers in the United Kingdom, the most skilled and the most qualified. If Rosyth goes down the tubes, the Labour party in Fife will not be forgiven, in the same way that the SNP does not forgive Nick Johnston and the Conservatives for the years from 1979 to 1997. Rosyth must stay. I want a commitment from the Scottish Executive that it will fight for Rosyth to ensure that those jobs are retained.

Will the minister give way?

If it is not a question of spin or of presentation, surely it is a question of timing. Will the minister explain why, only six months ago, Calum Macdonald said that there would be no one sleeping rough on the streets of Scotland by 2002, while the Executive's target is 2003? How much further back will the target go?

I add my thanks to Maureen Macmillan for securing today's debate. Scottish Women's Aid has done much to raise the issue of domestic violence and to provide practical solutions. The Parliament can learn from and use the expert advice which such organisations can offer. Indeed, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee will meet representatives of Scottish Women's Aid next week to discuss legal means of protecting women, and to see what this Parliament can do to help them.  As Maureen rightly says, there are particular problems in rural areas. For those who live in a small village, miles from the nearest town, who rely on public transport, and who have two toddlers in tow, it is very difficult to get away and there is nowhere to go anyway.  It is difficult to enter the debate at this stage, because much has already been said: I just want to add my thoughts. One of the central themes of this debate is the need for resources and money. One of the most horrifying statistics is the fact that 9,000 women were turned away from women's refuges last year. Those women took the decision to make a break from their partners and we did not find them the help and resources to do so.  I saw Jack McConnell nodding his head at Jackie Baillie: I hope that he was telling her that there will be money for women's resources.  We need safe and accessible refuges, with the support staff, and we need dedicated police officers to deal with complaints. We need 24-hour helplines so that women can get the help they need, particularly in rural areas.  I look forward to working with Maureen Macmillan in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, under the convenership of my colleague Roseanna Cunningham, to put legislation in place that will truly protect women, but we need the resources-the money-to do that.

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer. The Lord Advocate is clearly making a political speech. He is here as an independent-

It is not a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am seeking your guidance. I raised what I thought was a genuine point of order about the fact that the Lord Advocate had strayed way beyond his role. Can you advise me, Presiding Officer: if that is not a matter for you, who is it a matter for?

Will Iain Gray confirm that during its first three years this Labour Government will spend £176 million less on housing in Scotland than the Tories did in their last three years?

Will Mr Brown join me in condemning the Executive for cutting £176 million from Scottish housing? Does he agree that the Executive-or the Labour party-is spending less on Scottish housing in its first three years than the Tory Government spent in its last three years?

I associate myself with the comments made by my colleague, Kay Ullrich. There is much in the white paper that commends itself to all members. I want to address a number of issues.  For some of us, the lifestyle that we choose has a bearing on the life that we eventually have. I want to concentrate on those who have no lifestyle choices and no choice about the life that they live.  "Action on life circumstances is the rock on which work to improve lifestyles and tackle disease will stand or fall."  Those are fine words from "Towards a Healthier Scotland"-and the minister talked about tackling the root causes of ill health-but there is one startling omission from the action points in that document. Its authors have not said how they intend to tackle damp housing in Scotland.  Thirty per cent of children in Scotland live in damp houses. More than half a million children and pensioners have no choice about the circumstances in which they live. The link between damp housing and health is well established. Asthma, bronchitis and other respiratory diseases are prevalent among people who live in houses that are riddled with damp.  A study of damp housing and asthma in Glasgow, published in 1996, states:  "The greater the severity of dampness or mould in the home the more likely the patient was to have severe asthma."  More children suffer from asthma in Scotland than anywhere else in Europe.  All of us come into this chamber with experience from previous jobs and from events in our lives. I am no exception. While I worked for Shelter, I came into contact with people in the most appalling housing conditions. I met mothers who were in despair because their babies were constantly being admitted to hospital with respiratory diseases, and children who could not go to school because their clothes stank of dampness.  One such mother was Michelle from Glasgow, whose young son had been constantly in hospital; he screamed non-stop and he failed to thrive. Consultants finally discovered that he was suffering from Weil's disease, a rare illness caused by being exposed to rat urine. The rats were living under the floorboards in a Glasgow City Council house, scraping and scratching all night and terrifying the family. The disease has left that child with no lining in his nasal passages and his health will be affected for the rest of his life.  What choice did that baby have in the lifestyle or life circumstances in which he was being brought up? I warn members that I shall return again and again to the issue of dampness and health. I ask the minister why, having mentioned damp housing in the document, she is not setting targets for tackling dampness in Scottish homes. Why have no targets been set for reducing respiratory diseases?  In the earlier part of this century, the massive investment in public housing came as a drive to improve public health. The departments have forgotten the lesson of the joined-up thinking of 60 years ago. We must re-establish the link between housing and public health.  It does not have to be like this. We need to invest money to tackle dampness. A recent project in Cornwall invested £300,000 in housing to improve the homes of children with asthma. Central heating was installed, dampness was eliminated, the children's health and school attendance improved and their life chances improved as a result.  I welcome the white paper, but it does not go far enough. We will never improve the health of our nation until we improve the state of the homes in which people live.

Mr McLeish will know that yesterday Scottish Power announced the closure of Methil power station in his constituency, which will cost 70 jobs. He will also know that the Methil and Levenmouth area is one of the country's unemployment black spots. Unemployment is not falling in the Levenmouth area-in fact, it has been increasing over the past two years. Can Mr McLeish assure the people of Methil and Levenmouth that in the short and the long term he will work to secure jobs for them?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to tackle the level of teenage pregnancies in Scotland. (S1O-74)

Does the minister agree that poverty coupled with low expectation and lack of self-esteem are key factors affecting the level of teenage pregnancies? Will she join me in condemning the rhetoric of her new Labour colleagues south of the border, whose solution is to force single young mothers into supervised hostels, thereby continuing-not solving-social exclusion?

I want to ask one more supplementary question. The Department of Health's new unit dealing with teenage pregnancy has been awarded £60 million over the next three years. Will the minister confirm that a similar amount will be available for projects in Scotland?

We cannot hear you at the back, Sir David.

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer. I asked the clerks whether I could lodge a question in today's meeting about the housing green paper. I was prevented from doing so, because that is still a matter for the Scottish Office. Can you tell me why the minister is referring to a housing green paper about which I was not allowed to ask a question?

It is a matter of regret to me that my first speech in this Parliament is not about homelessness, poor housing conditions or one of the many issues that I care about. It is a pity that this debate is taking place at all. As Mike Russell said, most of the provisions of the motion were reached by consensus. It is a pity that that consensus has been cast aside by the Labour party. It serves none of us well in the eyes of the public that in this Parliament so far we have done little other than to discuss ourselves.  This debate should be about parity, principle and the Parliament itself-and about recognition that all MSPs are equal and that none is more equal than others. This debate is about principle in the shape of the Parliament. What we agree today will be difficult to change; other parties would be well advised to consider that point. The staff allowances and office accommodation allowances are not for the benefit of MSPs but are to allow us to do our jobs well and, most important, to provide a service to the people we represent. Until 6 May there was widespread acceptance that all MSPs would be treated equally and that constituents would have a choice of MSP to approach. It is a pity that Henry McLeish is not here to hear this again. He told the House of Commons in May 1998:  "The Scottish people value their Parliament and want it to work for them. The nation does not want the Parliament to work for any political party."-[ Official Report, House of Commons , 19 May 1998; Vol 312, c 719.]  Ms Whitefield would do well to remember that when she talks about "my office", "my constituents" or "my community". Henry McLeish's words are a bit hollow considering the events of the past few weeks.  A number of Labour spokespeople have tried to suggest that there is a difference between list and constituency MPs and that list members will have a different role in this Parliament. My mailbag suggests that that is not the case. I have been contacted by constituents and I intend to take up their concerns and problems.  Donald Dewar said in a newspaper article that it is all a question of work load. Can we look forward to the Labour party arguing for a 60 per cent reduction in the allowances of Westminster members, because this Parliament and its members are taking on 60 per cent of their work? I think not. The Welsh Assembly has voted to treat all members equally, but the Labour party in Scotland has set its face against that principle. We  are told that devolution means that Wales and Scotland can do things differently if they so choose. It is all right for Alun Michael in Wales, and it is all right for Donald Dewar in Scotland: that is what is meant by choice.  Fairness, democracy and equality should be non-negotiable, regardless of where the Parliament is situated. Today's proposals from Labour are hardly fair or equitable and certainly not in keeping with the spirit of the new democracy in Scotland.