As other members have, I offer congratulations to David Stewart on securing time for this debate. I also want to acknowledge the expertise that he brings to Parliament, not only as the co-convener, with Nanette Milne, of the cross-party group on diabetes, but also as a result of the eight years that he spent as the secretary of the Westminster all-party group on diabetes, which he mentioned. It should be recognised that he has been committed to the issue for a considerable time, to his credit. This afternoon's debate has given us an opportunity to underline the serious challenge that diabetes presents to countries all round the world. Scotland is not immune to the challenge. I want to spend some time outlining some of the work that we have done to improve the lives of people with diabetes. The International Diabetes Federation estimates that one in 10 of the world’s population will have diabetes by 2035. Scottish figures for 2012 saw the number of people with diabetes increase to more than 258,000—that is 4.9 per cent of our population, or one in 20 people. Those sobering figures demonstrate the significant challenge that we face. I also very much welcome the renewed focus that the Melbourne declaration on diabetes has brought to the subject, and the work of the global parliamentary champions for diabetes forum. I hope that, at some point, they will be able to come to Scotland as part of their programme in the years to come. I recognise the important work that has been undertaken by the IDF in promoting the ethos of the declaration, to promote solutions for managing and preventing diabetes globally, as David Stewart outlined. As several members, including Nanette Milne, have recognised, we are thankfully well placed to answer some of the challenges in Scotland. We are very fortunate to have outstanding clinical leadership as well as a strong patient voice. I record my thanks to Professor John McKnight, Professor Donald Pearson and Professor Andrew Morris, who have all chaired our Scottish diabetes group over the past decade and have provided excellent clinical leadership to ensure that diabetes services in Scotland are second to none. I also recognise the work that Sir Michael Hirst has undertaken, as president of the IDF, and the work of Professor Steve Green, who chairs the International Society for Paediatric and Adolescent Diabetes. Both are fellow Scots and both are highly regarded, with reputations both at home and internationally. Our national diabetes programme has, for over a decade, helped to co-ordinate the safe, effective and person-centred diabetes care that we want to be delivered throughout Scotland. Members are familiar with the diabetes action plan and have referred to it. That plan has been key in driving forward improvements in a number of important areas of diabetes care, including delivery of state-of-the-art e-health solutions for monitoring progress; the improvement of foot care services; an increase in access to insulin pump therapy; and the enhancement of the knowledge and skills of staff in our NHS in both acute and primary care. I do not have sufficient time to go into all the successes of our diabetes programme in great depth, but I will update members on a couple of key areas. A key measure of diabetes care in Scotland is our Scottish diabetes survey, which is perhaps the most comprehensive national record of its kind in the world. One of the major issues to be highlighted in the most recent survey is the fact that the percentage of people with diabetes who have had their foot risk recorded more than doubled between 2008 and 2012, rising from just 31 per cent to 70 per cent. That has had a major impact by reducing the incidence of foot ulcers and lower-limb loss, and we want to make further improvements through developing that service. There is evidence that our world-leading triage system for assessing foot risk, which was developed by our diabetes foot action group, is working, and that people with diabetes are having their foot risk properly assessed to avoid complications in future life. A second area in which we have made substantial improvements is access to insulin pumps. Several members have referred to that, and Malcolm Chisholm mentioned it in relation to his constituent. Insulin pump provision for under-18s has increased from 8.4 per cent to 22.6 per cent across Scotland since December 2011. We have also seen a more modest increase in provision for those aged over 18. As Malcolm Chisholm said, his constituent feels that her daughter would benefit from an insulin pump, and we have provided additional resource to our boards to allow them to make the pumps available when that is clinically appropriate. The whole insulin pump issue has been driven forward by the interest of David Stewart and the cross-party group on diabetes and the work of the Public Petitions Committee. I am sure that he knows that health boards that have not come up to the mark have been left in absolutely no doubt that the Government wants them to make progress and to ensure that they achieve the target that we have set for them. Members have also mentioned a national screening programme. The Government is advised on such programmes by the National Screening Committee. The most recent review of evidence on a national screening programme on diabetes and the modelling work that was undertaken concluded that there was no conclusive evidence on whether screening should be undertaken, or which population sub-group would potentially benefit. In light of the review’s findings, the NSC recommended that screening the general population for diabetes should not be offered. However, that recommendation is under review and we expect to receive further advice on screening programmes in May. As members have rightly highlighted, we do not just need excellence in and equality of access to clinical services that we offer to people who have diabetes; we need also to ensure that we take action to prevent diabetes from occurring in the first place. The world health assembly’s global target to halt the rise in diabetes and obesity by 2025 is very much welcomed and will give added focus to our work. We are progressing a range of programmes to address the need for healthy eating habits and we have taken forward work with a range of stakeholders to achieve that. Last year, we funded Diabetes UK’s live for it school programme, which teaches children how to eat healthy meals and to be active, and about how that can have a positive impact on long-term health. The programme has been very successful and we are giving further consideration to how we can work with Diabetes UK to develop the work in the months and years to come. I hope that I have reassured members that we take the issue seriously. We are committed to building on the progress that has been achieved under the “Diabetes Action Plan”, to looking at what further measures are required to ensure that we provide patients with the best clinical care, and to taking the right measures to prevent diabetes from occurring in the first place. 13:07 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Further to the First Minister’s announcement in October 2013 about the Scottish Government’s intention to introduce legislation, on 22 January we published our consultation paper on carers legislation. The consultation period will run until 16 April. The consultation paper sets out our proposals to build on achievements to date to help ensure more consistent and sustainable support to improve outcomes for carers and young carers across Scotland. We look forward to receiving responses from carers and young carers and from the statutory and voluntary sectors.

I recognise the point that the member has made. As he correctly states, the consultation document clearly sets out the importance of making sure that we provide the right type of support to young carers and the opportunities that are afforded through the provision of additional legislation. My officials have already met a range of stakeholders, including the national carers organisations, and they will be looking to ensure that the consultation document is circulated widely through the Scottish young carers services alliance and their stakeholders who work with young carers across the country. Alongside that, we will look at how we can make sure that young carers have the opportunity to take part in any consultation events that are taking place across the country so that we can get access to the views of young carers who are under the age of 18 and the views of those who are between 18 and 25. It is absolutely crucial that we hear their voices during this consultation exercise, and we will work with stakeholders to make sure that that happens effectively.

I am of course aware of the Scottish Youth Parliament’s work in the area, and I supported the event that it held last week. I am very conscious of the issues that have been raised, and I assure the member that the Scottish Youth Parliament will have the opportunity to feed into the consultation exercise, as will many other organisations across the country.

We are already aware of the issue and have taken some action on it. Officials have met representatives from the Scottish young carers services alliance and the College Development Network, and we are undertaking a range of actions in relation to the difficulties that young carers face with access to EMAs. We are revising the Scottish Government guidance on EMAs to ensure that it includes information that can help to support carers and that recognises some of the unique challenges that young carers might have. We are also looking to provide additional information in the school packs on EMAs, which are currently being finalised before they are distributed to schools, and at how we can provide further information to young carers about the provisions within the EMA guidance. I recognise the concerns that have been raised, and some of the work that we are doing is aimed at addressing some of those concerns. I will of course be more than happy to discuss that with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to make sure that we build on what we have achieved and we look at what we can do to improve things further in the future.

New access criteria recommended in the national infertility group’s report, with some modifications, were given to national health service boards on 15 May 2013 and have been in place since 1 July 2013. That means that, for the first time ever, criteria for NHS in vitro fertilisation are the same regardless of where couples live in Scotland. We are committed to providing an equitable and sustainable service across Scotland, which is why we will have a maximum waiting time in place by March 2015 of 12 months for IVF. This is the first time that a Government in Scotland has made such a commitment. It is also the first time that the Government has invested funds specifically to reduce IVF waiting times. To date, we have invested £6 million, and a further £6 million will be invested in 2014-15. That investment has made a dramatic impact in reducing waiting times for IVF treatment in all areas across Scotland, and I am pleased to say that waiting times are now currently at or below 12 months in the vast majority of areas. In particular, waiting times in NHS Fife, NHS Forth Valley and NHS Grampian have fallen from more than three years to between six and nine months. I am sure that Sandra White will recognise that as good progress on improving the service.

Sandra White is correct to point out that the national infertility group recommended a review of the access criteria after a period of time. We are undertaking work to look at the new treatment pathways and to establish whether there is sufficient data to allow us to undertake the review at an earlier stage. The review was initially intended to take place in 2015. This month, my officials have met the information services division, representatives of the four NHS IVF centres in Scotland and patient stakeholder groups, such as Infertility Network Scotland, to consider whether we have sufficient robust data to allow an earlier review. A further meeting will take place next month to consider that in more detail. If sufficient robust data is available, the Scottish Government is content for the review to take place and for views to be submitted to the Scottish Government by the end of this year.

Nanette Milne is correct that the national infertility group recommended to the Scottish Government that two cycles should be made available, and she is correct to point out that there is a different position in England, with three cycles. However, that is NICE guidance, not what is actually being implemented by the NHS in England. In commissioning areas in the NHS in England, some 73 per cent of commissioning groups recommend fewer than three cycles, so it would be wrong to suggest that IVF is universally provided on a three-cycle basis. However, part of the review is to consider whether there is the possibility of the NHS in Scotland providing further cycles once we have achieved the 12-month waiting period. The review will assist us in considering whether that increased capacity is something that can be achieved with the existing service delivery, staff complement and resources.

A couple of boards, one of which is NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, are still not meeting the 12-month target that was set nationally. At present, the assisted conception unit in Glasgow infirmary has a 19-month waiting period. Patients have been offered the opportunity to have services provided in other health board areas, in places such as Dundee, Aberdeen or Edinburgh. There is additional capacity, particularly in NHS Lothian, to assist the board in meeting the timeframe. The board is doing a considerable amount of work to ensure that it complies with the 12-month target, but patients who have unfortunately had to wait for a longer period are being offered alternative options in other health board areas to speed up access to treatment.

The Scottish Government is in regular dialogue with NHS boards regarding the delivery of the actions in the diabetes action plan. The NHS boards’ diabetes managed clinical networks have each provided a comprehensive report to the Scottish diabetes group. Overall, good progress has been made, and boards are on track to meet the vast majority of actions for which they are responsible. A summary of the reports will be published on the diabetes in Scotland website in April.

The member raises an important point. There are a couple of aspects to the issue. One is that we need to ensure that we take a range of actions to reduce the chances and risks of individuals developing type 2 diabetes. We have a range of programmes in our obesity route map to help to reduce the risk of individuals developing diabetes in the first place. We also need to ensure that those who are diabetic get the best possible service. The action plan, which I know the member is well aware of, is aimed at ensuring that those people receive the right type and quality of services in their health board area. As I mentioned, good progress has been made on that, and we are now evaluating the impact, which will help to inform the next step that we must take as part of the second phase of the action plan. I have no doubt that the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on diabetes will wish to feed into that process once it has started. The aim is to ensure that the next action plan allows us to build on and continue to make good progress.

I am aware of recent reports in the media that link excessive sugar consumption with obesity, type 2 diabetes and a range of other conditions, including heart disease and stroke. It is, of course, also linked to poor dental health. The Scottish Government is spending more than £7.5 million in the three years to 2015 on projects to encourage healthy eating, which include the healthy living award, the healthy living programme, the healthier Scotland cooking bus and the community food and health (Scotland) programme. Alongside those, the Scottish Government has published the Scottish dietary goal of reducing the average intake of added sugars to less than 11 per cent of food energy in children and adults.

I am aware that the latest data from the Kantar Worldpanel shows that there has been a reduction of some 10 per cent in the volume of soft drink sales since 2010, although I agree and recognise that much more still has to be done. Under the current devolved powers, the Scottish ministers are unable to create taxes on food or drink with a higher fat or sugar content, which is why we articulated in the white paper on Scotland’s future our desire to have the ability to consider such a policy as part of a coherent and concerted approach to tackling issues such as obesity and poor diet. In the meantime, we are asking the food industry to take specific voluntary action to help rebalance Scotland’s diet. Our supporting healthy choices voluntary framework will be launched in the spring, following a period of consultation. The framework sets out voluntary actions for the food industry, which includes manufacturers, retailers and caterers, to encourage and support consumers to make healthier choices.

Children and young people with developmental disorders will be treated by their local child and adolescent mental health services team in the community. In the mental health strategy, we made a commitment to undertake work to develop appropriate specialist capacity in respect of developmental disorders such as ADHD, as well as to improve awareness in general settings. As part of that work, we will review the need for specialist in-patient services in Scotland. Education authorities have a duty to identify, meet and keep under review the additional support needs of all their pupils and to tailor provision to their individual circumstances.

It is important that the member recognises that the type of clinical intervention that is provided for a patient is a matter for clinicians, rather than something for the Government to direct. Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 112—which, unlike the NICE guidance, applies in Scotland—sets out for clinicians detail on the management of children with ADHD and other behavioural problems. It sets out the criteria that should be used, how such children should be supported and how their condition can be dealt with appropriately. However, I reiterate that the final judgment on clinical provision is a matter for clinicians.

A substantial investment in heart disease services has reduced Scotland’s premature deaths from coronary heart disease by more than 60 per cent in the past 15 years. In 2011, the Scottish Government committed £7.5 million of funding to the Scottish Ambulance Service for state-of-the-art defibrillators. However, more can be done and we recognise the important role that public access defibrillators can play. Local councils, community groups and organisations, as well as businesses, can have assistance to look at the provision of public access defibrillators in their premises, with free support and advice from the Scottish Ambulance Service, which includes guidance and information about how they can apply for funding for such equipment.

I encourage local authorities and other leisure trusts to follow the good practice of those authorities and trusts that have installed defibrillators in their facilities. However, we have to be careful about putting the issue on a statutory footing because, as I am sure the member will recognise, some venues can be used for a variety of purposes, not just sporting purposes, and might operate at times at which it might not be appropriate for them to have a defibrillator. That said, another aspect that I should highlight is our work with the British Heart Foundation in Scotland. We have provided £100,000 to roll out to school pupils cardiopulmonary resuscitation training, which I have witnessed myself, to give them the confidence and knowledge to decide when to offer CPR to someone who has had a heart attack. We can take the issue forward in a number of ways and, as I have said, I encourage our local authorities to follow the good practice of those authorities that have provided defibrillators.

I, too, congratulate Mrs Gunn on being awarded her MBE and, indeed, take this opportunity to thank her for the tremendous amount of work that she has undertaken over a number of years in pursuing this agenda through Scottish HART. We have learned important lessons from the cardiac assessment of young athletes and the chief medical officer has asked Dr Brian Walker, the head of medicine at the sportscotland Institute of Sport, to consider what further lessons can be learned from that work. Indeed, I believe that Dr Walker’s group is meeting today to explore the matter further and see what lessons sporting bodies and our national health service can learn from that initiative.

I am pleased to open the debate on behalf of the Scottish Government. As the motion says “significant progress ... has been made in recent years in suicide prevention”. In 2012, there were 762 deaths by suicide in Scotland. We all want that number to be lower but the 2012 figure nevertheless represents a welcome decrease on the number of suicides in 2011. In 2012, as in each of the previous two years, we saw one of the lowest levels of suicide in Scotland since 1991. The three-year rolling average rate shows that, between 2000 and 2002, and 2010 and 2012, there has been an overall downward trend in suicide rates, with an overall decrease in Scotland of 18 per cent. That progress reflects the priority that I believe the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament have given suicide prevention and mental health in the work that they have done since devolution. The Parliament has given attention to suicide prevention and to the wider mental health policy agenda for a significant number of years, and that has been widely recognised by many people outwith Scotland. The motion also says that “there is still work to be done to reduce suicides further”. In December 2013, we published our new “Suicide Prevention Strategy 2013-16”. The intention is to build on previous work, while setting out commitments and actions for the next three years. I will talk about what has been achieved already and the firm basis on which we have built our new commitments. I will also talk about how we developed our new suicide strategy and the importance of basing practical actions on established and emerging evidence to benefit people who are at risk of suicide and those who care for them. As members are aware, “Choose Life”, a 10-year suicide prevention strategy and action plan, was published in 2002. At the end of 2012, we formed a working group to consider our future strategy and action on the prevention of suicide and self-harm. With the working group and a reference group, we developed an engagement paper to support progress on developing a new strategy for the prevention of suicide and self-harm. From February to May last year, several engagement events took place across the country at which stakeholders, including interested members of the public, had the opportunity to feed in their aspirations for a new phase of suicide prevention action in Scotland. The engagement paper prompted discussion on a range of key issues at the engagement events and in the many written responses that were received. Those responses helped to inform the preparation of our new strategy on the prevention of suicide—I will say a little bit more about that later. First, it is worth reflecting on some of the progress that has been made in suicide prevention over recent years by people working in a range of sectors across Scotland. As I said, in 2012, as in each of the previous two years, we saw one of the lowest levels of suicide in Scotland since 1991, and since 2000 to 2002, there has been an overall downward trend in suicides, with an overall decrease of 18 per cent. That means that we have achieved most of the planned reductions in suicide rates as set out in the choose life strategy. Looking to the future, I mentioned that our engagement paper prompted discussion on a range of key issues, both at the engagement events and in the many written responses that we received. The comments received were considered by my officials, the working group and the reference group. Through those deliberations, we have developed a robust new suicide prevention strategy for Scotland. I had the pleasure of launching the strategy last month when I addressed the annual stakeholders forum, which was organised by NHS Health Scotland’s choose life programme team. The strategy contains 11 commitments across five themed areas: responding to people in distress; talking about suicide; improving the national health service response to suicide; developing the evidence base; and supporting change and improvement. Our purpose in the strategy is to focus on a number of key areas for future work that we believe will continue the downward trend in suicide in Scotland that we have seen over the past 10 years. We want the strategy to deliver better outcomes to people who are suicidal and who come to services; to their families and carers; and to those who are not in contact with services. We also want to ensure that we improve our knowledge of what works in this complex field. We acknowledge that there is a broader focus on activities that are not directly related to suicide prevention but which, if taken forward effectively, will contribute to reducing the overall suicide rate. Such activities include building resilience and mental health and emotional wellbeing in schools and in the general population; working to reduce inequality, discrimination and stigma; and promoting good early years services. All that work is undertaken in the context of being vigilant about improving mental health; supporting people who experience mental illness; and preventing suicide. The strategy continues the trend in previous strategies of focusing on where the evidence leads us. The strategy echoes key messages—learned from practice and research—that suicide is preventable; that it is everyone’s business; and that collaborative working is key to successful suicide prevention. Members may recall that the engagement paper covered prevention of suicide and of self-harm. However, after taking into account the views that were received in the engagement process and the deliberations of the working group and the reference group, we have taken the approach that our strategy should focus on suicide prevention. Although it covers self-harm as a risk factor for suicide, it does not specifically deal with support for people who self-harm as a coping mechanism. We will undertake separate work this year on supporting people at risk of self-harm, including those in distress. That will link with the commitment in the mental health strategy to develop an approach that focuses on improving the response to distress. As many members will know, we are working with NHS Tayside and other partners to develop a shared understanding of the challenge and the appropriate local responses that can engage and support people who are experiencing distress, and to provide support for practitioners. I mentioned the importance of following the evidence. A growing evidence base has emerged in recent years that suggests that there are practical actions that we can take to reduce suicide. For example, improving the NHS response to suicide, which is one of our five themes, is based on evidence from a range of sources such as the Scottish suicide information database, or ScotSID, and the national confidential inquiry into suicide and homicide by people with mental illness. As well as pointing to the actions that can be taken in the NHS setting to support people who might be at risk of suicide, ScotSID has thrown up challenges that we need to look at further. For example, those who died by suicide tend to have had fairly extensive contact with a range of healthcare services, including general practitioners, accident and emergency departments and acute hospitals. ScotSID also throws up the fact that, at the time of death, many people are receiving some form of medication that is used in the treatment of mental illness. We have therefore set out commitments on ways in which the NHS can focus on effective treatment that brings benefits to patients. Analysis from the confidential inquiry has already informed safety improvements for patients, prioritised attention to follow-up for patients after discharge from hospital and supported a focus on actions to tackle problems around drinking and drug use. We have a strong, internationally recognised research community in Scotland, which stands us in good stead as we move forward with the aim of continually improving the evidence base on suicide and on how we can support people who are at risk. Like the choose life strategy, the new strategy has a strong focus on services, but it is not intended to replace existing population-based health work that many people and agencies have been doing to help prevent suicide in Scotland. We expect many of the elements of the suicide prevention action plan that is set out in the strategy to continue alongside the work that is already taking place as part of the choose life legacy. Indeed, one commitment in the new strategy is that NHS Health Scotland will continue to host the choose life programme. The national programme will, among other responsibilities, continue to provide leadership and direction to local choose life co-ordinators. We are committed to working closely with NHS Health Scotland, the see me campaign and other agencies to develop an engagement strategy to influence public perception about suicide and the stigma surrounding it. The way in which we talk about suicide is important. We know that talking openly about suicide in a responsible manner saves lives. We have adopted that approach through the choose life campaigns—“Suicide. Don’t hide it. Talk about it” and “Read between the lines”—and we will continue to campaign in that way during the period covered by the new strategy. It is also important to continue to challenge the media misconceptions that sometimes still arise about suicide and suicide numbers and rates in Scotland. Suicide prevention remains a significant challenge, but progress over the past several years has been encouraging. We are proud of what we have achieved collectively so far in Scotland in improving the population’s mental health and services for people who experience mental illness, and in significantly reducing the suicide rate. Our new suicide prevention strategy reflects the high priority that we attach to that agenda. The strategy reflects a changing landscape, but we still need to ensure that we have the right commitment and energy to implement it and to continue to make progress. The strategy builds on existing successful suicide prevention work and sets out new commitments that are based on emerging evidence on the risk factors that are associated with suicide. I look forward to seeing further progress being made in the coming years. I know that practitioners and others across numerous services and agencies will continue to approach the work with the dedication and commitment that they have shown in recent years. I am confident that we in the Parliament have a shared objective of continued improvement in suicide prevention in Scotland, and I have no doubt that all members will want to support our aim of achieving that objective. I move, That the Parliament recognises the pain experienced by families and friends who have lost loved ones through the tragedy of suicide; notes the significant progress that has been made in recent years in suicide prevention, with an overall decrease of 18% in the suicide rate in the last decade, and in supporting people who have been bereaved through suicide; agrees that there is still work to be done to reduce suicides further, and therefore welcomes the publication of the new Suicide Prevention Strategy 2013-2016, which builds on previous and continuing work and establishes the priorities and actions for suicide prevention over the next three years in support of a healthier and fairer Scotland.

I very much welcome the tone of the debate and appreciate the fact that all members support the motion. Over the years we have been able to share a common purpose in many social policy areas—not just suicide prevention, but the wider mental health agenda and key points in our drugs policy agenda. I am pleased that we have been able to continue to do that today. I was struck by what Graeme Pearson said about the sadness of having a debate about suicide prevention, because any loss of life through suicide is a tragedy. However, as I said in my opening remarks, a key part of tackling issues around suicide is to talk about suicide, raise awareness of the issues and engage in a debate about how we can help to prevent suicide. I am sure that Graeme Pearson agrees that there is no better way to set an example than by having a debate of the tone and nature of the one that we have had in our national Parliament today. As Christine Grahame said, over the past 15 years Parliament has a strong record of debating mental health policy and suicide prevention issues. I have the pleasure of meeting delegations from other parts of the world who come to Scotland to look at policies that we are taking forward in the health portfolio. Last week, the Danish health minister came over to look at our patient safety programme and to consider what the Danes can learn from that. We have had delegations here to look at our mental health policy. Internationally Scotland is—believe it or not—viewed as being a progressive country in respect of its overall mental health policy and the approach that it has taken over the past 14 or 15 years. That is also the case with suicide prevention. It is recognised that the trend in Scotland over the past decade or so for a reduction in the number of suicides, against a rising number globally, means that Scotland is doing some of the right things. I think that that has happened because the Scottish Parliament has allowed devolution to put much greater focus on such issues than was previously the case. That is to the credit of the Parliament, previous Administrations and the present Administration.

In any mental health debate, the prescribing of antidepressants is inevitably raised. It is worth keeping it in mind that medication for mental illness is as valid as medication for coronary heart disease or for arthritis. It is a legitimate form of treatment, when it is appropriately used. It is fair to say that recently there have been changes to prescribing practices in antidepressants, which has to some extent been because of concerns about how they were being provided to individuals. Sometimes they were prescribed for very short periods and sometimes for extended periods, when clinical evidence has not been so good, in terms of their use. Some of the most recent prescribing data show that clinicians are likely to have individuals on antidepressants for longer and at higher doses because clinical evidence now demonstrates that that is a much more effective way to get the benefit of that medication. When the statistics come out, it looks as if more people are receiving antidepressants for longer, but that reflects the change in prescribing practice. When we talk about such things we need to be very careful that we do not give the impression that use of medicines in treatment of mental illness is in some way secondary. I want to address access to psychological therapies. Jim Hume raised the point that we should not limit our ambitions to a target of 18 weeks. It is fair to say that Scotland is the only part of the UK that has set such a target in order to drive improvement in access to psychological therapies. It is worth noting that in Scotland the average time for access to such therapies is not 18 weeks, but nine weeks. If a patient requires an urgent referral to a clinical psychologist or another type of therapy, the normal process is the same as the one that is used to refer someone to an orthopaedic surgeon. A person can have an urgent referral, so that they are seen quickly. There has been an increase in the number of psychologists in the NHS in Scotland and there is a range of equally important therapies that patients can benefit from. There has been mention of physical activity, which can help a person’s mental health and wellbeing. We have the social prescribing aspect of the mental health strategy, which is the green pad: the idea of prescribing physical activity or something else that can help mental wellbeing, rather than medication. The mental health strategy is looking to encourage that and take it forward. In his contribution, Neil Findlay outlined the scale of the international issue and the increasing problem of suicide around the globe. Between 800,000 and 1 million suicides a year take place around the world, which is why the World Health Organization has set a target to reduce suicides by 10 per cent by 2020. We want to ensure that our strategy helps us to play our part in reducing suicides overall. It is worth noting that in 2012, Scotland’s suicide rate fell below the world global monthly suicide rate, to 14 per 100,000, against the global rate of 16 per 100,000. We are moving in the right direction, but we have to do more. Neil Findlay also raised issues around data in the strategy and data that he got from local authorities. The data all come from the General Register Office of Scotland and can be broken down into health board and local authority areas. There are some differences because in 2010 the WHO issued guidance that resulted in a change to the coding of particular deaths, which meant that some drug deaths are now classed as suicides. However, the GRO still produces two sets of data: one with the new coding and one with the old coding, which shows the 18 per cent reduction. That is why there is a difference in the data that Neil Findlay referred to, which are being measured against data that were collected over the 10 years of the choose life programme, which started before the GRO introduced their change after the WHO made its recommendations. A number of members have also made reference to the impact that suicide has on families. I am struck, but not surprised, by the number of members who have been touched in some way by the suicide of a family member or a friend. In my opening speech, I made the extremely important point that suicide is preventable. The data show us that the vast majority of individuals who commit suicide were, prior to doing so, receiving treatment in the form of medication for a mental illness, or had been in contact with GPs, A and E departments or other services.

Let me just finish my point. If those individuals are in contact with those services, why are we not picking up on their potential risk of committing suicide? It is absolutely key that we learn from that. Part of the pilot work up in Tayside is to look at how we can respond much more effectively to, and follow up on individuals who present in distress at A and E departments but do not need to be admitted, or who are arrested by the police and are in distress, or when other agencies are involved. Therefore, an important piece of work for us to develop in the self-harm strategy is how we can be much more effective at picking up signs of distress, which is a key factor that often presents when someone is at risk of committing suicide. Presiding Officer, do I have time to take Christine Graham’s intervention?

I understand Christine Grahame’s point that there are not always signs of distress prior to someone committing suicide. However, the evidence shows us that a very large number do show such signs, so we must ensure that we get much better at identifying and following up such individuals more effectively. On cyberbullying, Kevin Stewart raised the benefits of social media in addressing stigma and educating and informing individuals about the services and the supports that are available. He also mentioned how people can use social media negatively—I am sure that we have all witnessed examples of that. There are programmes in schools—for example, the respect programme, which is about respecting individuals when using social media. It is important that we develop that work. I have no doubt that my colleagues in education will continue to progress such policies. I will certainly ensure that, in progressing the self-harm strategy, we consider how to build more of that into our approach and that we consider how cyberbullying, for example, impacts on someone’s mental wellbeing. A number of members asked how we will progress the work. I am not a fan of big thick strategies. I like strategies that are task focused, time limited and measurable—hence the short nature of the suicide strategy. We are establishing an implementation group, which will be made up of a range of individuals from across the sector, who will be responsible for measuring and monitoring implementation of the 11 commitments in the strategy. I have limited the strategy to three years, so that it is focused and so that we can measure and evaluate its progress over that period. I reassure members that there will be no lack of energy on my part to drive forward the strategy. I have no doubt that the monitoring and implementation group will hold us to account in making sure that we are doing that effectively across all the agencies and with others who have parts to play. I am very grateful for all the positive comments that have been made in the debate. I will keep Parliament informed of progress on the strategy.

The Scottish Government recognises the benefit of low-vision aids for those who need them and values the work of local authorities, national health service boards and others in providing access to them.

Boards across Scotland have arrangements in place to ensure that they are working in partnership with local optometrists, voluntary organisations and local authorities to make low-vision aids available, and all boards have services in place. In the NHS Lanarkshire area, there is a shared care arrangement with a range of local optometrists to provide low-vision aids. I am aware that there has been significant pressure on the service above what NHS Lanarkshire planned for. The board has engaged with local optometrists to adjust activity in order to allow them to bulk purchase more equipment, for which the board has provided an extra £20,000 in this year’s budget to bring in more equipment that can be made available to people in the NHS Lanarkshire area. If some of Elaine Smith’s constituents continue to experience particular difficulties, she can raise that with me in writing. I would be more than happy to ensure that NHS Lanarkshire looks into the matter more thoroughly.

It is extremely important to ensure that patients who have low vision are able to maximise their remaining vision. The vast majority of functional vision training is provided in a specialist way—largely by the voluntary sector working in partnership with NHS Scotland and local authorities. I am conscious that there are variations in its availability in different parts of the country, depending on the provision that is available from the voluntary sector. If Dennis Robertson has specific examples of where he believes there is a need for further improvements to functional vision training, I will be more than happy to meet him to discuss how we can achieve that effectively.

Like others, I offer my congratulations to Tavish Scott on securing time for this important debate. I have listened with interest to all the local members who raised concerns about services in the north of the country. I fully understand the concerns that Tavish Scott and Liam McArthur raised about their constituents, who are going through a stressful and difficult time in undergoing cancer treatment, with the stress and the difficulty compounded by the associated travel. I fully appreciate the challenges that that creates. Those challenges are why we are particularly grateful for the hard work and generosity of the CLAN organisation in Aberdeen and at CLAN Haven, which provides invaluable support to people who are affected by cancer. I understand Liam McArthur’s concerns regarding the changes that NHS Grampian is considering. I will have those issues looked into and will provide a response to him. I stand ready to meet him to discuss the matter if he continues to be concerned by the board’s approach. I recognise the stress and strain that the staff in NHS Grampian have been under. Our NHS staff have worked tremendously hard to sustain services as best they can within the staff limitations that they have faced. I acknowledge that and thank them for their work during what has been a stressful period. Tavish Scott recognised that the Scottish Government acknowledges that the problem is a priority that must be resolved and dealt with effectively, as was set out in the cabinet secretary’s response to him last year. Unfortunately, the situation that has developed in the north of Scotland has come about as a result of a unique combination of factors, some planned for and some not planned for. For example, people have retired or gone on maternity or sick leave, and there have been multiple failed attempts to recruit to the workforce to deal with the pressures. Those have all impacted on the service’s capacity and capability to deliver all the cancer services that it would wish to deliver, including radiotherapy. Radiotherapy is extremely important, because 40 per cent of people with cancer receive it. Only surgery cures more patients; radiotherapy cures more patients than many of the new cancer drugs put together. We are absolutely determined to deliver radiotherapy services across the country and to ensure that they are on a secure and sustainable footing now and into the future. We are working with a range of parties to make that happen.

I will address some of the local issues, including, I hope, that point. As Lewis Macdonald will be aware, two people have been recruited: one started in a clinical oncologist post on 6 January, and the other is expected to start at the end of this month. Between them they will cover a range of areas, from head and neck and neuro-oncology to gastrointestinal, colorectal and urological cancers. I will ensure that Lewis Macdonald gets details on further recruitment, particularly around services for children. Once the Scottish Government became aware of the problems that were being experienced in the north of the country, we put in place a working group, led by the national planning forum, to address the wider issues of sustainability and specialist services. I hear members’ questions about why some of the issues, particularly the planned issues, were not picked up earlier. I think that there are some lessons for boards to learn about having proper succession plans in place to deal with such things. Of course, some of that is compromised by the challenge that boards can face in recruiting the right clinical specialists; indeed, that can be a challenge for the whole United Kingdom, not just Scotland. To ensure greater sustainability in services, we have also reached agreement on creating a virtual single service in the three cancer sites across the north—in NHS Tayside, NHS Highland and NHS Grampian—to ensure that they work more closely together, provide cross-cover and support continuity of care.

There might be an opportunity for both approaches. As the member will acknowledge, certain technical aspects of a patient’s treatment might need to be provided in a particular setting. The aim is to use staff much more effectively over the three areas but, on occasion, there might need to be a more effective use of resources. That might be more the case with regard to arrangements between NHS Highland and NHS Grampian than those between NHS Grampian and NHS Tayside, given the facilities at NHS Highland’s Raigmore hospital. I am satisfied that we are trying to do everything possible to retain and maintain local radiotherapy treatment but I am sure that all members will recognise—indeed, some have pointed this out already—that that will not always be possible, given the specialist nature of the care, for which, at times, patients will have to travel elsewhere. That is why we have reached agreement on care pathways into the cancer centres in Glasgow and Edinburgh for patients who need expertise that cannot be delivered locally. That agreement will allow them to receive treatment much more quickly and will avoid delays. I hope that the use of such an approach will be kept to a minimum, but it will be clinically determined instead of being a policy matter. I believe that 42 people have had to be referred out of the north of Scotland for treatment during this particularly trying period. Of that total, 33 have begun their treatment; I understand that the others have not begun theirs for clinical reasons. However, all members will agree that we must ensure that patients access the specialist services that they require as quickly as possible. I reassure members that we are determined to continue to provide across the NHS in Scotland clinical services of the best quality and standard in cancer and other areas. Over the past number of years, we have put additional investment into services and taken forward a range of measures to improve them, and we will continue to monitor the progress that is being made in the north of Scotland to ensure that the shortfall that was experienced over several months is being sufficiently addressed and that we have in the north of Scotland sustainable services in the medium and long term for all patients who require them. 13:13 Meeting suspended. 14:00 On resuming—

As every health debate in the chamber does, this one has proved to be interesting. There have been a number of measured and constructive speeches. Jackson Carlaw, Aileen McLeod, Nanette Milne and Hugh Henry all made considered contributions on how they see things moving forward in the NHS in Scotland in the years to come. Jackson Carlaw got us off to a good start when he outlined the shared values that we all have with regard to our NHS, and noted that every one of us recognises its value and the importance that it has in our society. A big part of that is probably because it is a public service that we have all made use of and benefited from at some point. It is also the service that we hope will put things right when our health goes wrong and we lose a bit of control over our lives because we are unwell as a result of some condition or other. It is the body whose staff will help to give us back that control. Those practical and personal reasons explain why it is an issue that cuts across political boundaries and why we value so highly our NHS and the contribution that it makes to our society. It follows, therefore, that we all have a vested interest in ensuring that we have the best possible NHS—that we have an NHS that is a world leader that is able to deliver the best standard of healthcare for every citizen, as and when they require it. We all have that shared value, and it is important that the debate around health is informed by it. Of course, there will be times when parties will disagree about the approach that has been taken by a particular Government at a particular point with regard to how it seeks to achieve the best possible health service. However, as Hugh Henry noted, underlying that is a shared agenda, which involves a desire to achieve the best possible healthcare system. As others have done, Jim Hume acknowledged that the vast majority of work that goes on in our NHS is fantastic. We are rightly proud of the staff in our NHS and of what they achieve. I say this not for political ends, but it is a reality that our NHS is better today than it was five, 10, 15 or 20 years ago. It continues to evolve. During the quarter ending September 2013, 98.3 per cent of patients were treated within the 12-week legal treatment time guarantee period. That compares with 85 per cent of inpatient day cases that were seen within 18 weeks in the quarter ending March 2007. In September 2013, 95.4 per cent of patients waited less than the 12-weeks standard for their first outpatient consultation, which compares with 84.2 per cent back in March 2007. Those statistics demonstrate the progress that has been made in our NHS. Some of it is because of policy and direction—set by Government and delivered by NHS boards—and some of it is because of science in terms of how our NHS has moved on and the diagnostic programmes that we now have. However, although those improvements are taking place as our NHS evolves and develops over the years, we must face up to the challenges that the service faces and which the cabinet secretary set out in his speech. In particular, I refer to the demographic challenge that we have as a society, with an ageing population—people are living longer; that is great, but as they live longer, they are more likely to have a number of long-term conditions—and how that impacts on how we design and deliver our NHS. I will pick up on a couple of points that members made about changes to address some of the challenges. Neil Findlay raised seven-day working. He challenged us on the progress that we are making on that because of the lack of staff across a range of disciplines in our NHS. However, a bit of research would have helped him to understand that we have started the process. We have established a task force to help us to identify what staffing levels we need to put in place to ensure that we can deliver services seven days a week. It is not about criticising where we are now; it is about where we are trying to get to and the measures that we are taking to achieve that. If Mr Findlay had given further consideration to that, he may have realised that and understood it more fully. Several members raised delayed discharges, which have been a long-standing problem in our NHS and in the linkage between our health and social care systems. A week or so ago, I was in Ayrshire at Crosshouse hospital meeting the staff in the frail elderly unit and talking to them about the challenges that they face. Delayed discharges are one of the major problems that they face, as a result of obstructions in the patient pathway and in their ability to discharge patients. We accept that that is a problem, which is why we have taken a range of measures to address it, and why we are integrating healthcare and social care to ensure that we deal with delayed discharges much more effectively. We need to ensure that the back door in our hospitals is as big as the front door so that we can get patients moving through the system much more effectively.

Part of the challenge in Ayrshire concerns how the local councils operate. The problem is the failure to create proper links between them in order to have staff working in partnership. The front-line staff tell me that that is their experience day in, day out. That is why we must make the system much more effective. Mr Findlay also asked how we can ensure that we deliver the right services when, in a board such as NHS Lothian, there are only something like 25 doctors on at the weekend. That is utter nonsense. It would hardly be possible to staff an accident and emergency department with 25 doctors over a weekend.

Sit down.

That is another example of misleading information that does not help the debate. That is why it is important that, if we are going to make sure that we continue to make progress in our NHS—

Not only is it not a point of order, it is a load of baloney.

The facts will prove that there are not only 25 doctors in NHS Lothian at weekends.

It is important that we not get sucked into inertia through a review that would take us to a never-never land that is, basically, a fig leaf for a party that has nothing to contribute on how we take our NHS forward in the years to come. We need to get on with the actions that we have already put in place to ensure that we deliver an NHS that is fit for purpose. We need a vision for the future; we have that, and the Government is prepared to work with others who have serious ideas about how we will ensure that our NHS continues to evolve to be a world-leading service.

I congratulate Fiona McLeod on securing time for the debate. I listened with great interest to all the speeches. I will use the debate to recognise on the Scottish Government’s behalf the valuable work that high street optometrists do and the role of Optometry Scotland. The Government has a commitment to community-based eye care services because there is a strong and compelling case for continuing to deliver services in that way for some of the reasons that members highlighted in their speeches. It can be convenient for people. It provides flexible access to eye care services, with the real prospect that conditions will be identified at an early stage. Community-based eye care also reduces the burden on hospital care by ensuring that patients with conditions that could be dealt with outside a hospital setting are treated appropriately within the primary care setting. Also, appropriate care can be delivered much more cost effectively in the community than in the hospital environment, without any detrimental impact on the quality of care that an individual patient receives. A number of members have highlighted the free NHS eye examination. That policy, which the previous Executive introduced, is an exemplar of the benefits of preventative healthcare. That comprehensive examination of eye health affords the best prospect of identifying treatable eye conditions at an early stage in their development, which is important, for the reason that Dennis Robertson outlined. The examination is provided in our communities—on the high street—by optometrists and is universally available. Members will be aware that the policy has proven extremely popular with the public and that take-up continues to grow. In the year ended 31 March 2013, there were more than 1.9 million examinations, which equates to 36 per cent of Scotland’s population. That demonstrates that the people of Scotland are taking on board the message about the importance of maintaining good eye health and making good use of the services that are in place. That is to be welcomed. It is important to say something about the financial commitment to community-based eye care services. In the last financial year, 2012-13, NHS Scotland spent £70.8 million on the provision of free NHS eye exams. I am sure that members will recognise that that represents a significant financial commitment, particularly when it is contrasted with the expenditure of just over £20 million in 2005-06 on the universal examination’s predecessor, the NHS eye test. That is just part of the Scottish Government’s commitment to eye care. In addition, through NHS Education for Scotland, the Government provides £1 million per annum for optical education and training to support the free NHS eye examination. We made funding available to optical practices to purchase digital cameras and other associated equipment to facilitate examinations and take photographs of the eyes in order to monitor a patient’s condition. That builds on further improvements in the overall service. I am sure that members all recognise that prevention is a key part of our eye healthcare policy. We know that the universal free NHS eye examination has delivered benefits to the people of Scotland. One study estimated that between 2,000 and 5,500 patients have received treatment for preventable sight loss that they would not otherwise have received. We can begin to see the substantial benefits when we consider that the RNIB estimates that sight loss has an associated cost of more than £17,500 per person per year. Of course, the personal cost of blindness is impossible to determine. A partial or full loss of sight results in a loss of confidence and can result in a loss of income and in dependence on others. Members will be aware of the significant impact that the change in Scotland’s demography is having on our healthcare system. As we grow older, increased funding for care costs needs to be provided, and the prevalence of conditions such as diabetes and glaucoma increases with age. The age profile of Scotland’s population is set to change dramatically in a comparatively short time. I will give members some figures to illustrate that. The proportion of the population that is aged under 15 is to fall from 32 to 16 per cent, while the proportion that is aged 65 and over is to increase from 5 to 17 per cent. That trend is set to continue and our health services, including our eye care services, will need to meet that challenge. However, I believe that we have a very strong base to work from. I acknowledge the important role that has been played by Optometry Scotland in helping to bring in, and successfully deliver, the free eye examination. That would simply not have been possible without strong partnership working. To extend that theme of partnership working, it is fair to say that, as a result of the work done by Optometry Scotland, NHS boards, RNIB Scotland, the Scottish Eyecare Group, and NHS National Services Scotland, we are now generally acknowledged as the world leader in the provision of eye healthcare services. However, we want to build on that good progress. For example, we are well advanced in implementing the electronic referral system between optometrists and hospital eye healthcare services that patients can benefit from—several members have referred to that system. Those are real benefits that I believe will continue to allow us to build on the progress that we have made and to ensure that we speed up the process for patients being referred into the appropriate system as and when they require further care. As a Government, we recognise the value of community optometry in the success of eye care services in Scotland, and the particular role of Optometry Scotland in bringing that about. Of course, we need to remain vigilant to the challenges of an ageing population but, equally, we need to acknowledge the strengths of the current service and the fact that we are well placed to build on those achievements in the years to come. Meeting closed at 18:16.

It is important that women who are at risk of postnatal depression are identified quickly and that appropriate and timely care, treatment and support are put in place to respond to individual needs. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network published in March 2012 evidence-based guidance and recommendations on the management of perinatal mood disorders. That includes not only guidance on predicting and reducing risk, but guidance on detection, including routine inquiries about depressive symptoms, and use of the Edinburgh postnatal depression scale and the Whooley questions as tools to aid identification and clinical monitoring of those who are at risk of antenatal and postnatal depression. Most women will be treated in the community in primary or community mental health services, with access to the full range of services and support that NHS Scotland and its partners provide.

A wait of 21 weeks is unacceptable. That is why we have taken forward the health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—HEAT—standard to drive forward improvements in access to psychological therapies, which will come into force in December 2014. The data that we have received from national health service boards show that it takes on average about 10 weeks for patients to access psychological therapies, but we want to ensure that all boards are making sufficient progress, which is why the target was introduced. I expect NHS Lanarkshire to continue to take forward measures to ensure that it complies with the target that has been set. Another important part of the work that has been set out by the SIGN guidelines is to ensure that those who are directly involved in clinical care of women, including midwives and other nursing staff, are properly trained and are able to provide the right support and assistance to individuals who may be at risk of developing postnatal depression. I expect all boards to continue to make sure that they take forward a range of measures to help to support their staff to adequately identify and, as necessary, refer on patients to get access to appropriate treatment and care.

The relationship between low income and poor health is well established. People on a low income are more likely to limit or simply not purchase goods and services that maintain or improve health, or are forced to purchase cheaper goods and services that may increase health risks. In other words, it affects their ability to access nutritional food, exercise facilities and affordable energy for cooking and heating, and the availability of safe and secure accommodation. It can also affect mental wellbeing, with those on low incomes prevented from participating in social activities, leaving them feeling less worthy and of a lower status.

As I mentioned, it has been well established that many of the health inequalities that we experience in our society are not factors that our health service can address by itself, because so many of them are led by determinants that are outwith our health service’s abilities to control. For example, income, wealth and power are key determinants in health inequalities. If we are to tackle those issues effectively, we need to ensure that we are able to address the type of income inequality that too many of our citizens experience. We also know that, as a direct result of the austerity measures of the UK Government, child poverty will increase in Scotland. The key consequence of that is not only the shameful fact that we will have more children in poverty but the likelihood that those young people will experience further health inequalities as they grow up. In an independent Scotland, we will be able to address those issues effectively by aligning our health and our equalities agendas. We will be able to tackle those issues much more effectively by having a welfare system that is guided by a desire to achieve that.

The Scottish Government supports the Scottish living wage and has actively taken forward that policy. It is extremely important that we recognise that there are too many people who are in work and experiencing poverty and that the changes that have been taking place in the taxation and the welfare systems are pushing more families into poverty. That is why it is important that this Parliament has control over those matters, so that we can address them effectively rather than just talk about them or ask questions about them.

It is important that women who experience postnatal depression can access appropriate and timely care, treatment and support. The national health service is responsible for providing such care on the basis of a multidisciplinary needs assessment and in line with clinical and other guidelines. In March 2012, the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network published guidance on the management of perinatal mood disorders, which highlights the good evidence base for psychological therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy and interpersonal therapy as effective interventions for depression in the postnatal period. NHS boards are making good progress towards delivering the mental health HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target that was introduced to improve access to such psychological therapies by ensuring that, by December 2014, no one has to wait longer than 18 weeks for access to such services.

As I mentioned, we have set down a HEAT standard to drive improvements in the way in which patients access psychological therapies. As of December 2014, boards will be expected to have services in place that patients can access within 18 weeks from referral. As I also mentioned in an earlier answer, the current average in NHS Scotland is about 10 weeks, but I want to ensure that all boards are making improvements, including NHS Lanarkshire, because 21 weeks for access to such services is unacceptable. I should say that 18 weeks is the maximum that a patient should have to wait. If clinicians believe that a patient requires access to particular psychological services at an earlier date, they should be referred on that basis to ensure that they receive those services. It is important that we drive the improvement in psychological therapies to ensure that there is greater provision and access for all who could benefit from them. I am more than happy to meet the member and his constituent to discuss the matter further if he feels that that would be helpful.

Scottish Government policy states that it is essential that young people have access to sexual health services, advice and information when they require it. That may consist of services that cater specifically for young people, or it may involve signposting and referral to generic services with easy access for young people. The decisions on the procedures, tests and facilities that are available locally are based on local needs assessments and the decisions are for national health service boards and local authorities.

I am aware that Caledonia Youth no longer receives funding from NHS Lothian for such services. I understand that that is because NHS Lothian is providing the services directly rather than through Caledonia Youth. As part of our sexual health and blood-borne viruses framework, it is important that boards implement a range of measures to continue to improve sexual health and to reduce the incidence of blood-borne viruses. Boards are doing that with the support of £29 million in this financial year for a range of measures. I have no doubt that Caledonia Youth might wish to discuss with NHS Lothian how they can work in partnership, but NHS Lothian is taking forward services to meet local needs.

The member should be aware that there have always been a variety of different services—there have not always been dedicated youth services. In some local areas, dedicated youth services have been provided. NHS Lothian is providing services that young people can access for sexual health needs as well. It has never been the case that all boards have provided dedicated sexual health services. What is important is that boards look at what is required in their local area and that they ensure that they have services arranged in a way that can meet the needs of young people in that particular area.

The Scottish Government funds health boards through carer information strategies to provide carers with information and advice. We also fund the national carers organisations to do likewise. Through Carers Scotland, we provide a range of resources and training materials for carers on the use of technology, particularly telehealth and telecare. We recently launched the first prototype portal, “Living it Up”—an online resource that will allow service users and carers to access a range of information, advice and support about local services, information and products. Moreover, subject to the outcome of consultation and parliamentary approval, the Scottish Government intends to introduce new legislation to support carers and young carers.

If I understand Claudia Beamish correctly, she is asking about access to information and advice services and how we can ensure that there is greater consistency in that access across all local authority areas. Without wanting to pre-empt the consultation on the subject, it is clear to me that carers are often unaware of what is or may be available to them. I want to look at how we can ensure that there is a greater consistency in awareness. We will consult on how we go about achieving that and whether a legislative provision can assist us in that regard. We can consider, as part of the consultation, whether legislation is the best way to ensure that there is consistency in access to advice and information for carers.

That seems to be a very worthwhile project, and I encourage other carers organisations in Scotland to consider participating in similar projects.

We want to ensure that people who are living with neuromuscular conditions, such as myasthenia gravis, and their families have access to the best possible care and support. We are currently supporting the national neurological advisory group in raising the profile of all neurological and neuromuscular conditions in the national health service and the third sector and among the public. The advisory group aims to drive forward implementation of the neurological standards, which aim to improve the patient journey from the point of referral to the service and to ensure that every patient with neurological or neuromuscular conditions experiences a quality of care that gives confidence to the patient, clinician and carer.

I recognise that awareness of myasthenia gravis—which is fortunately a relatively rare condition—is very limited. There is a specialist nurse based at the Southern general in Glasgow who is able to provide specific clinical advice on that particular condition to patients and their families and to other nurses in the field. I am always happy to look at what measures can be taken to help to raise further awareness of such issues. The national neurological advisory group has an important role to play in ensuring that we do everything possible to make sure that patients who have neuromuscular conditions such as myasthenia gravis are receiving the best possible care, and that those who are providing patients with the necessary clinical support have the right advice and information to enable them to provide the right clinical input. The specialist nurse at the Southern general in Glasgow has an important role to play in helping to support that area of work.

Like others, I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing time for this debate, which raises the profile of the 25th world AIDS day last Sunday. As several members have pointed out, this is a topic of global importance and it is worth bearing it in mind that, worldwide, the tide is starting to turn, with the lowest number of new infections recorded since the late 1990s and a 40-fold increase in access to treatment over the past 10 years. However, despite that progress, the stark reality is that there are still more than 35 million people living with HIV and that there were 1.6 million deaths from AIDS last year. In Scotland, more than 4,500 people have been diagnosed and are living with HIV, and the vast majority of them are receiving specialist care. Very high numbers are on treatment and many will have undetectable viral loads. However, in Scotland, there is still nearly one new HIV diagnosis every day. It is worth keeping in mind the fact that an estimated 22 per cent of our HIV positive population remain undiagnosed. It is for those reasons that HIV continues to be a public health priority in Scotland. Our policy in this area is articulated through the sexual health and blood-borne viruses framework, which is supported by almost £30 million every year. The emphasis is on the importance of prevention, testing and diagnosis and on the provision of treatment and care to those who are infected. The national advisory committee on sexual health and blood-borne viruses is responsible for taking the framework forward. I chair the group, and it includes a range of stakeholders from across the sector who support us in this policy area. Members will recognise that significant progress has been made over the past 25 years. Thanks to needle exchange programmes, HIV transmission through injecting drug use is now rare—there are fewer than 20 cases a year on average. Pregnant women are now routinely offered antenatal screening for HIV and, with the right care, the risk of mother-to-child transmission is less than 1 per cent. Due to treatment advances, many people with HIV are now living into old age, with 31 per cent of those who are HIV positive in Scotland now aged over 50. However, still too many people are being infected and prevention is a priority. That is why, over the past two years, we have invested almost £200,000 in research by NHS Lothian and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to examine the risk behaviours among men who have sex with men. The results of that work, which will emerge over the coming months, will inform service development and policy in the coming years in Scotland and will also add to the international evidence base for measures that can be implemented globally. Of course, the other area in which we still need to do more is that of stigma and discrimination. In that regard, it was great to see the efforts that were made across Scotland to recognise world AIDS day on Sunday. We should congratulate HIV Scotland for its light up Scotland campaign, which saw more than 50 buildings across Scotland being lit up red to mark the day. I was pleased to arrange for St Andrew’s House and Victoria Quay to participate in the event. I am aware that a range of community events also took place, involving health boards and other sectors and recognising local activity around world AIDS day. Reducing stigma is one of the five high-level outcomes that are set out in the framework. That is why, over the past year, we have conducted research into the most effective way in which to take forward a national campaign on the issue. Interestingly, the research found that a campaign by the Government was more likely to increase fear and stigma and that a campaign that was run by the voluntary sector was seen as more acceptable by the public. That is why we have decided to fund Waverley Care with more than £270,000 to deliver the always hear campaign. Campaign resources have already been distributed and are being used widely across Scotland. By any measure, the campaign has been a success and has helped to give a voice to people living with the disease. I look forward to continuing to work with Waverley Care to develop and expand the always hear campaign over the next 12 months. In looking to the future, we continue to hope that there will be a cure or a vaccine, but those remain some way off. However, members will be aware that changes in the law mean that, from next year, for the first time, it will be possible to buy HIV home testing kits in Scotland. That development should help to remove barriers to testing and diagnosis for those who may fear stigma, as, in the future, people will be able to conduct tests themselves in the privacy of their own homes. We are working with our partners in NHS Scotland to ensure that NHS Scotland is able to deal with any issues that arise from self-testing, and HIV Scotland held a seminar for health boards on that topic last week. I hope that I have emphasised to members that HIV remains a priority for the Government. Our efforts to test, diagnose and treat those who are affected will continue. We will continue to invest in prevention and we will do all that we can to ensure that people who are living with HIV are able to live longer, healthier lives free from stigma and discrimination. 13:11 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

I begin, like others, by offering my congratulations to Linda Fabiani on securing time for the debate, and I offer my personal congratulations to Michael O’Neil on his award for pioneering a technique that will enhance surgical results for patients who have undergone jaw surgery. I am more than happy to take up Linda Fabiani’s suggestion and visit the service to learn more about the important work that it undertakes. Michael O’Neil’s award is a recognition of the important work that is being done in the developing field of maxillofacial prosthetics, particularly at the west of Scotland regional maxillofacial prosthetics service. I am sure that Michael will recognise that it is also appropriate for me to congratulate George Payne from Glasgow royal infirmary, as James Dornan did, on the work that he has undertaken and on receiving the Mount Vernon award for outstanding clinical or technical practice. Both awards reflect the importance of the specific research of certain individuals but also the wider pioneering work in the field that is taking place within NHS Scotland. We are both grateful for and proud of that. The west of Scotland regional maxillofacial prosthetics service is responsible for treating patients with a disfigurement of the head and neck region. A wide variety of work is done in the service, from surgical plates that are used to aid healing to the recontouring of a patient’s skull after trauma. As Linda Fabiani mentioned, the laboratory runs prosthetics clinics and fabricates custom-made noses, ears, indwelling eyes and orbital prostheses for patients who have lost part of their facial contour through trauma, cancer or congenital deformity. The field of maxillofacial prosthetics and the technology have seen some significant developments in a fairly short period of time. We are seeing increasingly sophisticated technologies such as 3D modelling to enable the accurate modelling and construction of prosthetic replacements for mouth, jaw and facial reconstructive surgery. Having undertaken research as part of his master’s degree, Michael O’Neil received his award for pioneering a technique whereby surgical results can be enhanced for patients who undergo jaw surgery operations. His technique involves pre-planning the operation on a 3D model of the patient’s skull that has correctly proportioned teeth. The technique involves taking a direct impression of the patient’s dentition, casting it in dental plaster and then replacing the inaccurate dentition of the 3D skull model with the accurate plaster dentition taken from the patient. The technique is an excellent example of how technology can have a positive impact on patient care and the outcomes for the patient. As Linda Fabiani highlighted, it has helped to reduce operation times and made reconstructive bone grafting much more accurate. I want to touch briefly on the restorative benefits of the research. It offers significant benefits to people who have lost part of their facial contour through trauma, cancer or congenital deformity. Such a loss is likely to have a serious impact on the person’s self-esteem, as several members said, and their ability to fulfil their potential in our society. Reconstructive surgery brings enormous benefits in improving a person’s outlook and self-confidence. As Linda Fabiani’s motion states, the technology enhances treatment and improves outcomes for patients. It is right that we recognise that in the Parliament. I also want to highlight some of the wider issues. The motion gives me an opportunity to highlight some of the issues around oral cancer here in Scotland. Although cancers of the mouth are relatively rare, more than 400 cases are still diagnosed in Scotland each year. It is also more common in men, although rates among women are on the rise. Although the causes are unknown, risk factors are smoking and excessive consumption of alcohol. A study in 2011 estimated that more than half of mouth and throat cancers in the United Kingdom are associated with and caused by smoking. It is important that we keep that in mind when we are looking at preventative approaches to dealing with such issues. I will reflect briefly on the role of NHS dental services in the prevention of oral cancer. Dental teams are in a unique position to detect oral cancer at its early stages, when we know that it is easier to treat and the outlook is better for the patient. Early diagnosis and treatment can increase a patient’s chances of survival from below 50 per cent to 90 per cent. As well as the fact that we have free NHS dental examinations, I report that registration rates among adults are at their highest level. As at September 2013, a total of 81.6 per cent of adults are registered with a NHS dentist. The equivalent figure in September 2007 was 48.6 per cent. I return to the motion and the need for the Scottish Parliament to recognise the important work in maxillofacial prosthetics. Although prevention has a role with regard to oral cancer, unfortunately such treatment will always be needed. It is therefore important that we encourage development in this field. The field has an exciting future in which technology and research, as we have heard, can make a difference to the quality of people’s lives. Advances such as the ones that we have heard mentioned represent hope for patients in need of reconstructive surgery of the mouth, jaw or face. I have no doubt that members will be inspired by the work undertaken by Michael O’Neil and his colleagues and will recognise that that work demonstrates the significant advances that are being made in this technological field here in Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:37.

Health professionals provide tailored care and support to people who have experienced miscarriage, which may include further investigation or counselling, as appropriate. Additionally, a patient may be referred to an appropriate voluntary organisation. During 2013 the Scottish Government has provided funding to several organisations that work in the field.

I met SCIM last week to discuss such issues. We provide it with a grant of more than £7,000 a year for the work that it undertakes in the greater Glasgow and Clyde area. We also provide funding to a range of other organisations that work in the field, to help them to support families who experience miscarriage. I have no doubt that SCIM will choose to apply to the section 16(b) funding stream, which will open before the end of this year. Its application will be considered alongside other applications from organisations that carry out similar work.

On carers’ rights day and all year round, the Scottish Government supports unpaid carers and young carers by providing valuable care and support to their families, friends and neighbours. With partners, we are developing a carers’ rights charter that will set out and consolidate existing rights and which will be widely available next year. Moreover, subject to the outcome of consultation and parliamentary approval, the Scottish Government intends to introduce new legislation to support carers and young carers.

The legislation is clear that where carers request an assessment the local authority must provide it. Local authorities must also notify carers of their entitlement to make such a request. I note that some councils support carers without any assessment, but it is important that councils undertake a good-quality assessment of all carers who request it. As I have pointed out, we will also consult on carers legislation provisions on, for example, identification of carers, carers assessments and information, advice and support for carers with the aim of having across the country a more consistent approach that supports better outcomes for carers and ensures that those who would benefit from such an assessment are able to obtain one.

I congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing time for the debate on an area of extremely specialist healthcare provision in NHS Scotland. I welcome Cara Hilton to the chamber, as this is the first debate in which I have had the opportunity to hear her speak. I thank her for sharing her experience, which has given us a personal insight into the matter. I take this opportunity to acknowledge the support that is provided across the country by organisations such as Bliss Scotland to parents of sick and premature babies. They do a tremendous amount of work to raise awareness of premature birth matters. The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that sick and premature babies receive the highest possible quality of care by the most appropriate professional at all times. We recognise the vital role of our neonatal units in providing intensive and specialist care for sick and premature babies. Only on Monday this week, I was in the Victoria hospital in Kirkcaldy visiting the neonatal unit, which I am sure is a significant improvement on the previous facilities there. The level of neonatal care from the staff is first class. I also had the opportunity to see a BabySam system in operation there: a small camera is located above the incubator so that a mother can observe her baby on a tablet device from her hospital bed at any time. Parents have found that facility to be tremendously useful. I am pleased that Rhoda Grant’s motion welcomes “Neonatal Care in Scotland: A Quality Framework”. We are extremely fortunate in Scotland to have a high level of expertise available to us, which was provided in the form of the neonatal expert advisory group that we established to develop the framework. The group included key experts from the health professions and other services, and stakeholders from across the country including support groups Bliss and Sands. The expert group also played a vital role in engaging with the managed clinical networks that were established in 2010 to ensure that we had agreed pathways of care and protocols for maternity and neonatal surgical services, and that services, staff and facilities meet the predicted demand from the population. The framework outlines NHS Scotland’s commitment to providing the highest possible quality of neonatal care for babies. It aims to be a dynamic framework that supports staff in order to allow them to improve services at local level. The framework has been regularly reviewed by neonatal staff throughout its development. I believe that the framework is ambitious. It needs to be, in order to secure the best form of care for premature and sick babies. We know that implementation of the framework will take time. I acknowledge that Cara Hilton and others are anxious to see things happen as quickly as possible, but I am also sure that members appreciate the complexity and the specialist nature of some of these matters, and understand that health boards need time to implement the framework effectively. We will make sure that that happens. We have heard mention of workforce issues. Those issues are not unique to neonatal care, despite the specialist nature of the work, but the framework offers boards opportunities to move to a much more modern and stratified service that focuses on the provision of safe care and ensures that the sickest babies are cared for by the right staff with the right skills at the right time and in the right place. A neonatal nursing workload and workforce planning tool that identifies the nursing needs of sick and premature babies has been implemented across NHS Scotland though our neonatal units, so we are making progress. The tool takes into account the staffing recommendations of the British Association of Perinatal Medicine, which Rhoda Grant and Nanette Milne mentioned, and it captures actual nursing workload in real time so that we can see clearly the level of work that is being undertaken. Many of the requirements that are set out in the framework to deliver high-quality, safe and person-centred neonatal care are already in place at units across the country. The framework makes it clear, however, that boards must put in place plans or pathways to repatriate babies to the unit that is closest to their home as soon as is clinically appropriate for the level of care that they require, and parents should be supported to help them to understand the situation and the choices that they face. Mark McDonald mentioned the challenges that exist when babies are transferred and parents have to transfer to other units. That is why we need to ensure that boards are working in a co-ordinated way so that we have the right staff in the right place to provide the right care to parents at that point, and then to allow babies to return to more local units, when possible. We are also working to provide more information to parents. We are undertaking a patient leaflet programme in partnership with Bliss to support and inform parents of what the framework means for them, and what they should expect. In drawing my remarks to a close, I reassure members that, where any service change is considered as an option to meet the high standards that the experts set out in the framework, boards should work in consultation and in partnership with their local communities. Scottish Government officials are reviewing the implementation plans that have been received from NHS boards and we will meet the three managed clinical networks to go over them in more detail. Facilities for parents, workforce issues and other points that have been raised in today’s debate will be highlighted and discussed at that meeting, as will potential funding opportunities. I hope that I have reassured members that we are determined to ensure that the framework is implemented across the country so that babies who require such specialist care receive it at the right time. 13:05 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

As some members have already said, this has been a largely consensual debate. Over my years in the Parliament, debates on drugs policy have been largely consensual, although last year’s was not quite as consensual. It is good that there has been much more of a consensus this time. Out of the people who I recognise have been engaged in the drugs debate in the Parliament over the past 14 years, a few notable individuals have not been able to participate in today’s debate. One such person is Brian Adam, who is no longer with us; he would often participate in drugs debates. Another is Richard Simpson, who is unwell. Annabel Goldie has participated in drugs debates over the years; I suspect that she is prepping for a visit to my constituency this evening. The debate has been helpful in setting the drugs policy issue in the wider context of inequality in our society. Jackson Carlaw showed his age a little when he reflected on how, over the past generation almost, there has been a change in the way in which individuals have got into drug use. Some of the personal experiences that we heard about from members such as Christian Allard and Mark McDonald demonstrated that. Over the years, I have lost a number of good friends as a direct result of drug use or through illness or violence associated with drug use. Some of them were my best friends at school; sadly, they are no longer with us. Many members have been touched by the damage that drug misuse can cause. The report helpfully underlines that “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem”, which we published five years ago, is the right approach. It confirms that we are moving in the right direction, while highlighting some areas in which we face challenges and in which we need to take further action. I want to pick up on a couple of issues. Mention has been made of the alcohol and drug partnerships and the health aspect. In particular, it has been identified that there can be inconsistencies among the 30 ADPs and in the way in which health boards deal with such matters. Roseanna Cunningham and I are determined to do as much as we can to achieve a level of consistency, where possible. However, there is only so much that we can do. It is worth bearing in mind that ADPs are partnerships—they are partnerships that have been formed by local authorities, health boards and others in an effort to reflect most effectively what is needed in the local community. A top-down approach to prescribing everything that they must do on the ground is not necessarily the best approach, as it will not allow the necessary level of flexibility. That said, as my colleague Roseanna Cunningham highlighted, ministers set a range of priorities that they expect ADPs to report on annually. That includes information on the health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—HEAT—standard, the Scottish drug misuse database, quality data in the national drug and alcohol treatment waiting time database and an increasing number of naloxone kits being made available. Some of those aspects can be measured, but it is worth bearing in mind that ADPs are partnerships and that we must allow a level of flexibility to reflect local need.

I was going to come on to that in the next part of my speech, which is on health. I think that, on the health aspect, we can get greater consistency because of the nature of the way in which we configure health services in Scotland. As Roseanna Cunningham did, I have set out that I am clear that I want to see much greater leadership in this issue in the NHS. When I met primary and secondary healthcare teams a few weeks ago to discuss an aspect of the report, I made it clear that I expected all the boards to have an accountable officer at a decision-making level who could take responsibility and show leadership in this area of policy. That work is now taking place, and we expect all boards to demonstrate that they are doing that and to select the right individual. We can do more, and I am determined to ensure that we do more and that someone is accountable for ensuring that the work happens. I do not want to prescribe whether that should be a director of public health or a medical director, but the person must be sufficiently senior to bring about the change that is necessary. I will pick up on an area where we can get greater improvement. Elaine Murray talked about access to psychological services, which can be challenging at times and has been so for many years. That is why we are bringing in a HEAT target on psychological services. It will come into force from December next year, and it will ensure that we have a clear timeline for those who are referred for access to those services. The availability of psychological therapies has increased across the country and work is on-going to support more of that. That is an example of where we can get more consistency across the country by setting a clear national standard. A key part of dealing with the health challenges that the expert group’s report highlights is ensuring that GPs are properly engaged in the process. Primary care is central to how we deliver aspects of the drug recovery model, but there are challenges in doing that, because GPs are independent contractors. We must look at how we can build the approach into their contract, but it is not in the Government’s gift just to say that that will happen. We must negotiate with the profession and look at taking the issue forward. Given what I have said, and although I am keen to have a consensus in the debate, we cannot accept the Labour amendment. That is not because of its main content but because of its final element, which is on setting a timeframe. I am not in a position to set a timeframe for getting a national agreement with GPs; I wish that I was, but the reality is that I am not. It would be false of me to indicate that I could do that, but I can say that the issue is on our agenda and is part of the discussions that we are having. We wish to strike a consensus, but it is a fact that we cannot set a timeframe.

Taking forward such issues with GPs as part of the general medical services contract involves negotiation. We would have to explore the questions. As I said, the issues are very much on the Government’s agenda, and we have to work with colleagues to take them forward. I turn to prescribing through our community pharmacy services. Willie Rennie and Jackson Carlaw made the point that community pharmacies play an extremely important part in the jigsaw of the recovery model. Some of the publicity and language last year about the methadone programme through our community pharmacy provision was unfortunate. Thankfully, we have moved beyond that. In September, we published “Prescription for Excellence”, of which a key part is developing and implementing NHS standard specifications on alcohol and drug services and, in particular, pharmaceutical services, which will help us to drive forward improvements in standards. We all recognise that community pharmacies have a role to play in delivering an effective recovery model under drugs policy in Scotland. Mary Scanlon asked whether individuals who are on the methadone programme are tested monthly for compliance. I appreciate the logic of that suggestion, but the recovery model is such that people often slip back. The suggested approach of testing every month is recognised as not being valuable and can undermine the recovery model. It is resource intensive and it does not demonstrate much in the way of outcomes. However, I appreciate Mary Scanlon’s point that we must ensure that the system has proper checks. That brings me to my final point, which is the need to make sure that we measure what we are getting from the system. Graeme Pearson is right that we need to be sure that we are clear about what we get from the drugs policy that we are pursuing. The improvement methodology that we are setting out as part of our response on this particular policy will help us to achieve that. I believe that the report helps us to build on the good progress with drugs policy that has been made in recent years. The consensus that has been struck today gives me strength in knowing that a joint effort is being made across all parties to make sure that we build on the progress. I hope that we have demonstrated to members that Roseanna Cunningham and I are committed to making sure that we take the joint working across Government to build on the good progress that we have been making.

I, too, congratulate James Dornan on securing time for this debate, which gives us an opportunity to congratulate St Andrew’s First Aid on the work that it does in general and, in particular, its latest campaign during first aid week this year. I got my first first aid certificate with St Andrew’s First Aid when I was in the scouts, as David Torrance did. The scouts and other uniformed organisations do a fantastic job in helping to support young people to recognise the value of first aid. Over the years when I was involved in mountain rescue, I completed various mountain first aid courses, which usually had to be reassessed every three years, and I have witnessed first hand how good-quality first aid can save lives. It can also help to reduce further injury to someone who is already injured. Its value cannot be overestimated. As Nanette Milne mentioned in her contribution, there was a debate to celebrate the 2012 campaign this time last year. Then, there was a focus on whether loved ones, whether or not they know much about first aid, would be able to give someone the kiss of life should circumstances arise in which that would be appropriate. It is good to be able to recognise the work of St Andrew’s First Aid and to help it to promote its message on helping to save lives. I also recognise the valuable contribution that it, with other organisations, will make in 2014, which will be a significant year. In that year, which will be a hugely exciting time for Scotland, the eyes of the whole world will be watching us, with the Commonwealth games taking place in Glasgow, the Ryder cup and the year of homecoming. I have absolutely no doubt that the organisers of those events will work with a range of first aid organisations to ensure that they are effectively covered with first aid support. From the Scottish Government’s perspective, the Scottish Ambulance Service is clearly at the heart of the issue in providing immediate emergency care. It works closely with a whole range of partners to support wider community provision, including voluntary organisations such as St Andrew’s First Aid. In last year’s debate, which celebrated first aid week 2012, I mentioned some of the important work that goes on in local communities, including that by community first responders, who can provide vital early support prior to an ambulance arriving in the course of an emergency—that is particularly important in some of our more remote areas—and the community resuscitation development officers, who recruit and train community members to provide such care. I also mentioned the public access defibrillators in a range of locations, which Rhoda Grant referred to, supported by local training and awareness of how they can be used and where they are located, and the first aid training that takes place in schools and community groups. All of those things support the bigger objective of delivering better outcomes and experiences for those who require support from first aid at a particular time. They can also help to reduce the need for someone to be admitted to hospital and help to support and create greater resilience in communities, particularly some of our more rural and dispersed communities. First aid training is hugely important to supporting our communities. As an organisation, the Scottish Government has a range of first aiders within the workplace. There is a network of first aiders across all the Government’s offices and they are usually trained by St Andrew’s First Aid. To date, the Scottish Government has 251 trained volunteers in its offices. Members might recall the campaign that was run last year by the British Heart Foundation that had a television advert featuring Vinnie Jones. When someone suddenly collapses and is not breathing normally and is unresponsive, they might have suffered a cardiac arrest. The advert advised members of the public not to worry about giving the kiss of life during CPR but to concentrate on giving good, fast chest compressions to the tune of the Bee Gees “Stayin’ Alive”. That was an innovative and fun way of getting across a serious message about helping to ensure that someone who has experienced cardiac arrest gets the necessary swift care. Turning to the specific focus of the St Andrew’s First Aid week, I was interested to see the online pledge that is the focal point of this year’s campaign. The pledge seeks 34,000 signatures, one for each of the people each year who are taken to hospital for treatment in Scotland. We would like to see that number reduce dramatically. That can be achieved by awareness raising and accident prevention in the home, the garden and the community as a whole. The Scottish Government and a range of partners that we work with recognise the importance of encouraging young people to have fun and explore without wrapping them up in cotton wool. However, it is important that we ensure that parents, friends and carers are confident about dealing with the scrapes and bumps that can happen when children get involved in different activities. That is why the Scottish Government works with a range of organisations, such as the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, Barnardo’s and Volunteer Development Scotland, which all have different initiatives to help to support young people, parents and carers to have the right skills to deal with those who have accidents. I offer the Government’s and my personal thanks for the work that first aiders across Scotland do day in, day out. Their dedication and efforts should, rightly, be recognised because they provide an extremely important service in our society. I also offer my congratulations to all those who will be recognised at the first aid awards this Saturday. I finish with a challenge: we should all go home tonight and suggest to someone we know, someone who lives with us or a friend that, if they do not have basic first aid skills, they might want to look into getting them, because we never know when they might be required. Meeting closed at 17:38.

This has been a good debate on the stage 1 report, with a number of important speeches. What has struck me most in the debate is that the change that the bill will introduce through the integration of health and social care will be one of the largest changes to take place in the health and social care system in almost a generation. It is unusual that a piece of legislation that will result in such a significant change has such cross-party support. That is a reflection of the fact that, as the committee’s report recognises, there is a broad consensus around the issue and the need for it to be addressed. In his opening speech, the cabinet secretary set out some of the key drivers behind the need to take integration forward, such as the demographic challenge that we face. In themselves, however, those are not the only reasons for integration. Ken Macintosh highlighted the history of the debate. He talked about the joint futures agenda back in 1999 and the fact that the document for taking forward joint futures echoed many of the opportunities that the bill creates for partnership working, joint budgets and joint commissioning of services. However, the policy predates joint futures. The whole integration agenda started in the 1980s and continued into the 1990s. The debate has been around for some time and has presented some real challenges. I have no doubt that, when Malcolm Chisholm was a health minister, he tried to pursue the agenda and was successful in some areas and unsuccessful in others. That demonstrates the challenge in ensuring that integration takes place on a systematic and consistent basis across the country, which is why the bill is extremely important. The bill will not resolve all the difficult issues that we face in our health and social care system at present, but it will ensure that we focus on some of the challenges much more effectively so that, in health and social work, our local authorities and health boards will work much more closely in partnership. Neil Findlay referred to the route that West Lothian Council pursued in 2003. That is an interesting illustration, as the joint futures agenda goes back to 1999. There was a four-year period before West Lothian Council was able to take forward the agenda, but it is now the most advanced area in the country in this matter, which we should recognise. When colleagues in other parts of the country ask me what integration is going to look like, I tell them to look at what is happening in West Lothian and the way in which the council has been able to lead the agenda.

I will just finish this point. The experience of the 1990s, joint futures and what has happened in West Lothian teaches us that, if we do not provide the legislative framework to drive integration forward, it will not happen on a consistent basis. The bill builds on the good practice in areas where joint working is taking place, ensuring that it happens consistently and right across the country.

Sure, and I know that my SNP colleagues did exactly the same in driving forward that agenda when they were in charge of West Lothian Council. I could, of course, identify other councils that are not doing as well, but I will not get into that, because I think that it is a question of ensuring that we create the right legislative framework to drive forward the agenda in a much more effective way. Bob Doris pointed out that the integration of health and social care has been an aspiration for several decades, and the bill will make that happen in a way that has never previously been done. In doing so, it will enable us to integrate the services that people receive much more effectively. What Mary Scanlon said about the experience in Highland was a good illustration of the benefits that come from the greater integration of services. Taking forward that agenda has put an end to the lack of planning and the cost shunting that can go on between different agencies. The experience of the approach that has been taken in Highland bodes well for the benefits that can be achieved through integration. Some members raised concerns about the potential for services that have been provided by health moving into social care and being charged for. When we consider such issues, we should be careful to remember that the moving of more services into the community is not a new development. The late 1980s and the 1990s saw the closure of long-stay hospital beds for people with a mental illness and for those with learning disabilities. Most of those patients moved into the community and received social care packages to support them there. Many of them continue to live in the community with the help of such support. Therefore, the process that we are talking about is not new—it has taken place previously. It is also worth bearing in mind that the bill is not about taking a service that is provided in hospital, such as physiotherapy, and giving responsibility for it to a social care partnership, which must then decide whether to charge for it. Instead, the bill is about ensuring that there is joint commissioning of health and social care services, that those services are jointly planned and integrated, and that people work together collectively to look at the best way of doing that. We need to consider how we can best configure social care services at a local level to meet the demand on the healthcare system, and how we can better configure them to reduce the demand that exists in some areas. Rather than taking something that health does and putting it into the social care setting, we must ensure that services are configured and planned much more effectively. A number of members, including Duncan McNeil and Hanzala Malik, highlighted the importance of general practitioners in taking forward the integration agenda. Primary care is key to the success of greater provision of healthcare in a community setting and to ensuring that social care provision is properly aligned with that. The work that we are doing with the British Medical Association on issues such as the GP contract gives us an opportunity to do some of those things in a way that has never been done. Although those negotiations are confidential, I am strongly of the view that we are all singing from the same hymn sheet—GPs, social work, the Government, the independent sector and the third sector all want to see more effective integration. We need to find a way that allows us to deliver that for patients on a daily basis. We are taking forward our work with the BMA to assist us in achieving that. Neil Findlay highlighted concerns about the quality of the inspection process for those people who receive care at home. I recognise some of the challenges of conducting inspection in a home setting. That is why the cabinet secretary has already commissioned the Care Inspectorate to do work on how we can improve the inspection process and ensure that it is much more rigorous when it comes to the quality of care that is provided at home. I point out that inspections are not a bad thing. Inspection is a good part of the system that can help to drive up standards and lead to improvement. As Mary Scanlon said, care-at-home services in Highland did not receive a fantastic report, but that report has created a platform for improving those services. That is what we need to do much more systematically right across the country. The work that the cabinet secretary has asked the Care Inspectorate to undertake is exactly about doing that and ensuring that we have a more robust and clear inspection regime for care at home. I believe that the bill has not only cross-party support in the Parliament but public support, because people want to see services working in co-ordination and planning their delivery much more effectively in their communities. The bill will help us to make significant changes in how we can deliver in our communities right across Scotland. I call on members to support the cabinet secretary’s motion at decision time.

We have always been clear that—

Take two, Presiding Officer. I heard his question. We have always been clear that asylum seekers should be welcomed, supported and integrated into Scotland’s communities from day 1 and have access to health services. National health service boards are required to ensure access to health services to meet individuals’ needs. Over the past year we have been working in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Refugee Council to develop a strategy for asylum seekers and refugee integration. The strategy, which will be launched next month, recognises the importance of good health and access to quality health care to the successful integration of refugees and asylum seekers. The strategy will increase understanding of their rights and how to access them.

There is already guidance available for NHS boards that sets out very clearly that those who are in Scotland as asylum seekers should receive the same healthcare provision as any other resident of Scotland. Clearly, on the issue that the member raises, which he has previously raised with the cabinet secretary, clinical decisions have to be made about whether someone should be put on the transplant list. That is about not only the clinical benefit that they would get from a transplant but whether they are able to meet the treatment requirements following the transplant. If the member has specific information that he thinks would help in addressing his constituent’s concerns, I or, I have no doubt, the cabinet secretary will be more than happy to explore the matter with him, to ensure that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde properly addresses those concerns.

The cabinet secretary and I hold regular meetings with our ministerial colleagues, including the Minister for Housing and Welfare, on a range of issues that affect the health and wellbeing of the Scottish people. Our discussions focus on the most vulnerable groups in our society and how we can help to tackle issues around health inequalities.

I will correct the member, because we have not rolled back any of our anti-poverty strategies. If anything, we have increased the range of anti-poverty strategies in order to try to tackle the issue. It is important that we keep the issue in context. Inequality, particularly health inequality, is very much rooted in social inequality. Income inequality and lack of opportunity and educational attainment all contribute to inequality in society. We need to take concerted action to address those issues effectively. The member said that she had visited a food bank in her region. I have done the same in my constituency. The number 1 reason for individuals having to make use of a food bank in Falkirk, in my constituency, is delays in welfare payments due to the welfare system reforms that are taking place. I believe that the most effective way in which we can deal with such issues is to ensure that this Parliament has the powers to manage the welfare system here in Scotland so that we can tackle the root causes of people being forced to use food banks, rather than use food banks to mitigate the impact of the welfare system being ripped apart by the member’s colleagues in the better together campaign.

I am sure that it is not lost on the member that there is a direct correlation between the increasing number of food banks in the country and the welfare changes that his Government at Westminster are introducing, which are causing real difficulties and crisis for many individuals throughout the country. I am sure that he is no different from me and other members, who, on a weekly basis, see constituents at their surgeries who are having difficulties with the changes to the welfare system and experiencing delays in payments being made to them, which is forcing them to get food from food banks. Food poverty is on the increase in this country, not because of the inaction of the Scottish Government but because of the action of the UK Government and the direct impact that the introduction of welfare changes is having on people. I hope that the member will acknowledge that, although we will do everything that we can within our powers, in order to deal with the situation effectively we need full control of our welfare system so that we can effect the change that is more appropriate for the people of Scotland.

Health visitors play a vital role in contributing to the health and wellbeing of children, young people and families through their focus on early intervention, prevention and provision of universal services. With other members of the multi-agency team, health visitors help to ensure that the wellbeing of every child is at the heart of our public services and that families get the support that they need when they need it.

The financial considerations around the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill are in the financial memorandum that sits alongside the bill. The memorandum has already been set out by the Minister for Children and Young People, Aileen Campbell, who is responsible for the bill. Health visitors clearly have an important role to play for those aged zero to five, as part of the named person provisions in the bill. Since 2007, we have increased the number of health visitors in Scotland by some 13 per cent, along with a 77 per cent increase in the number of public health nurses. We intend to work closely with our boards to ensure that they have the capacity in place to allow health visitors, who will be responsible as named individuals, to carry out that role effectively. We expect our boards to put plans in place to ensure that they do that in time for the bill coming into force.

It is important to see health visitors as part of that multidisciplinary team, including the general practitioner, the public health nurses and other health professionals who are engaged in working with children, young people and families. It is important that we continue to improve the education provision for health visitors. NHS Education for Scotland is already undertaking work to consider how we can do that to allow health visitors to continue to progress in their careers. Health visitors are a key part of the multidisciplinary team, working with general practitioners, social workers and teachers to ensure that we meet the needs of children and young people effectively.

Figures on the cost of overseas visitors and temporary migrants accessing NHS healthcare in Scotland are not held centrally. Overseas visitors are managed effectively in Scotland through a combination of regulations and Scottish Government guidance for NHS boards.

It is important to recognise the report that was produced on the NHS in England, but the number of migrants and so on in England is different from that in Scotland. We view migrants as an important part of the Scottish economy. They are provided with healthcare in the same way as other individuals in Scotland are. We have robust mechanisms in place for those who are not from Scotland and who require to pay for NHS treatment. That system is managed effectively by our boards. The figure that Alex Johnstone referred to is probably pretty excessive. There is no evidence whatever of such a level of expenditure in Scotland and no indication from any of our boards of difficulties that have resulted from the number of migrants who use healthcare services. It is important to treat people equally and fairly while they are in Scotland. We should not try to use our healthcare system to manage immigration and migration.

Our “Better heart disease and stroke care action plan” is backed by more than £1 million of Scottish Government funding each year. It is aimed at ensuring that people with stroke are able to access effective, safe and person-centred care as quickly as possible. The priorities that the action plan sets out are monitored and updated annually and approved by the national advisory committee on stroke.

I know that there has been an issue with access to psychological therapies for patients who have experienced a stroke. As part of our wider mental health strategy, we have increased the availability of psychological therapies. That is why there has been an increase in the number of psychologists and in other therapies being made available in the NHS. We want to continue to increase capacity, and we have introduced a HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target for access to psychological therapies to ensure that boards are more consistent in making those services available. The HEAT target will come into force at the end of 2014 and it will ensure that all boards put in place the necessary measures to make psychologists and other talking therapies available in their area, including for patients who suffer stroke.

There is no doubt that having one’s blood pressure checked regularly is an important element in helping to reduce the likelihood of experiencing a stroke. I am aware that in January 2014 the Stroke Association will run a “Know your blood pressure” campaign, which we are more than happy to support and which will be taken into community pharmacies in order to encourage people to get their blood pressure taken. Alongside that, the general practitioner contract continues to contain provisions to ensure that GPs take the blood pressure of the patients who are at greatest risk of heart disease, stroke and hypertension. Within the workplace, through the Scottish centre for healthy working lives we are taking forward work to assist employers and workplaces in general to help to promote good health and wellbeing among the workforce. The centre will support companies and individuals on issues such as providing blood pressure checks for the workforce on a regular basis.

I have listened with real interest to many of the contributions in this debate. Duncan McNeil invited us to make a good start to debating these issues by agreeing on the definition of person-centred care. Obviously, we have set out in our strategy what we believe the definition is. We have explored issues around person-centred care. If there is anything on which we can agree, it is that there is more on the agenda about how we should progress person-centred care that we agree on than divides us. All members also recognise that the status quo is not an option. The environment in which we have to make the change makes it more challenging, but we all recognise that, even if we were in the land of milk and honey, there would have to be changes in the way in which we deliver services. As the cabinet secretary set out in his opening speech, the change must take place against the backdrop of the three big challenges that we face in our health and social care system. The first is the financial challenge that has been forced on us by the current situation, meaning that changes must be managed within the available financial envelope. The second challenge is the inequality that continues to exist in society—and Scotland’s health inequalities are marked. Historically, we have tried to identify a health service solution to address health inequalities, but the reality is that health inequalities are symptoms of wider inequalities in society—inequalities in income, social opportunity, education and attainment. If we are to tackle health inequalities, we must address their root causes much more effectively and we need a system that is able to do that in a combined way and systematically over a period of time. The third challenge that the cabinet secretary set out is the demographic shift that is taking place in our country and in most others throughout the world. Given the challenges that are being created by people living longer with different health conditions, we must ensure that our health and social care system is configured so that we can meet people’s care needs in a person-centred way and support individuals to live long, healthy lives in their own homes or in a homely setting. Health debates often focus largely on the acute secondary care setting, and the brickbat goes between what should happen in different departments in the acute sector. We brought this debate on primary care to the chamber specifically in order to focus on the sector in a way that we often do not in debates on our healthcare system. The primary care system is an important part of the overall system, sitting between secondary care and the social care system, and we must integrate it in the most effective way in order to provide person-centred care to individual patients. We all recognise—as Duncan McNeil did in his speech—that patients increasingly expect to receive their care in that way. Like everybody else, I recognise that the delivery of person-centred care will not happen at the drop of a hat and on the back of a single strategy that says that that is what we want to do. There are challenges in taking it forward because of the way in which the system is configured. There are also interprofessional challenges and cultural shifts that must take place if we are to do it, although I do not think that any of those is insurmountable. We must be committed and recognise not only the vision that we have set for our health and social care system, but the measures that we must take to achieve that vision. Several members, including Neil Findlay, have referred to individual cases. Like other members, I get constituents at my surgeries who are dissatisfied with the way in which the NHS has performed. I have witnessed the NHS not getting it right, but I know that our NHS gets it right more than it gets it wrong, and we should always keep that in mind when we discuss such issues. We should not use individual examples to suggest that the whole system is, in some way, falling apart or not working effectively. That does a disservice to the thousands of staff in our NHS who are dedicated to their jobs and work day in, day out to deliver the best possible care for patients—for which we, as a country, are grateful.

That was an extremely helpful comment. Mr Findlay gives the impression that the cabinet secretary and I live in an ivory tower and think that everything is perfect. We have brought forward a debate on how we can improve the system, because we know that it is not good enough. No one is trying to skate over the fact that there are problems in the system, or to kid on that there are not, but we must be realistic about how we go about dealing with those challenges, instead of just making throwaway comments that do not contribute to the debate about how we can improve the system overall. In addressing such issues, it is key that we learn from the mistakes that are made in the system when we get things wrong. When the NHS does not work as well as it could, we must learn from that. As Malcolm Chisholm and Jamie Hepburn said, we need to ensure that we listen to the patient experience and that we build on that by ensuring that we do not make those errors again in the future.

I would like to make progress on my point. Despite the fact that patient satisfaction levels in Scotland have improved and continue to be at a very high level, we are in no way complacent. I want our health service to get it 100 per cent right every time for every patient but, like Mark McDonald, I recognise that sometimes that will not happen. We need to ensure that we learn from the experience of things going wrong and that we use it to ensure that it does not happen again.

I will come on to the issue of accident and emergency departments, given that it was raised in the course of the debate. As soon as the winter period is over, our NHS boards begin to plan for the following winter. In doing so, they learn from previous years’ experience. It is good to see Richard Simpson back in the chamber, because he always makes a substantial contribution to health debates and is duly respected for that. He made a point about learning from the complaints process and the patient experience process that are taking place as a result of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Act 2011. I can announce that I have asked the Scottish health council to do an analysis of the first round of reports from all our NHS boards, which were produced in September of this year as part of the feedback and complaints process, and for that analysis to be completed by the spring of next year so that we can see the areas of good practice, where there is learning that can be built on. That will enable us to use that information much more effectively across all our boards. I have no doubt that Richard Simpson will look forward to the Scottish health council publishing that report in the spring. I turn to the issue of accident and emergency departments. The pressures that A and E departments in Scotland faced last winter were no different from those that were faced across the rest of the UK. There are a variety of reasons for that. As Jackson Carlaw highlighted, rather than make use of primary care services, some individuals have a tendency to go straight to the A and E department. The weather and flu can affect demand, which can have an impact on the system. Rhoda Grant asked whether we had learned from last year’s experience. One of the things that we have done since last winter is provide £50 million for an unscheduled care programme. All our boards have been commissioned to take forward a localised unscheduled care plan programme to look at what they need in the way of staffing and other resources to assist them in ensuring that they can meet the demands that they will undoubtedly face this winter. In doing that, they have made significant progress. Jim Hume raised questions about the recruitment of staff. So far, 18 A and E consultants and 39 nurses have been recruited. The extra recruitment for this year alone must be considered in the context of what has happened over recent years. Since 2006, the number of A and E consultants in our health service has increased by more than 100 per cent—we have doubled their number. Through the additional 18 consultants that we are paying for this year, we will take the increase since 2006 up to almost 110 per cent. That demonstrates the level of resource that we are putting in to support our A and E departments to meet the demands that they will face this winter much more effectively. When Margaret McCulloch talked about the challenges that our A and E departments face, including in Lanarkshire, she seemed to forget that it was not the Scottish National Party Government that proposed closing the Monklands A and E department but the last Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration that proposed to do so. She might be interested to know that up until June this year, the Monklands A and E department had dealt with 67,000 attendees. Members can imagine the state that we would be in if we had listened to the last Labour-Lib Dem Administration and closed that department, because the pressure would be even greater on A and E departments across the country. That is an example of the type of practical measure that we have taken to try to address issues. The Government is very much committed to ensuring that we build on the good progress that we have made over the past six years in our NHS. We are happy to accept the two amendments to the motion that have been lodged. I give members a clear guarantee that we will protect the NHS and do all that we can to support our NHS boards and our partners over the winter to ensure that they meet patients’ needs in Scotland during the winter months.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that all communities in Scotland receive high-quality and sustainable healthcare services. National health service boards have a statutory obligation to provide—and are accountable for—those services that they consider necessary to meet all reasonable requirements for their areas. There is no one-size-fits-all approach to service provision and health boards are expected to design and put in place those service models that best reflect local community circumstances. All NHS boards’ service provision, whether in rural or urban areas, should match the aims and ambitions of the healthcare quality strategy and make measurable progress towards the 2020 vision.

I am aware that NHS Tayside is considering services in the area. The board has confirmed that no decision has been taken regarding the future of Little Cairnie hospital. However, it has identified an opportunity to make further service improvements in south Angus in the fields of palliative and cancer care. It has had early discussions with Macmillan Cancer Support on a proposal to introduce three palliative care in-patient suites in Arbroath, with an adjacent day assessment and treatment facility, which would significantly improve the range of assessment and diagnostic and treatment options that are available in south Angus. Alongside that, the board is looking at how it can develop treatment services in conjunction with Ninewells hospital’s oncology service, which would also help to enhance services locally. NHS Tayside is clear that any changes to services must be made in conjunction with the local community, and with good local engagement with the community. I expect the board to act in that way in its consideration of Little Cairnie’s future.

The Public Audit Committee is due to consider the Audit Scotland report “NHS financial performance 2012-13” at its meeting on 6 November 2013. At the meeting, the Auditor General for Scotland will give evidence on the report and then the committee will consider what action, if any, is required. Following the committee’s deliberations, the Scottish Government will respond formally to the report.

I am sure that the member will welcome the fact that for the fifth year in a row all our NHS boards in Scotland have reached a break-even position and have been able to manage their budgets effectively, and that includes NHS Fife. The NRAC formula has been in place for several years now and we are moving towards a level of parity across all the boards, but it has to be done in a way that does not financially disadvantage some of the other boards at the present point. That process will continue over the next couple of years to ensure that we have parity across all the NHS territorial boards.

We work with all boards to help to ensure that they can reach break-even positions within their budgets. As the member will be aware, we have kept to our manifesto commitment to pass on all the Barnett consequentials for the health budget to our territorial boards where that has been possible. It is also worth noting that in the draft budget for 2014-15, NHS territorial boards will receive an allocated increase of 3.1 per cent in 2014-15 and 2.7 per cent in 2015-16, which represents a real-terms increase that will be allocated directly towards protecting front-line services.

Telecare can and does support more people to live independently at home and in their community. We are keen to promote that message during the first Scottish telehealth and telecare week, which we are in the middle of. However, I recognise that more can be done to develop telecare, and to help to drive it forward the Scottish Government, along with NHS Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, published “A National Telehealth and Telecare Delivery Plan for Scotland to 2015: Driving Improvement, Integration and Innovation”, which set out our ambitions for the growth of telecare services across Scotland. That included work with Scotland Excel on a procurement framework for telecare. With the involvement of all 32 local authorities and a number of housing associations, that has ensured that the latest technology is available at the lowest possible price across the country.

The strategy that I mentioned is exactly the way in which we intend to take this forward with our partners in local government and the health service. It is important that telehealth and telecare are not looked upon as an alternative to care, because they are there to help to support other forms of care including services such as meals on wheels and home care. The approach that we are taking is to take telehealth and telecare forward on an incremental basis so that we can ensure that we get real benefits for both the individuals who use the service and the service providers. The strategy is set out in a way that helps us to make sure that we achieve that across the country with all the partners who can assist us in delivering on it.

Like others, I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on securing time for this debate. I thank all the members who have spoken for their speeches, which I listened to closely. I am sure that all members recognise that having a child or family member with a disability can be hugely challenging for parents and carers and the family as a whole, and the work that the Scottish Spina Bifida Association does is essential in supporting families with children who have spina bifida. The presentation last night by the parents of Ella, a 10-year-old child who came along, clearly demonstrated some of the challenges that they have faced and also some of the ways in which they have been assisted by the Scottish Spina Bifida Association. However, no one could be left in any doubt that, when it comes to having a discussion on spina bifida or any other issue, Ella would have the last word. She is clearly a very inspiring young 10-year-old. I am sure that members will note with concern that some 52 per cent of women in Scotland are not aware of how they could prevent spina bifida and other neural tube defects. The Scottish Spina Bifida Association’s national folic acid awareness campaign—are you getting enough?—is an important part of its work. It aims to encourage a greater number of women across Scotland to learn about the importance of taking folic acid prior to and during the early stages of their pregnancy. It is known that not having enough folic acid during pregnancy is the most significant risk factor for spina bifida. As a Government, we are clearly committed to improving the health and wellbeing of the Scottish population as a whole and ensuring that children get the best possible start in life. That is why we published “Improving Maternal and Infant Nutrition: A Framework for Action” back in January 2011. That framework for action is to be implemented by health boards, local authorities and others, with the aim of improving the nutrition of pregnant women, babies and young children. It is the first framework of its type that looks at the nutrition of mothers before and during pregnancy. During pregnancy, there is an increased demand for several key nutrients such as vitamin D and folate. The increased demand for vitamin D and folate cannot be met from food sources alone, which is why it is recommended that all pregnant women take a daily supplement of each in addition to increasing their dietary intake. As Malcolm Chisholm said in his speech, the Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition recommends that, before conception and until the 12th week of pregnancy, women should take a folic acid supplement of 400 micrograms per day to reduce the risk of having an infant with a neural tube defect. In addition, women are advised to eat foods that are rich in folate and folic acid to increase their nutrient intake to 300 micrograms per day for the duration of their pregnancy. Some of the recipe ideas that Stewart Stevenson offered are a good example of how women can do that. NHS Health Scotland has launched an updated leaflet with information on folic acid before and during pregnancy. The leaflet, which is free and widely available, provides basic information on folate from foods, folic acid supplements and fortified food products, and recommendations on intake for women before pregnancy and up to their 12th week of pregnancy. Its recommendations are in line with the SACN recommendations, and advice is also available to professionals on the advice that they should provide on folic acid to ensure that all health professionals see themselves as having a role in promoting folic acid supplements. Through implementation plans provided by our NHS boards, we are aware of the specific work that the boards are undertaking to raise awareness of folic acid supplementation before and during pregnancy that is mainly targeted at particular groups such as those who have had pregnancy loss or are at high risk and attend pre-conception clinics. In Scotland, women and babies who are at the greatest risk of poor health outcomes are the least likely to access and/or benefit from the antenatal health care that they need. That can significantly hamper the contribution that maternity care services can make to improving health and reducing health inequalities. We know that just having access to antenatal care is insufficient; it needs to be accompanied by a focus on the continuous and effective assessment of health and social need to identify any prevention and early intervention actions that are needed before babies are born and in the early days of their lives. We need to know what to do more effectively, and maternity care staff need to work in partnership with each other and with women and their families to address the issues effectively. That is why NHS boards have an antenatal access health improvement, efficiency, access to services and treatment target, which means that at least 80 per cent of pregnant women in each of the lower quintiles will be booked into antenatal care by the 12th week of gestation by March 2015. That will ensure improvements in this area. A number of members referred to the fortification of flour and products made from flour, and the chief medical officer, the Food Standards Agency in Scotland, I, and the Scottish Government as a whole, are clear that the fortification of bread or flour with folic acid is an important way of increasing the folic acid intake of women who might become pregnant. I am also clear that it would be an effective way of reaching sections of the population with the lowest folate intakes. We are working with our colleagues in other parts of the United Kingdom to develop a UK-wide approach to mandatory fortification and we are actively considering the mandatory fortification of flour with folic acid with our partners in other parts of the UK. I have requested further advice from the Food Standards Agency in Scotland on this matter and I expect it to provide updated information early in the new year. We as a Government very much welcome the Scottish Spina Bifida Association’s national folic acid awareness campaign, which is very much in line with the advice that we provide. I wish it well with the campaign and it can be assured that we as a Government will continue to look at what measures can be taken to reduce the incidence of neural tube defects in Scotland, including the possibility of taking forward mandatory fortification of flour and bread with folic acid. 13:15 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Like others, I congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing time for the debate and bringing to the Parliament’s attention the important work that the Teenage Cancer Trust undertakes daily. I thank the trust for the tremendous amount of work that it does over the year and particularly for its close working with our detect cancer early team, to which some members have referred. I recognise that the fear of being diagnosed with cancer is still one of the biggest imaginable, particularly for children and young people. A diagnosis of cancer often proves traumatic not only for the affected individual but for their family. Thankfully, the number of children and young people in Scotland who are diagnosed with cancer every year is relatively small. However, when they are diagnosed, that can have a significant impact on their life, particularly as they might be at a stage when they are finding themselves and at a key point in their education—that can have a lasting impact. It is therefore important that all our services are able to work collectively in order not only to treat an individual as effectively as they can clinically, but to look at the holistic picture around how they can provide them with support and assistance in education and in other areas. It may be helpful if I set out for members how we provide children and young people’s cancer services in Scotland. They are largely taken forward through our managed service network, which Malcolm Chisholm referred to. The managed service network was established in 2011 and it is there to help to ensure that we have sustainable services across Scotland for young people up to the age of 15. I note Malcolm Chisholm’s concerns about the fact that some of the areas of progress that were set out in the action plan have not been achieved as yet. However, the action plan does run up until 2015 and there is an annual report that sets out the progress that has been made and also identifies what future action has to be taken in order to ensure that we maintain progress in this area. I hope that Malcolm Chisholm will be reassured that there is certainly more that we can do in this area and the managed service network is determined to do so. It is also worth noting that the managed service network works closely with the professionals who work in this field and with third sector colleagues, and has had very helpful contributions from organisations such as the Teenage Cancer Trust. Most important, it also has input from children and young people and their families. I recognise that the members of the managed service network have taken forward an outstanding level of work to date and they are starting to make a change in how services are delivered. I have no doubt that they will wish to continue with that work between now and 2015. We have heard about the numbers of young people who can be diagnosed with cancer—about 170 teenagers and young adults aged between 15 and 24 are diagnosed with cancer each year in Scotland. Very often, the signs of cancer in young people—as some members have mentioned—can easily be dismissed. They can also be misdiagnosed, because they are very similar to signs of other issues that may be less harmful and are confused with those issues. Amy Quinn set out powerfully in her letter the challenges that some young people can face in being able to get their condition appropriately diagnosed and then treated. That demonstrates the need for further work in this area, in particular with our colleagues in primary care—who may be that first port of call—to enable them to recognise the issue more quickly. Part of the issue is to do with the cultural aspect that cancer is often associated with older individuals and not often with young people. However, the earlier a diagnosis is undertaken, the better. That is why I believe that GPs have an important part to play and part of the work that we need to do is about how to improve understanding and communication within a primary care setting—in particular with our general practitioners. Of course, I recognise that everyone would be naturally apprehensive about being checked for cancer but, as we recognise, early detection of cancer improves the chances of a positive outcome for treatment. Cancer remains a clear priority for us as a Government, as we acknowledge that we are behind other parts of Europe on cancer survival rates and, with an ageing population, we can all anticipate that there will be an increasing incidence of cancer in future years. The detect cancer early programme is important in order to help improve outcomes for patients. That leads me on to the education programme that the Teenage Cancer Trust has been involved in. If we educate young people at an early stage about their health, the risks of certain conditions, symptoms and so on—as several members have mentioned—that education can live with them for the rest of their lives and it can help to ensure that they take appropriate action at an early stage should they exhibit any of those symptoms. Equally, young people who have been through such an education programme can assist in giving a gentle nudge to a family member who may be exhibiting symptoms of cancer to take medical advice at an early enough stage. The Teenage Cancer Trust’s work in helping to educate young people in our schools—Aileen McLeod referred to a programme the trust is running in Glasgow—can help to make a real difference to the understanding of those young individuals about both the potential symptoms of cancer and the lifestyle risk factors that can contribute to cancer, which may be extremely important for them in later life, if not when they are teenagers. We will watch with real interest to see how that programme develops. Such work can also complement our detect cancer early programme, which works with adults, by encouraging the young people, as I said, to give that gentle nudge to a parent or family member to take early action if they seem to be exhibiting symptoms. I am conscious that Ken Macintosh raised an issue about the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. I will ask my colleague who is leading on that bill whether measures could be taken to assist in strengthening hospital education provision in order to achieve greater consistency. In drawing my remarks to a close, I offer my sincere thanks for the tremendous work that is done by the Teenage Cancer Trust. In particular, I thank Amy Callaghan for attending the debate along with her colleagues from the Teenage Cancer Trust. I also thank Amy Quinn for the moving letter that she wrote to all MSPs, in which she set out issues that still need to be addressed to improve the way in which we support young people who may have cancer. Meeting closed at 18:01.

The new learning disabilities strategy, “The keys to life: Improving quality of life for people with learning disabilities”, was published in June of this year. It is the second national learning disabilities strategy for Scotland, and we are the first part of the United Kingdom to produce a second strategy of that nature. As a nation, we can be proud of some of the changes that we have brought about in the quality of life for people with learning disabilities since “The same as you? A review of services for people with learning disabilities”, our original learning disability policy, was published in 2000. It was highly successful in shifting the balance of care to support more people to live in their community, and it led to the historic closure of more 1,000 long-stay hospital beds that many people called home for decades. It also led to improved day opportunities and created employment and meaningful activities for those with a learning disability. The human rights of people with learning disabilities are at the heart of the keys to life strategy. I believe that everyone should have those rights and freedoms and that our statutory agencies should be transparent in demonstrating how they respect and uphold human rights in all their policies and practices. People with learning disabilities need information so that they know what their human rights are. Since “The same as you?”, people with learning disabilities tell us that they are generally more accepted and valued in their communities than they were before and that, rightly, they are seen as people who can contribute to Scottish society in very positive ways. However, to be truly accepted in society means being treated equally and fairly in other ways. It means having a health service that is committed to changing the fact that people with a learning disability can still die 20 years earlier than the general population—that is simply unacceptable. Their lives and life choices matter as much as those of any other citizen. We must make addressing the stark health inequalities faced by people with learning disabilities a national priority. Much of the emphasis in the 10-year keys to life strategy is on health issues so that we make the required change. It is about improving health practice and outcomes so that people’s human rights are respected and upheld. In my view, if we do not achieve that shift, we will have failed as a society to ensure that people with learning disabilities enjoy the same rights as everyone else. We all want people with learning disabilities to be healthier generally. For that to happen, those who work in healthcare need to better understand the health needs of people with learning disabilities. We also want all health professionals—not just those who work in specialist learning disability posts—to know how the health needs of people with learning disabilities can differ from those of the general population. We already know a lot about the health needs of people with learning disabilities. For around four years, the Scottish Government has led a national learning disability health inequalities network, which consists of senior health professionals who come together to identify ways in which we can tackle those stark health inequalities more effectively. Through their work, they have developed projects that are about self-care, prevention, awareness raising and training. For example, the take 5 programme in Glasgow is an effective way for adults with learning disabilities to lose weight by having a personalised diet and by increasing exercise. Another good example is the NHS Western Isles learning disabilities collaborative, which has an electronic health assessment that is linked to general practitioner health records so that individuals get regular health screening. However, I want to build on the progress that has been made in recent years, which is why I have commissioned the Scottish learning disabilities observatory to provide us with the evidence and data that are required if we are not only to take action on the basis of improved understanding, but to demonstrate clearly improvements from those actions. To assist us with that, I intend to develop a health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment target to capture the evidence and data that will help to support the transition. The observatory is also committed to help us to better address the causes of unnecessary deaths of people with learning disabilities. That work will help to inform the interventions that we need to take forward in the years to come to address the issue. The role of primary care is integral to our success, which is why an early task will be to explore how the GP contract in Scotland can best meet the needs of people with learning disabilities. That work will include an exploration of the possibility of the reintroduction of an enhanced service. Another aspect of the primary care role will ultimately be to develop annual reporting of trends in the management of long-term conditions of those with learning disabilities. I recognise that having to go to hospital or attend another healthcare setting can be an anxious time for anyone—often more so for people with learning disabilities. Small things matter, such as having both the emergency care summary and the key information summary to meet the information needs of people with learning disabilities who access healthcare services. It is essential that services work together to make sure that people with learning disabilities get the right level of support when they are in hospital and have access to the right medical services. Most important, people with learning disabilities should get the same treatment as the general population. People with profound and multiple learning disabilities face particular challenges in their daily lives. They need simple things such as appropriate toilet facilities. It is simply unacceptable for families to have to change their daughters or sons on toilet floors. That is undignified and unhygienic, and it involves heavy lifting by the carers, which has the potential to cause serious damage to their health. Sometimes families opt to stay at home, with increased isolation and a lack of stimulation as results. That is why one recommendation in the new strategy is to extend the number of changing places toilets in Scotland, which are designed to allow access for all. I thank the Profound and Multiple Impairment Service—PAMIS—for the tremendous amount of work that it has done over the years in the area and the work that it intends to do in assisting us to address the issue in the future. A challenge for others, and one that I am committed to addressing, is the fact that some parents and carers of people with complex needs have to visit their children in facilities outwith Scotland. I appreciate how difficult it must be for them to maintain regular contact and I recognise that it can be upsetting and distressing for them and their children. Everyone deserves to live near family and friends. That is why we have established a group to look at how we can better deliver services for people with complex care needs more locally, here in Scotland. In other words, where we can, we will bring people much closer to their own home to meet their care needs. Underpinning all that activity is the need to ensure that people with learning disabilities and their families know what is available to them. Alongside that, it is important that they are confident that the support that is available to them is of a high quality. We already have learning disability quality indicators, and a review of general health services and specialised learning disability health services will help us to ensure that NHS Scotland is fully compliant with the quality indicators that we have laid down. On-going objective scrutiny of progress in the area is key to success in making further progress, which is why I have asked the Care Inspectorate and Healthcare Improvement Scotland to ensure that strategic commissioning—both process and implementation—are examined as part of their overall inspection of services for people with learning disabilities. So far, I have concentrated on the anticipated positive changes in health, but life is about much more than that. At the heart of the keys to life strategy is the principle that individuals should have greater choice and control over their lives. The same principle is central to the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013, which will come into force next year. However, the new legislation is more than just the act itself. We need to challenge our local authorities to meet the aspirations that are set out in the 2013 act and the strategy. We need to support professionals to engage with self-directed support as part of their core practice, and we need to ensure that we provide clear and unambiguous guidance to emphasise that support is about a whole variety of lifestyle issues and that we reform the commissioning processes that our local authorities use. At a very basic level, we need to tackle the lack of awareness of the options that are available to people under the new legislation. The benefits of the self-directed support legislation are very clear, and councils and providers have an important role to play in ensuring that the legislation is effectively taken forward. “The same as you?” encouraged local authorities to review their day care services, and we have seen considerable change in the way in which those services have been delivered in the past 13 years. A range of models is now in place across Scotland. Some of those models involve little or no contact with day centres; others involve a balance of centre-based and community-based activities. However, I am aware that, for many people, day centres will still play an important part in their support arrangements, especially people who have more complex needs and people with profound and multiple learning disabilities. It is still essential that services and staff continue to develop personalised care approaches that enable people to make choices and follow activities that are meaningful to them, including the choice of being able to use a day care facility. I know that living an independent life is important to people with learning disabilities. That means having the same choice and control in their lives that others have.

The member has raised a very important point. I am aware of those concerns. I was going to touch on the transition between services, particularly for those who receive care through education services and are moving into adulthood, and how we can improve that transition. A key part of that is ensuring that we translate the getting it right for every child principles much more effectively into managing the transition from children’s and young people’s services into adult services. The issue that the member raised can best be addressed through, for example, the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which is a mechanism that will allow us to ensure that we take a much more targeted approach and have a range of services in place to support young people and their families to make informed choices. We can therefore ensure that parents who feel that the system currently works against them will feel that it works more in their interests and in those of the young person so that they can make the right choice. On transitions, I recognise that many people with learning disabilities need additional support when they leave school if they are to have meaningful education and employment. So that there is a smoother and clearer pathway into education and employment, “The keys to life” makes specific recommendations on how local authorities, further education, Skills Development Scotland and the transition forum can work more closely together to ensure that the GIRFEC framework better prepares young people with learning disabilities when they leave school. We also need to ensure that young people get access to accessible information to support them to understand all the options that are open to them and are able to make the right choices from those that are available to them. There is an expectation that personal life plans will be an integral part of the commissioning plans, to inform the high-quality services that we expect to be provided to support individuals to achieve better outcomes for themselves. Getting people into employment is a national priority. We know that most people with learning disabilities want to work in paid employment, so we need to provide them with more training and education. The Scottish consortium for learning disability will work with Scotland’s Colleges and Skills Development Scotland to ensure that that happens. In addition, the national implementation group will work with local authorities, the national health service and the third sector to open up employment opportunities within those agencies for people with learning disabilities. I am conscious that we have made significant progress in recent years by improving the way in which services are provided for those with a learning disability and by improving their life chances. However, there is still much to be done, and I commend the new strategy to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the new learning disability strategy, The keys to life, which was launched on 13 June 2013 in partnership with COSLA; notes that the strategy highlights the health inequalities and barriers to social inclusion for people with learning disabilities but recognises that they are generally much more accepted and valued in their communities than they ever were before, and considers that Scotland can be proud of some of the changes in the quality of life for people with learning disabilities but accepts that there is still much to do.

I thank all members for their speeches in what has been a useful debate. The Parliament has debated issues around learning disability fairly regularly, but this has been our first opportunity to debate the new strategy, which is the first of its type in more than 10 years. I recognise that there is always a hefty degree of scepticism about whether strategies make a real difference to people’s lives. Having a healthy degree of scepticism about the benefit of strategies is a good thing. I have a healthy degree of scepticism about strategies. However, in saying that, I assure members that when I bring forward a strategy, I am determined to do everything in my power to ensure that it does what Neil Bibby believes it has to do, which is make a difference to people’s lives. As Jim Eadie said, no party has a monopoly on the issues around learning disability. A number of members have referred to the continual decline in the number of long-stay beds for those with learning disabilities. That did not start with the strategy in “The same as you?”; it started back in the early 1990s under a Conservative Government, when we started to close institutions such as the Royal Scottish National hospital, in which my clients were often based. The process has built up over a 20 to 30-year period. If I have a criticism of what happened then, it is that there was a lack of a community strategy to provide the right kind of support. “The same as you?” came along and helped to provide the cohesive strategy that was necessary to build on the progress that had been made with the closure of long-stay hospitals. The key aspect of the new strategy is that, rather than claiming to be better than the previous one, it builds on the progress that has been made. Neil Bibby expressed a degree of scepticism about whether “The keys to life” was as ambitious as “The same as you?”, but it would be fair to say that “The same as you?” was taken forward by this Government for a significant period, so there is no lack of determination on our part to do everything that we can to ensure that the new strategy can make a real difference to people’s lives. I understand that that is not something that can be achieved by Government on its own, just as the new strategy was not drafted by the Government on its own—there was input to its content from a range of stakeholders. We took on board what they thought a new strategy should look like, and we developed it in partnership with COSLA, in recognition of the fact that local authorities have a lead role in delivering a range of services to support people with a learning disability and their carers.

I will give way once I have finished my point. It is important to recognise that the Government will not achieve everything that is set out in the strategy by itself. The strategy will have to be delivered in partnership with a range of stakeholders: the NHS, local authorities and, importantly, the third sector, the role of which Malcolm Chisholm highlighted. I believe that the third sector has an extremely important role in delivering a range of recommendations that are contained in the strategy. That partnership helped to frame the strategy, as was the case with previous strategies, and it will be key to ensuring that, in 10 years’ time, we will be able, in reviewing the strategy, to recognise that it has built on the progress that was made through “The same as you?” and has made a real difference to people’s lives. We need to ensure that we take forward the strategy in a way that does that.

I completely agree with that. When we talk about some aspects of health or social care policy, there is a danger that the discussion becomes too process driven, to the extent that the patient or the individual comes second to the process itself. The key is that the strategy does the kind of thing that Dennis Robertson mentioned in his speech. He said that it needs to ensure that we treat those who have a learning disability with dignity, equality and—importantly—respect. The strategy can help us to achieve that. I want to pick up on a few of the themes that have emerged during the debate. There has been a bit of ping-pong on the issue of education and access to college courses. Joan McAlpine, Jim Eadie, Neil Bibby, Jackie Baillie and Stewart Maxwell all mentioned the approach that the Government is taking. It is extremely important that those with a learning disability who access education services, whether in school or in college, do so for a purpose. Particularly in the case of college, it is important that people are not parked on courses just for the sake of doing a course. The course that someone takes should lead to a positive outcome for that individual. That is extremely important, because I know that in the past there has been a tendency for individuals with a learning disability to be parked on a college course so that it appears that they are doing something worth while, but the outcome is that it changes nothing in their life. Therefore, one of our approaches is to ensure that colleges and the rest of the sector work more effectively to identify the right types of opportunity for those with a learning disability—ones that provide a more positive outcome and destination for them so that they do not go from one college course to another because that appears to be what they are interested in doing. One of the ways in which we can ensure that we build on that approach is to increase employment opportunities for those with a learning disability. I acknowledge that addressing that issue is a very significant challenge; Jackie Baillie referred to the statistics in her speech. However, we are providing funding to the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability for project search, which is a one-year programme of supported work experience for individuals that guarantees them an interview at the end of the programme with a view to going on to employment. Six pilots are operating across the country to evaluate how effectively the model can be delivered in partnership with the third sector. It will be key to learn from that partnership and ensure that we can scale it up on a more consistent basis. If I recall correctly, it was Rhoda Grant who suggested in her speech that, when creating employment opportunities for those with a learning disability, Government and public agencies should lead by example. The strategy sets that out in recommendation 14. Our education bodies, local authorities, health boards and Government can all play a part in creating opportunities for individuals to get into employment. In doing that, we can ensure that we get a better link between education and getting into employment.

The danger here is that we lose focus on improving the outcomes for those with a learning disability when they go into education provision and then look to move on to employment. That aspect has been lacking in the past and that is what the strategy sets out to address. The other key theme that was highlighted by a number of those speaking in the debate is health inequalities. As a country, we face stark health inequalities in our society. However, the fact that they are exacerbated for those who have a learning disability is simply unacceptable. I said in my opening speech that we have identified the marked health inequality of the life expectancy of people with a learning disability being 20 years less than that of the general population, which is just not tolerable in a modern society. However, having identified that inequality, we must now ensure that we understand what its drivers are and what will work to address it. We are providing funding to the Scottish learning disabilities observatory to undertake detailed work to ensure that we understand those matters better and that we measure the approach that we take in order to assess whether it is closing the gap. We do not want to get into a process of “projectitis”, in which a project that is meant to deliver a reduction in inequalities does not in the end deliver what it was intended to. The observatory’s work will be crucial in ensuring that we deliver. We are also taking forward a HEAT target to ensure that all our health boards are under an obligation to collect the required information. Another key approach to closing down the gap for those with a learning disability is to ensure that our primary care is set up to provide the right type of support to those with a learning disability. Joan McAlpine said in her speech that we need to look at that aspect within the new GP contract. We have given a commitment to do that and assess how we can build on that to ensure that primary care provides the right type of support. A number of members referred to the importance of self-directed support and the real difference that it can make to an individual’s life by giving them the opportunity to control how their care is provided. I recognise the challenges for local authorities in that, particularly the challenge of the locus of control shifting from the professional to the individual. However, I believe that that is an important step in the direction that we must move in. How we treat the most vulnerable members of our community, which includes those with a learning disability, is a reflection of our society and its values. Significant progress has been made over the past couple of decades in ensuring that those with a learning disability in our society are treated with fairness, respect and equality. However, we clearly have to do much more. I believe that we have a strategy that will allow us to achieve that in the coming years.

As others have, I congratulate Gordon MacDonald on securing time for the debate, which brings to the chamber the important work of Al-Anon and the role that it plays in tacking alcohol misuse within our society. In his speech, Gordon MacDonald set out very well the valuable support that Al-Anon provides to anyone whose life is, or has been, affected by someone else’s drinking. It is just as important for those who are affected by someone else’s drinking to receive support, as it is for those who themselves are affected by problematic drinking. Al-Anon plays an invaluable role. We are already acutely aware of the damaging effects that excessive alcohol consumption has on individuals, families and communities. A number of members in their speeches referred to those damaging effects. Scotland’s drink problem is now significantly worse than that of the rest of the UK. We drink almost a fifth more than the English and Welsh, which fuels much higher levels of alcohol-related harm. The statistics are stark. Alcohol-related hospital discharges in Scotland have quadrupled since the early 1980s and Scotland has one of the fastest-growing chronic liver disease and cirrhosis rates in the world. This Government has, since 2008, made significant investment in local services to prevent the occurrence of alcohol-related problems and to provide treatment and support for those who already have a problem. We have long said that there is no single solution that will change Scotland’s relationship with alcohol. Our alcohol framework outlines a package of over 40 measures to tackle alcohol-related harm, including one that we believe is important: minimum unit pricing. In our framework, we also acknowledge families and communities as being one of the four areas for sustained action, alongside consumption reduction, the encouragement of more positive attitudes and positive choices, and improved treatment and support services across the country. What we also know, and what today’s debate has highlighted, is that it is not just those who drink too much who are affected; alcohol misuse impacts negatively on people around drinkers, including family, friends and communities. Alcohol misuse impacts on children who live with parents who have a drink problem; heavy drinking is a common factor in family break-ups. The impact of our excessive consumption of alcohol is estimated to cost Scots £3.6 billion each year, which breaks down as £900 for every adult. We need to understand better the full extent of alcohol–related harm in our communities in order to tackle a complex and, at times, ingrained problem. A new research study by Alcohol Focus Scotland seeks to investigate the harm that is caused by alcohol to people other than drinkers. The study started in September last year and will be published shortly. The Scottish Government has contributed grant funding to the overall costs. The study will provide us with a clearer insight into the true impact of overconsumption of alcohol on the wider community. I have no doubt that the information will reinforce the important work that is carried out by groups such as Al-Anon. We have taken a range of actions to provide support to others who are affected by alcohol misuse. Alcohol and drug partnerships were set up in 2009 and are responsible for developing local strategies to tackle problems such as alcohol and drug use, and to promote recovery. They also take into account the impact that problem alcohol and drug use has on families, and the need for related services to provide appropriate support.

A range of measures must be taken, and advertising is one of the key issues. There is a challenge around social media, because it is much harder to control them than the general media. It is clearly a growing area, however, and we are considering it as part of our alcohol policy. This year, the Scottish Government is providing more than £38 million to support our alcohol and drug partnerships in their work on alcohol. That is designed to ensure that people who want to take up early intervention treatment if they have an alcohol problem get timely and quick access to the support and treatment that they require. That is why I am particularly pleased that the target for drug and alcohol treatment was exceeded at national level, with 94.6 per cent of people waiting three weeks or less to receive appropriate treatment. A range of policy areas can impact directly on helping to support families and their children in addressing alcohol-misuse problems in their households. I would like to highlight the actions in our approach to children who are affected by parental substance misuse, which focuses on reducing impacts on children through prevention and early intervention, through strengthening support for families and through management of immediate risk. The Scottish Government recognises the on-going challenges that overconsumption of alcohol represents for Scottish society. As I mentioned earlier, there is no single solution to the problem. We need to take forward a range of measures, and Al-Anon plays an invaluable role in helping to support the families and individuals who are affected by someone’s misuse of alcohol. I wish it well in its on-going work, and I have no doubt that it will continue to provide important support to communities across the country. Meeting closed at 17:42.

Following a birth and for the first five years of a child’s life, all families receive universal services and contact from health visitors and/or the health visiting team. Contacts include child health reviews completed by health visitors or general practitioners and home visits by health visitors and/or a member of their team. Services include a number of home visits in the first year of a child’s life and a full family assessment and child development review at 27 to 30 months, which is undertaken by the health visitor.

Most members recognise that the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill provides us with a good opportunity to expand the range of ways in which we help to support and develop children and young people in Scotland. We are undertaking work at present to review the existing arrangements for health visitors and the number of health visitors that we have, including our public health nurses, to see how we can use them much more effectively. I do not doubt that health visitors have an important part to play. Since 2007, there has been a 13 per cent increase in the number of health visitors in Scotland. However, we see health visiting as a key part of ensuring that we continue to develop the range of services that our children and young people require, which is why we are reviewing current numbers to see how we can take that forward in future years.

We are already aware of the services that health visitors provide by the nature of their job. However, there is patchiness in how different boards operate their health visiting teams. Some of the work that we are doing with boards just now provides them with guidance on how they should take forward their home visiting programme so that we can get a greater consistency of approach across the country. Work on the guidance will continue over the next couple of months. Alongside that, the children, young people and families nursing advisory group is reviewing Scotland’s health visiting capacity overall to see how we must develop it in the future to ensure that we build on the progress that has been made since 2007, which has seen a 13 per cent increase in the number of health visitors in Scotland.

We have already set out the programme for the checks at 27 to 30 months, which has been done within the existing capacity of health visiting. However, as I mentioned in my previous answer, the children, young people and families nursing advisory group is reviewing Scotland’s capacity for health visiting to see where we might have to add to it in years to come in order to meet any growing demand that might arise.

We recognise the importance of the carer’s assessment in enabling local authorities and carers to jointly assess a carer’s need for services. Local authorities have a legal duty to notify carers who provide a substantial amount of care on a regular basis that they might be eligible for a carer’s assessment. An assessment must also be carried out at the request of the carer. Later this year, the Scottish Government will be publishing practice guidance on carrying out assessments. That will be widely available to local authorities and health boards.

A range of measures have been taken to help to support carers in Scotland. Our carers strategy and our young carers strategy were published in 2010 and run to 2015. We have also provided a range of different funding streams to support greater information for carers. For example, we have invested £13 million in the carers information strategy, which is being delivered by NHS boards. In the member’s region, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has received more than £1 million from that fund this financial year to help to provide further information. In the period 2010-15, we will invest some £70 million in other areas of support for carers. That aside, we have also been working with stakeholders on the provision of a range of short breaks for carers. Many of those things can be delivered only in part by Government. Local authorities have a key role in meeting the needs of carers, as do our health boards. Local authorities must recognise their important role in identifying carers and assessing them to deliver the services that they require. I call on local authorities throughout Scotland, including the one in Glasgow, to ensure that they provide the carer’s assessment to local residents.

As the member will be aware, I have set out the legal responsibility on local authorities to provide the carer’s assessment. Everyone will recognise that we owe a great deal to the many thousands of carers in Scotland who daily provide support and assistance to their loved ones. We have a responsibility to do as much as we can to support them in a role that is challenging at times. That includes Government, and we are taking forward a range of measures to provide that support, as are our health boards. A number of our local authorities are proactive in helping to support carers. I would encourage all local authorities to consider how they can implement good practice in their areas and do the right thing in supporting carers in Scotland.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of raising awareness of health issues among men and is committed to providing the best possible advice and support through NHS Scotland. Through the keep well programme, men and women aged between 40 and 64 living in the most deprived areas of Scotland are offered a free health check. The health checks are primarily focused on heart disease and its main risk factors such as blood pressure, cholesterol, smoking and diabetes. The checks can last approximately 40 minutes and may explore wider lifestyle issues with the individual, such as employability and benefits support. Over 180,000 keep well health checks have been delivered across Scotland so far.

I acknowledge the member’s concerns. It is worth emphasising that the keep well health check is targeted at those who live in our most deprived communities, who are at greatest risk of cardiovascular disease. I have outlined a variety of lifestyle factors that could contribute to that. However, a range of services is available in NHS Scotland for patients who may require assistance or support in addressing any other lifestyle issues. I would expect that, in instances in which a patient does not come from one of the geographical areas targeted through the keep well programme, and there are issues that need to be addressed, their general practitioner would consider which measures were appropriate for that individual and would signpost them to the appropriate support services.

Three reports of female genital mutilation have been made to the police by NHS staff since 2005.

We are aware that there is a risk of female genital mutilation to approximately 3,000 women in Scotland, and some of the work that we are taking forward includes the new strategy on violence against women, which will be published later this year. That strategy will have a strand on developing this area of work further—in particular to raise awareness and understanding among a range of staff on how we can reduce the risk and identify areas of risk more effectively. Alongside that, the strategy will help to ensure that those members of staff, in particular the staff within our maternity units, are better informed and are in a position where they can make referrals on as and when appropriate. As I am sure the member will also recognise, it is important that, where a case is identified, the individual is provided with the best possible healthcare. NHS Scotland will ensure that that happens.

Female genital mutilation will be an important strand of the work that we will take forward through the new strategy on violence against women. Part of that will be to make sure that we have healthcare staff who are properly informed and understand what actions they should take when a case is presented and who, in doing so, also make sure that the woman receives the appropriate healthcare at that point, should there be any requirement for a follow-up.

As we do with all new vaccines, we will take advice from the Joint Committee on Vaccination & Immunisation on the use of that particular vaccine. Meningitis B is a devastating disease, and I am keen that we take appropriate steps to tackle it. Nevertheless, it is important that we fully understand how effective any new vaccine will be before we consider introducing it in Scotland. The JCVI is currently consulting further on the use of the vaccine, and I await its final recommendations following that process, after which we will carefully consider its advice.

I recognise the devastating impact that the condition can have on families, so it is important that we look at progressing a range of measures to try and prevent it in the future. As Joan McAlpine may be aware, the JCVI made an interim statement in July this year on its position on the new vaccine. It is consulting further on the issue at present, and I understand that it is due to consider the matter again at its next meeting on 2 October. We expect then to receive further advice from the committee, at which point we will consider what further action may be necessary here in Scotland. Joan McAlpine specifically asked whether we could take action ourselves. The JCVI is there to advise Government; however, it is for the Government to take the final decision. It is important that we ensure that we consider all the expert opinion and advice on the matter before we come to any final decision.

We know that the earlier a cancer is diagnosed, the easier it is to treat, which is why, through the £30 million detect cancer early programme, we have introduced a HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target to increase the proportion of Scots who are diagnosed in the earliest stages of cancer by 25 per cent, initially focusing on breast, lung and colorectal cancers. To support the programme, we launched the detect bowel cancer early social marketing campaign in February 2013, which highlighted the national bowel screening programme. That activity was backed by extensive public relations, field and partnership activity. In addition, we have introduced a new two-year primary care initiative to facilitate informed uptake of the national bowel screening programme at general practitioner practice level. Healthcare Improvement Scotland is undertaking a refresh of the Scottish referral guidelines for suspected cancer.

In total, 1.95 million people in Scotland have so far taken up the screening programme since it was introduced in 2007. Of those, 896,724 males have participated in the programme, which has resulted in diagnosis of some 1,692 bowel cancers in men. That is an uptake of almost 52 per cent. It is an important element of the detect bowel cancer early programme that we continue to increase the number of men who participate in the screening programme because, in doing so, we can diagnose bowel cancer at a much earlier stage.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing time for the debate and I take the opportunity to thank Marie Curie Cancer Care, the University of Edinburgh and NHS Lothian for producing the report that we have been considering. I am sure that all members who have read the report realise that it is not criticising what is there, but recognising what is there and considering how and where it can be further improved. It is in all our interests to ensure that palliative care is provided safely and effectively, at the appropriate time and in a person-centred way, to improve the situation not just for the cared-for person but for the family at that vital time that is the end of someone’s life. In the past there was a tendency to regard palliative care as the province of the hospice and acute sectors, but it is important that we acknowledge that, nowadays, a great deal of palliative care is provided in the community and led by primary care teams. There are challenges for the primary care team in addressing issues with patients and families in the community setting, and it is important that we consider what action we can take to improve work in the area. The report illustrates the need for progress to be made. The report acknowledges the important work that has been taken forward. Our national action plan, “Living and Dying Well: a national action plan for palliative and end of life care”, is addressing a number of key issues that are highlighted in the report. Indeed, the report identifies areas that have been taken forward as part of the plan, such as the work on national guidance and payment structures, which has improved the situation. However, there is a need for further action. The Government seeks to take forward policy in a collaborative way, working in partnership with the wider sector to ensure that we take forward the national action plan appropriately and have the right priorities. The living and dying well national advisory group’s work is crucial in assisting us in that regard and supporting the work that is needed in NHS Scotland and beyond. It is extremely important that we do some work to ensure that there is an equitable approach throughout the country. That does not mean that care must be the same in every part of the country, but a patient in the primary care setting in Grampian should expect to receive the same type of palliative care support that a patient receives in Falkirk or in Glasgow. There is work for us to do to ensure that care is more consistent, and the national action plan tries to take the matter forward. The report makes an interesting point about patients who do not have a cancer diagnosis and who have difficulty accessing palliative care. That might be to do with professionals not recognising the issue and discussing palliative care with the patient, because of the nature of their condition, or it might be to do with other factors. No matter what it is, it demonstrates the need for us to look at palliative care on a much more holistic basis. The national action plan is very clear in focusing on the person, not the condition. We must ensure that palliative care is provided in that holistic way, as Malcolm Chisholm said, from the physical to the practical, the functional, the social, the spiritual and the emotional. It is important that it is looked at in that holistic context. A key part of addressing these issues is appropriate planning. Anticipatory care planning is an important element of ensuring that our primary care colleagues are able to manage the issues more effectively. Jim Hume referred to the fact that we have done a lot of work to improve anticipatory care planning within the general practitioner setting. We are starting to reap some reward from that and it is helping to facilitate some improvements, but we need to build further progress on that. We must look at how we can get much more effective integration between GPs and the wider primary care team, including groups such as pharmacists, who must be seen as part of that team in helping to manage someone’s palliative care provision. A number of members have referred to public attitudes to death and dying. Members will recognise that none of the issues will be addressed quickly or easily. Individuals often have a natural aversion to talking about dying and death. Some good work has been undertaken, which members are aware of, through the good life, good death, good grief programme. We need to build further on that to allow those discussions to take place. One of the challenges is the fact that, although professionals can be provided with the tools and the skills to enable them to have those discussions, some professionals still find that difficult. I recognise that there is a personal element to it. No matter how much we arm our staff with the skills and knowledge—a range of resources on palliative care can be provided through NHS Education for Scotland and others—there is a personal element to the work with families, including among the staff who work with the patients, that must be recognised. We must ensure that we have a healthy dialogue in this country around the issues to do with palliative care, including the positive nature of palliative care, and we must discuss death and dying more openly. No single campaign will address that issue, and all MSPs, in their leadership role within their communities, can contribute to that. If we can achieve a more open discussion of the issues, that will help with anticipatory care planning to ensure that patients who may not have a cancer diagnosis but require palliative care get that care at an earlier stage. It should be recognised that cancer is a life-limiting condition and that we need to engage sooner rather than later. I thank those who contributed to the report. We will consider its recommendations in detail. The national advisory group is already working on some of the recommendations, and we will continue to look at how we can further improve the provision of palliative care in Scotland as a whole. Meeting closed at 17:48.

I chaired NHS Lanarkshire’s annual review in Hamilton on 29 August, at which the recently published hospital standardised mortality rates were discussed. Ministers and officials regularly engage with all national health service boards—including NHS Lanarkshire—to discuss matters of importance to local people.

It is important to recognise that there has been variation across the three hospital sites within NHS Lanarkshire around hospital standardised mortality rates, which has been picked up over several quarters. NHS Lanarkshire has been reviewing its processes and practices to see what it must do to address that issue, and it brought forward a programme of work that it intended to take forward to address the specific issues. However, in light of the most recent data, Professor Jason Leach, from the Scottish Government, felt it prudent to appoint a specialist team to go in and undertake an independent review of the progress that has been made within NHS Lanarkshire. We expect to receive the review report from Healthcare Improvement Scotland by the end of this year. At that point, we will be able to identify the factors that have resulted in a higher mortality level in the three sites in NHS Lanarkshire. It is likely that there will be a number of different issues, but it is important that we take the right amount of time to investigate the matter thoroughly and then take appropriate measures as necessary to address it.

The more Scottish GP contract in Scotland will bring real benefits for patients while reducing bureaucracy and enabling GPs to spend more time with their patients. General practice is at the heart of the vision for healthcare in Scotland, ensuring that the people of Scotland are provided with better care in their homes and communities and helping them to live longer and healthier lives. Last year, the Scottish Government invested more than £757 million to deliver primary medical services, and this year it has increased funding to general practice by £8 million.

We have taken forward a range of measures, including making sure that the level of general practitioners available in Scotland is increasing, to help to support the provision of primary healthcare services in our communities. The member will recognise that the increasing pressure that our GPs find themselves under because of the welfare reform changes has not come about as a result of the actions of this Government. I would prefer to be in a position where we could influence welfare policy to make sure that it aligns more effectively with our healthcare policy in Scotland, rather than having a system imposed on us that causes unintended consequences in the Scottish healthcare service. However, we will continue to ensure that we support our general practitioners to provide the best possible care in the primary care setting in Scotland, and we will continue to take forward those measures in the years to come.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. Like others, I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing time for this important debate, and I welcome his reflections on ASH Scotland’s work, although I have to confess that when it was established I had not even started primary school. In its 40 years, ASH Scotland has made a lot of progress in supporting changes to our society’s overall perception of smoking and tobacco. The cultural shift that has been created has, if anything, probably been more significant than the simple legislative changes that have been made, and like others I pay tribute to ASH Scotland for its significant contribution to Scotland’s tobacco control strategy and agenda in recent years. All those who have been associated with ASH Scotland over the years can be very proud of the part that they have played in that success, particularly in more recent years. Duncan McNeil said that he was involved in scrutinising the bill to introduce the ban on smoking in public places. Scotland led the way in the United Kingdom in that particular area of policy, and Ireland was among the first countries in the world to introduce such a ban. However, significant work was done in the Scottish Parliament before we got to the point of legislation. Kenny Gibson looked to introduce a member’s bill to ban smoking in restaurants, and Stewart Maxwell looked to introduce a member’s bill before the then Scottish Executive decided to introduce its own legislation to ban smoking in public places. Therefore, from a very early stage in the Parliament, there was clearly an intention among members to consider how we could address smoking in our society and to take forward progressive measures that would assist us in doing that. We have made significant progress since the ban was introduced in 2006. As Jackie Baillie mentioned, we have had the comprehensive legislation to ban tobacco advertising and promotion, which has been implemented across the UK. The minimum age of sale has been raised—Duncan McNeil referred to that. We have seen the implementation of large graphic warnings on packs as a result of policy changes, and smoking cessation services have been established and have become increasingly accessible across the country. I am pleased that, following the unsuccessful legal challenges that the tobacco companies mounted against the legislation to ban the display of tobacco in shops, larger shops have introduced a display ban. By April 2015, the ban on tobacco displays will be implemented in our smaller retailers. Jackie Baillie referred to our new “Creating a Tobacco-free Generation” tobacco control strategy, which I launched at the end of March this year. Again, I thank ASH for the role that it played in supporting the development of that strategy. Scotland is among the first countries in the world to have introduced an ambitious target for reducing smoking prevalence. The target is to reduce that to 5 per cent of our population by 2034. A child who is born this year will celebrate their 21st birthday in 2034. Our aim is to create a generation of young people and young adults who do not smoke; to create a Scotland in which young people and young adults turn away from tobacco use; and to get the health, social and economic benefits that will come from that approach. As a Government, we recognise that that is a very ambitious approach to take to tobacco control, but we believe that we need to take bold and decisive action to reduce smoking prevalence in Scotland further to create a tobacco-free generation. The 5 per cent target is certainly challenging. Achieving it will require a determined effort on the part of the Government and other agencies that have a role to play in helping to reduce smoking prevalence. We believe that the target can help to ensure that we fundamentally change the whole culture of smoking in Scotland and get the health benefits that will come from that. We will take forward a range of measures in the five-year strategy to ensure that we take action. The strategy includes a national campaign that will start early next year to raise awareness of the dangers associated with smoking in enclosed spaces; the introduction of a new target to achieve a substantial reduction in children’s exposure to second-hand smoke by 2020; continued support for parents to create smoke-free homes for children; and the aim of all our NHS boards having smoke-free grounds by 2015. We will also review our smoking cessation services with a view to ensuring that they are much more effective, particularly in tackling smoking in our more deprived communities, in order to close the gap. The strategy can help to deliver real change over the next five years. It can help to ensure that we make progress on the agenda and demonstrate yet again that Scotland is prepared to lead the world in taking forward the necessary bold measures that will enable us to achieve our target of becoming a smoke-free nation by 2034. I have no doubt that ASH Scotland will continue to play its role in ensuring that we deliver on that commitment. Meeting closed at 18:59.

I congratulate Dave Thompson on securing time for this important debate on what remains a clinical priority for NHS Scotland. I am sure that all members recognise that encouraging progress has been made in recent years, which is underpinned by the 60 per cent reduction in the coronary heart disease premature mortality rate between 1995 and 2010. That shows the degree of improvement in clinical care and the benefits of preventative work in improving outcomes for patients. We recognise that new challenges are emerging—Dave Thompson set out the challenges very well. More people are living longer with long-term conditions, and more people who have suffered cardiac episodes and heart failure are living with co-morbidities. Supporting such individuals puts pressure on our NHS system. It is important that we ensure that our services can address the needs of the increasing number of patients in Scotland who might suffer from heart failure. We recognise that heart failure nurses need to be in place to meet the need. The better heart disease and stroke care action plan and the clinical standards for heart disease identify the important role of heart failure nurses in providing safe, effective and person-centred care. The action plan demonstrates our commitment in that regard and sets out how we expect boards to take the issue forward. We expect the recognition that heart failure nurses have an important role to play to inform boards’ workforce planning. A number of members referred to the SIGN guidelines for heart failure, which were published in 2007 and which recommended that there should be a nurse-led, home-based element of post-discharge care and that patients should be considered for follow-up by a trained heart failure nurse. The SIGN guidelines are important. They are not from, or directed by, Government, and no Government can claim some form of responsibility for them; they are commissioned and taken forward independently of Government to help inform clinical practice. However, I think that there has been some misunderstanding regarding the ratios that members have referred to, because the SIGN guidelines do not set a minimum standard for staffing provision. I can only assume that members were referring to the British Cardiac Society standards for having one heart failure nurse per 100,000 of the population. The SIGN guidelines do not specify a specific ratio. It is important, however, that boards ensure that whatever is contained in the SIGN guidelines is taken forward at a local level and that they have adequate staffing levels and the right skills mix in place to meet the local population’s needs.

I will give way to Mr McArthur.

I am going to come to Orkney in a minute, when I hope that I can address that point. I am more than happy to give way to Mr Robertson, too.

I will turn to those points on Orkney and Grampian after making a little progress on the wider issue. It is important to recognise that some progress has been made since 2008 because, of the 15 heart failure nurse posts that were funded by the British Heart Foundation, nearly all, but not all, of those nursing posts are now funded by the NHS. We must ensure that we continue to build on that progress. Given what is in the very useful report “Review of Specialist Heart Failure Nurse Services—Scotland 2013”, I intend to raise the matter specifically with directors of nursing in the NHS in Scotland in order that they ask their boards to look at the report’s findings and consider what wider measures they need to take forward at a local level to address some of the points that have been highlighted. On the specific issue of NHS Orkney, Mr McArthur referred to the fact that the board has been reviewing the way in which it provides cardiology services in the Orkney Islands. I understand that, as a result of that review and through additional resources that have been provided, NHS Orkney has recruited an extra consulting cardiologist to help support the service and that it is working in partnership with NHS Grampian on the way in which it delivers some of the services. I understand from NHS Orkney that it hopes that that will allow it to free up some of the time of the clinical nurse specialist that it has at present so that they can do some extra work on heart failure matters, which there is no time for at the moment. That will help to support and extend the work that can be taken forward there. No doubt Mr McArthur will wish to pursue those issues with his local health board to ensure that it continues to make progress on them. On the NHS Grampian matter to which Dennis Robertson referred, my understanding is that an option appraisal paper is being prepared for the board’s consideration this month that will look at a number of options. Part of that work will involve looking at how NHS Grampian can support heart failure nurse services in the board area. The process should be completed by August this year. Again, of course, we expect NHS Grampian to ensure that it can meet the needs of cardiac failure patients in its area in line with what is set out in the SIGN guidelines. Nanette Milne made an important point. Most chamber debates on long-term conditions to which I respond involve a request for more specialist nurses in one long-term condition or another. Specialist nurses have an important role to play, but they also play a role in supporting our other NHS staff to work more effectively with patients with specific conditions such as heart disease. That is why we have invested £150,000 in the heart disease education programme called heart-e, which will support our heart failure specialist nurses in training and supporting other nursing and clinical staff to deal with patients more effectively and to be more confident in managing heart failure. The programme will be launched in November and will support that area of work. Finally, I turn to the national advisory group to which Dave Thompson referred. That group has now been established and is acting as a heart failure hub that is drawing together expertise in how we can build on progress in the use of heart failure nurses. The group took a little longer than anticipated to get established, but we expect it to meet within the next six weeks. The chairs have been appointed and its membership has been agreed. We are also in the process of appointing a national co-ordinator to support the group’s improvement activities across NHS Scotland. By acting as a hub in drawing together good practice from different board areas, the group can help to disseminate that good practice in other board areas, and the national co-ordinator will have an overview of the progress that is made by individual boards. I recognise the importance of specialist nurses and of heart failure nurses in particular. The Scottish heart failure nurse forum report is an important contribution to that area of work. We will work with our health boards to see what further measures can be taken to build on the progress that has been made since 2008, so that we can continue to provide the best possible service for those patients who suffer from heart failure. Meeting closed at 18:17.

I congratulate James Kelly, as other members have done, on securing time for this important debate on how we can provide support to patients and carers of those who have Parkinson’s disease and how we can continue to improve the way in which we deliver that care and support, in particular within the NHS in Scotland. James Kelly referred to the fact that all MSPs will have constituents with the condition. I have no doubt that there are members in the chamber who have close personal experience of the disease—some closer than others. One of my own close friends, who is still relatively young, was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease a couple of years ago. Another friend of mine who had Parkinson’s disease has passed away. Margo MacDonald summed up the matter very well when she suggested that, although the disease has particular characteristics, the experience of it is personal: it affects every individual in a different way. We cannot underestimate the personal impact that it can have on an individual and their ability to lead as independent a life as possible. It is important that we look for what we can do to try to support individuals to manage their condition clinically, support them socially and emotionally and support their carers when appropriate. I very much welcome the report that has been published by Parkinson’s UK. It makes a very helpful contribution. Although we continue to welcome the progress that has been made and acknowledge the support that Parkinson’s UK provides, we also recognise areas where further progress needs to be made and where the level of service is not what we would wish.

I can give Margo MacDonald an exclusive revelation: there is no pecking order. We do not have a hierarchy of conditions, or decide that one is more important than another. We deal with issues on their merits, although there are some conditions where there is a greater demand for services, which I am sure she will recognise. James Kelly and Malcolm Chisholm made reference to the way in which we have sought to drive up standards in the NHS in relation to how we provide services to individuals with neurological conditions, through the clinical standards for neurological health services. An important part of that work was the review to which James Kelly referred, which compared boards and the level of service that they offer for a range of different neurological conditions. The review established that a number of boards do not provide the specialist nurse provision or the specialist services for people with Parkinson’s that some other boards provide. That piece of work was specifically designed to demonstrate that variation, so that we could see the gaps and the action that needs to be taken to make sure that boards start to provide those services. Having conducted the peer review around neurological standards, we then set about putting in place the national neurological standards advisory board, which exists to make sure that we continue that progress across all health boards in Scotland and continually improve how we drive forward provision. That work is taking place just now. Three of the neurological standards are specific to Parkinson’s disease, and Parkinson’s UK is a key part of the national advisory group. It is helping with that work so that we continue to see improvements. Alongside that, it is important to recognise that although we can see improvements at secondary care level, we need to see improvements at the primary care level within GP practices. We need to provide GPs with the right support and advice in their management of individuals who have Parkinson’s disease. With reference to Stewart Stevenson’s point, we also need to recognise the role of carers in supporting the individual in the management of their condition. That brings me to specialist nurses. Members who attend many of the health-related members’ business debates in this Parliament know that very few of the debates that deal with specific conditions do not include in the motion a request for more specialist nurses. We now have almost 1,600 specialist nurses across the NHS in Scotland, covering a wide range of different conditions. The real value that can be delivered by the provision of specialist nurses is not in dispute. The work that Parkinson’s UK has taken forward in partnership with some of our health boards is greatly valued because it drives the provision of Parkinson’s nurses in individual board areas. Once a specialist Parkinson’s nurse has been provided and there is a clear need for that service in an NHS board area, and once the pump-primed funding has come to an end, I expect health boards to continue with that service provision to ensure that patients do not see any reduction in the service that they receive. If possible, boards should be augmenting that provision to improve the overall service. I recognise that specialist nurses have an important role to play. Members will also agree that there has been a call for greater provision of specialist nurses in a wide range of conditions. There has been an increasing trend in that regard in recent years, which I expect to continue in NHS Scotland for neurological conditions such as Parkinson’s disease. Margo MacDonald was correct to point out that there is a need to look at training individuals such as carers and other members of the social care workforce, as well as our healthcare workforce, so that they have greater awareness and understanding of Parkinson’s disease and the needs of patients and their carers.

I will skip past Margo’s request for massage. It is important that we consider the health and wellbeing of carers as well, and provide them with the support that they need. Margo MacDonald is correct. Some of the work of the Long-term Conditions Alliance is about looking at what we can do to support more effectively individuals who have long-term conditions. I hope that I have given some assurance that we recognise the value of specialist nurse practitioners. There has been a move towards using them more and I would like to see more of them being provided by the NHS in the coming years. The Scottish Government is committed to continuing to work with Parkinson’s UK to make sure that the progress that has been made is built on and that we continue to provide the best possible service to those who have Parkinson’s disease in Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:44.

Studies have shown that the family nurse partnership programme has an impact not only on parents’ confidence in their parenting ability by developing their self-efficacy but on the whole family’s long-term wellbeing. That is demonstrated by outcomes such as reduced smoking in pregnancy, reduced accident and emergency attendance, increased workforce participation and partner involvement.

Family nurse partnerships have been implemented by seven of our territorial boards including NHS Lothian, NHS Tayside, NHS Fife, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, NHS Highland and NHS Ayrshire and Arran, and we will see some delivery from NHS Lanarkshire by early this summer. The other seven territorial boards are taking forward work to establish family nurse partnerships and we have given a commitment that the partnerships will be available in all 14 territorial health boards by 2015. We are also about to commence work on measuring the impact of family nurse partnerships through a natural experiment using comparator sites. In other words, sites with a family nurse partnership will be compared against those with similar characteristics that do not have such partnerships in place to evaluate the impact of partnerships on the clients—families—the nurses and the organisations involved.

It is important that health boards take forward family nurse partnerships in a way that allows them to continue to provide their other broad services for children. It is worth bearing in mind that the family nurse partnership is a licensed programme and that all family nurses have to undertake a programme of training over a period of time to ensure that they have the required skills to implement the model effectively. I am sure that Drew Smith will recognise the importance of having staff who have the right skill set to deliver the partnerships effectively and who are supported with the necessary training. However, it is important that, alongside that, health boards ensure that they meet their other commitments to support children in the community through the use of health visitors.

We welcome the research report. It further highlights a truth that is sadly only too evident in communities the length and breadth of Scotland: alcohol misuse does not only impact on the individual but impacts negatively on the people around them. We know that alcohol misuse impacts on children living with parents with a drink problem; that heavy drinking is a common factor in family break-up; and that the impact of our excessive consumption of alcohol is estimated to cost Scots £3.6 billion each year—that is £900 for every adult in Scotland. We need to understand the full extent of alcohol-related harm in our communities in order to tackle this complex and ingrained problem. We therefore welcome the new research study by Alcohol Focus Scotland, which seeks to investigate the harm caused by alcohol to people other than the drinker. The study commenced in September 2012, with the Scottish Government contributing grant funding towards the overall costs. The findings of the report, which we will study closely, will be released in September 2013.

Over a number of years now, the Scottish Government has taken bold action to address our alcohol problem in Scotland. Those important measures include minimum pricing for alcohol, which attracted a large degree of support from across the chamber, although not, unfortunately, from the Labour Party. We believe that minimum pricing is an important measure that can assist us in tackling the issue, but we are always prepared to look at other constructive ideas. If Graeme Pearson and Dr Simpson feel that they have constructive ideas to contribute towards this whole agenda, I can assure him that those will always be considered in detail by the Government.

Through delivering the actions in our comprehensive heart disease action plan, we are seeing significant improvements in outcomes for people with heart disease. The plan focuses not just on providing the best possible hospital care, but on supporting people’s longer-term recovery in their communities. Since 2002, there has been a 43 per cent reduction in premature coronary heart disease deaths—there was an 8 per cent drop between 2010 and 2011. An important point is that we are seeing reductions in health inequalities, with heart disease mortality dropping fastest in the most deprived areas.

As the member is aware, many of our health boards provide cardiac rehabilitation for patients who, following a cardiac episode, can benefit from it. Many health boards work in partnership with a range of third sector organisations to deliver that type of programme to patients in a controlled way in order to maximise their recovery. If the member wishes to write to me setting out the details of the specific programme that he wishes to see expanded, I will be more than happy to respond to him on that. However, I am sure that he will recognise from the statistics that I outlined in my initial answer that significant progress has been made in the area. We need to ensure that we maintain that progress and build on it, and we have a Government that is prepared to do that.

These matters are always best dealt with through facts rather than by misinterpretation of proposals that are put forward by boards. It is extremely important that patients receive the best quality clinical care that they can receive close to their home. Over a number of years, the Scottish Government has shown determination to ensure that we provide the best possible clinical care close to individuals in their communities. The cabinet secretary will ensure that we continue to pursue that with all our NHS boards, including NHS Lothian.

I agree. I am more than happy to talk to the cabinet secretary about that, as the member suggests. In my constituency, I have witnessed the quality of service that can be provided by third sector organisations such as Braveheart, which runs walking programmes for patients who are recovering from cardiac episodes. Real benefit can be gained. The way in which the NHS can best affect that in communities is to work in partnership with third sector organisations to deliver such programmes effectively for patients.

Although policies, frameworks and resources are provided by the Scottish Government, individual national health service boards are responsible for planning and funding services in their areas and securing the staff to deliver them. It is for NHS boards to determine their workforce requirements, including training, based on the clinical needs and service developments in their areas. That includes multiple sclerosis services. However, we have supported centres through funding and given grants from the self-management fund, which is administered through the Health and Social Care Alliance Scotland. For example, the Multiple Sclerosis Centre Mid Argyll received more than £200,000 and the Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Centre Lothian received £68,000.

As I mentioned in my initial reply, we have provided more than £200,000 to the MS centre in mid-Argyll to allow it to develop an outreach programme to support patients in remote areas. In taking forward such initiatives—this is similar to the issue around cardiac rehabilitation—it is not for the NHS to take over third sector organisations and the services that they provide, but the NHS should work in partnership with them and help them to extend the services that they provide to patients who can benefit from them. [Interruption.]

I am sure that it is nothing personal. We are taking forward initiatives to do exactly that, as in the case of the funding for the MS centre in mid-Argyll.

NHS boards should provide cardiac rehabilitation in line with the published clinical standards for heart disease, which were published in April 2010. Those standards state that people with heart disease should be assessed and have access to a menu-based cardiac rehabilitation programme.

I agree that cardiac rehabilitation nurses have a very important role to play in helping to support patients with cardiac disease. That is set out in our heart disease action plan, which makes it very clear that cardiac specialist nurses have that role. It is important that all NHS boards, such as NHS Grampian, have services in place and ensure that they have sufficient specialist cardiac nursing provision to meet the needs of their local patient group. If the member wishes to write to me detailing the nature of his constituents’ concerns, we would be more than happy to explore with NHS Grampian what its plans are and to seek assurance that it will continue to have a range of cardiac nurses available to meet the needs of patients in the Grampian area who could benefit from them, given that they have heart disease.

Our top priority for people with motor neurone disease is to ensure that the neurological standards published by Healthcare Improvement Scotland are implemented. They offer the best mechanism for achieving safe, effective, person-centred care. The standards will help to ensure that people get not only the earliest and most appropriate treatment locally but access to specialist services when needed. That is why we previously provided boards with £1.2 million to develop improvement groups as the main vehicle to take the standards forward. Progress is being monitored by the national neurological advisory group. We will continue to work with NHS boards and the third sector to improve services for people with motor neurone disease in Scotland.

I recognise that June is motor neurone disease awareness month. I am aware that the cabinet secretary is attending an event this evening as part of a programme in Parliament to raise awareness of motor neurone disease. Like most other members, I recognise the real difficulty that many individuals face as a result of the welfare reforms that are being introduced by the United Kingdom Government. It presents particular problems for those who have conditions that can deteriorate fairly rapidly and those who have fluctuating conditions. I recognise that patients with motor neurone disease experience particular difficulties as a result of the welfare changes. That demonstrates to me that the Parliament needs to have control over welfare policy so that we can ensure that we have a policy that is more suited to the people of Scotland.

That information is not available from routine prescribing data held by the national health service’s Information Services Division. The prescribing and dispensing activity that takes place in prisons is the responsibility of the Scottish Prison Service and local NHS boards.

We have no plans to review the strategy, which was published only last year. However, the member will be aware that it was only in the past year or so that responsibility for the provision of healthcare services for prisoners in Scottish Prison Service establishments was transferred to NHS boards. We need to ensure that boards provide a range of services that are appropriate to those prisoners. It is the responsibility of the local territorial boards, if treatment to support those who have a condition such as depression is to be included, to ensure that they have appropriate services in place to support those prisoners.

The debate has drawn considerable consensus across all parties on our shared desire to achieve a better way to provide services for patients who suffer from chronic pain, for whatever reason and however it may manifest itself. It is also an issue that a number of members have acknowledged has a long history of campaigns both within and outwith Parliament seeking improvements. The first debate, as members have mentioned, was led by Dorothy-Grace Elder back in February 2002, and Mary Scanlon’s debate was in March 2011. We now have the debate that the Government is leading today. It is an issue that has drawn considerable parliamentary interest over the period, although not necessarily by absorbing debating time in the chamber. Through the cross-party group and other activities, a significant number of MSPs have been involved in and interested in it. I also acknowledge recognise that for campaigners who have been pressing for improvements to services, there is—despite improvements that have been made since 2007—a degree of frustration, a desire for things to move on apace, and for that pace to be stepped up. Today’s debate demonstrates the Government’s response to that, which is to push forward with further improvements. The debate has been very much about looking forward to how we can continue to improve on the progress that has been made, and to build on it, rather than about looking back too much at what happened in the past, which report said what, when it was published or whatever. We have looked at how we can move forward and improve services overall.

I will try to address Mary Scanlon’s point when I talk about and develop issues around the SIGN guidelines. Jackson Carlaw made an excellent contribution about the difficulty in defining chronic pain. We could take the very sterile approach of using the clinical definition but, like Jackson Carlaw, I think that the real definition is about the effect of chronic pain on the individual. That is a definition by which we have to measure what we have to do to help support an individual and address their needs. That goes beyond the physical limitations that chronic pain causes, such as whether someone is able to tie their own shoelaces, to get out of their bed on their own, or to comb their own hair. Those are small practical things that a person who is suffering from chronic pain can find themselves unable to do. However, the definition should also cover the psychological impact and draining effect that chronic pain can have on individuals when they lose the ability to do those things themselves. That can demoralise them and have a negative impact on their mental wellbeing. There is also the social impact to consider—people’s potential to lose self-confidence or to desire to withdraw because they are concerned that they are not as independent as they would like to be. That can have a consequent effect on an individual. I recognise the medical model that was very ably illustrated by Margo MacDonald in her description of the “bag of goodies” approach that is often taken to chronic pain. The social model has an important part to play in supporting individuals who suffer from chronic pain and, by raising that issue through her petition, Susan Archibald has made a valid point. It is more about enabling, helping to support and intervening where necessary than it is about just looking for a straightforward medical solution. John Wilson talked about the holistic approach and Bob Doris referred to the work that is being done by Revive MS Support in Maryhill. The holistic approach that is used there looks at the whole person, including the medical, physical, and social aspects, when deciding how best to address the issues and support the individual most effectively. Alongside that, it is important that we have the clinical standards that underpin some of the necessary progress on chronic pain. Margo MacDonald talked about clinical standards, and Mary Scanlon raised the issue during her intervention. In December last year, the draft SIGN guidelines covered a range of areas that go from assessment and planning of care, support and self-management, and pharmacological therapies right through to dietary, complementary and physical therapies. That will offer a holistic package of standards to support improvements and developments. The SIGN guidelines are due to be finalised by December this year. The guidelines will provide us with another building block in progress on clinical standards. Several members referred to the Scottish service model for chronic pain, which the cabinet secretary in his opening remarks highlighted will include a three-tier approach. The reality is that the vast majority of individuals who suffer from chronic pain will receive services under tiers 1 and 2, which are about self-management and services within primary care settings that might be provided by general practitioners. However, where necessary, people will be referred to a tier-3 intervention, which will be a more specialised service that will be delivered within an acute setting. An extremely important point to recognise is that, for the service model to work effectively, we need within primary care settings to ensure that we have the right clinical skills and understanding of how to support individuals with chronic pain. In Dumfries and Galloway, for example, 20 physiotherapists have been trained in cognitive behavioural therapy to help to support that approach. NHS Lanarkshire is currently providing training to GPs and is, I understand, looking to recruit a GP clinical lead on chronic pain who can continue to drive forward improvements in the primary care setting. Using GPs and other clinicians who are based in primary care settings, working in partnership with the community pharmacists to which Sandra White referred—

It will be extremely important that community pharmacists work in partnership with community physicians—GPs—to ensure that they provide the best type of medical intervention, with pharmacological input as and when necessary, to help to support patients.

There is a formal application process for a pharmacy licence. If Hanzala Malik wants to write to me with the details, I will respond to him in more detail. Finally, on the residential facility, members should be in no doubt that the consultation that we intend to publish later this year will consult not on whether we should have a residential specialist facility, but on the model for it. Given the history of patients feeling that they have not been listened to and feeling that not enough action has been taken to address their concerns, it is important that we take the time to consult them on their views on what model the facility should follow. If we do that, we will ensure that we get the best outcome for patients. As a Government, we are very much committed to ensuring that we provide an appropriate facility. Whether three, four or five options—or a combination of those, as Jackson Carlaw suggested—are consulted on, it is extremely important that we take the necessary time to consult patients, who have the biggest interest in the issue, so that we get the right model. I regret that, on that basis, we are not able to accept the Labour Party amendment. I urge members to unite in supporting the motion in the name of the cabinet secretary at 5 o’clock this evening.

As others have done, I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing time for this important debate. The sudden and unexpected death of a young person that has been caused by an inherited cardiac condition may be rare, but it is always a tragedy. We have made great advances in recent years in reducing the number of people who die as a result of cardiac events, but there is much more that we need to do to reduce that number still further. A number of members referred to SADS and the particularly devastating affect that it can have on a young person, who often has had no symptoms and no indication that they were at risk. I acknowledge the work that is undertaken by the familial arrhythmia network for Scotland—or FANS, as it is known—which plays a vital role in helping to identify young people with an arrhythmia. The network brings together cardiologists, clinical geneticists and pathologists to help ensure that we reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death, and target the young people who may be at particular risk. Nanette Milne referred to CAYA—the cardiac assessment for young athletes. We have provided that programme with a further £40,000 to allow it to continue, so that we can look at further measures that can be undertaken to develop the programme and provide protection to young people who are involved in athletics. We have taken forward a range of work with the Scottish Ambulance Service, to which we have provided £7.5 million to allow it to purchase more than 500 state-of-the-art defibrillators for all Scottish Ambulance Service ambulances. Members such as Stewart Stevenson referred to the fact that delay in performing defibrillation can reduce the chances of recovery and the important role that AEDs and PADs—publicly accessible defibrillators—can have in supporting someone who has arrested, prior to the arrival of the emergency services. AEDs and PADs must be looked at in the context of community resilience and what we can do to help the wider community make use of such pieces of equipment when they are available. There is no point in making them publicly available if individuals do not have the confidence and ability to use them. The Scottish Ambulance Service has been working in remote and urban communities in which a publicly available defibrillator that could benefit those communities can be provided. Some of that work has been done by looking at remote areas, urban venues with high footfall, or areas in which clusters of cardiac arrests have occurred. The Scottish Ambulance Service is also looking to train community members in the use of the equipment. To support that work, since 2011 the Scottish Ambulance Service has developed a partnership with Scotmid—which owns the Semichem network—and the British Heart Foundation, which has identified shops in which defibrillators could be located. Staff have been trained and supported in how to use defibrillators in the community. I have no doubt that that will help to make defibrillators more accessible and ensure that we have individuals who have received training and can make use of them. To those who have had no training in the use of an AED, I can say—Stewart Stevenson gave away some of my background in his speech—that they are extremely simple. It is not possible to shock someone accidentally. If the person should not be shocked, the system does not allow a shock to be discharged. It also monitors whether there is any rhythm and, in some cases, it indicates that no shock should be provided because no support is necessary. The units are extremely safe, and although several models are available, they are extremely easy to use with a little training and understanding of them. In providing the units in different parts of the country, we need to know where they are at any given time. Therefore, the Scottish Ambulance Service is undertaking work to map the publicly accessible defibrillators, and that information will be built into its command and control unit so that, when someone calls for an ambulance, that individual can be directed to where they can get a PAD. I understand that the defibrillators that are being provided in schools in Lanarkshire will form part of that information in the command and control unit, and I have no doubt that that will help to support the service. I agree with Malcolm Chisholm that it is important that, although technology can help us to a considerable extent in supporting someone who is having a cardiac arrest, we must also ensure that people understand the basics of CPR. It is a bit like going up a mountain with a GPS device but not knowing how to use a compass if the device breaks down. People need to be able to go back to the basics, and part of that is CPR. We are working with the British Heart Foundation, as Malcolm Chisholm said, in providing funding support to develop the heartstart programme, which will provide emergency life-support training for school pupils. That programme is being developed, and we hope to make an announcement later this year when we will take that further forward. Fiona McLeod referred to Lucky2BHere, a charity based in Skye that is undertaking tremendous work not only around AEDs but around CPR training for school pupils. Work is also being done by Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland with Education Scotland on developing a national emergency life-support education resource that can be used in classrooms as part of the health and wellbeing part of the curriculum for excellence. Technology has a lot to give in support of addressing this issue, but we must keep it within the wider context of educating our young people in how to carry out CPR as and when it is appropriate. The work that the Scottish Government is doing with the British Heart Foundation will support the delivery of that in schools throughout the country. I hope that that has given members some assurance about the work that we are undertaking to ensure that publicly available defibrillators are properly mapped and are more widely available in areas where they can be most appropriately used, alongside our support for the training of school pupils in the basics of CPR. Meeting closed at 17:43.

Reviews were conducted in 2009 by the Health Protection Agency and Health Protection Scotland, which came to similar conclusions. The Health Protection Agency review concluded that the evidence suggests that “any potential damage to the health of those living close to incinerators “is likely to be very small, if detectable.” Health Protection Scotland continues to monitor research in the area to maintain awareness of new developments and it is collaborating in relevant new research. That includes two UK-wide studies that are being taken forward by the small area health statistics unit at Imperial College.

I understand the concerns that Elaine Smith has raised. I mentioned that we are part-funding one of the studies—both of which are UK-wide studies—that are looking at the some of the health outcomes for those who live close to incinerators. If it would assist the member in informing her constituents on the matter, I would be more than happy to write to her to give more details of exactly what the areas of research are about and how they will be taken forward over the next couple of years.

The decision to redesign services is entirely a matter for local authorities. However, the Scottish Government expects local authorities to listen to people with learning disabilities and their carers and to take into consideration what will work well for them.

One benefit of the integration of health and social care is that it will allow our health and social care services to be much more effectively planned and delivered locally in a way that reflects the needs of the local population. The member will recognise that, ultimately, it is up to the local authority to use its resources and to provide services in a way that it feels fits its local communities’ needs. In considering what can at times be a challenging issue, it is important that the council has a process that allows for genuine consultation with those who have a learning disability and their carers, and that those who participate in the process have trust in the way that the local authority is taking it forward. In the process in Glasgow, it is important that Glasgow City Council continues to consider what it can do to address the concerns that carers and those who use the centres have expressed, and how it can achieve an outcome that meets the needs of those who use the services.

The “Better Heart Disease and Stroke Care Action Plan”, which is backed by over £1 million of funding each year, contains actions aimed at ensuring that people with stroke get access to effective, safe and person-centred care as quickly as possible. Full implementation will help to ensure that we maintain momentum and continue to improve the quality of care and support that is available to people with stroke. NHS Scotland has made great progress in improving the outcomes for people with stroke. Between 1995 and 2010 we saw a 60 per cent reduction in the number of people who died prematurely from stroke. In 2011 stroke deaths fell by 5.7 per cent on the previous year.

I am aware of the Stroke Association’s survey, which rated hospital care in Scotland as being high. However, the report also recognises the need for further improvements, particularly around emotional and psychological support. Any healthcare condition can, of course, have a wider impact than the physical element, in terms of its impact on the emotional and psychological wellbeing of individuals and their families. That is why we recognise in our new mental health strategy the importance of providing a better response to conditions such as stroke, in order to provide the right type of emotional and psychological support. A key element of addressing such issues is improvement of access to psychological therapies—or talking therapies, as they are often described. That is why we are committed to delivering faster access to psychological therapies and have underpinned that by a HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target that will ensure access to such therapies within 18 weeks, by December 2014. That will assist patients who have suffered a stroke to access the type of psychological support from which they may benefit and that may assist in their full recovery.

Shingles can be a particularly severe illness. Many people are affected by the chronic pain that can develop after having it. The vaccine that we are introducing has been shown to reduce the incidence of shingles in older adults, as well as the persistent pain that often develops following the illness. There are around 7,000 general practitioner consultations for shingles each year in Scotland. The programme will offer protection against shingles to those who are especially vulnerable and should help to reduce the number of GP consultations each year.

Vaccine uptake rates in Scotland are consistently high. That is in no small part thanks to the concerted effort that has been made over a number of years to raise awareness of the importance of being vaccinated against a number of different conditions. Our vaccination uptake rates are rightly attracting attention from other countries, but we cannot afford to take them for granted. We are putting significant resource into ensuring that the new and extended vaccination programme that will be introduced in the coming months will be effective and will be maintained, if not improved, and that uptake rates will be as they have been over the past few years. NHS Scotland has the experience and expertise to build on the strong foundations that have been laid by our vaccination programme, and to improve on it in the years to come.

I am aware of Dr Alan McDevitt’s recent comments—I believe in The Scotsman newspaper—in relation to the extended vaccination programme. The majority of the work that will follow from the extended vaccination programme will fall to NHS Scotland; a smaller proportion of it will fall to general practices. We are working with NHS boards and the Scottish GPs committee to consider what further additional measures are necessary to ensure the required support for delivery of what is at present a very successful vaccination programme. I have no doubt that it will be in our interests to build on it and to ensure that the extended programme is successful.

Our diabetes action plan, which was published in 2010, sets out our vision for a world-class diabetes service and offers a comprehensive and ambitious programme of work that we are committed to implementing. The Scottish diabetes group has reported that good progress is being made on the implementation of the plan. For example, we have appointed national diabetes education and paediatric co-ordinators, enabled patients to access their own health data online, established a diabetes in-patient programme and consolidated our diabetes foot-screening programme. We will invest a further £900,000 in the programme this year.

Of course, it is for clinicians to determine the type of treatment that is most appropriate to an individual patient, having regard to local and national clinical guidelines. The member will be aware that the managed clinical network on diabetes has been established and is looking at implementing a prescribing strategy to address areas of variation in the way in which patients are prescribed with various forms of medication in the treatment of their condition. We will continue with that work and continue to support the work of the managed clinical network to reduce variation in how patients who have diabetes are treated in different parts of the country.

We are making significant progress in increasing the number of pumps that are available to under-18s and to those who are over 18. Some health boards have made greater progress than others, but the Government recognises the real difference that pumps can make to the lives of individuals should they be clinically appropriate. Of course, it will not always be clinically appropriate for patients to move on to an insulin pump. We are working with individual boards to make sure that they have plans in place to be able to deliver the increase in the use of insulin pumps that we want to see, particularly among our under-18s as well as in the wider patient group.

The responsibility for the overall provision of national health service general dental services in the area rests with NHS Grampian.

The member referred to the Scottish dental access initiative that was developed to increase the number of dental practices that will register NHS patients, particularly in areas in which there is a lack of service. He rightly recognises that there has been a significant increase in the level of NHS dentistry that is being made available within the NHS Grampian area. It is part of the condition of that grant that a significant number of the dental practice patients are registered as NHS patients and individual boards are responsible for monitoring that. There have been some issues with a practice in Grampian that NHS Grampian took appropriate action to address. I understand that NHS Grampian has also written to all the practices that have received support through the Scottish dental access initiative to ensure that their status remains the same and that they are delivering the services that are agreed on as part of the grant conditions. The point about check-up rates is very important. It may be helpful if I inform the member that 83.6 per cent of patients who are registered in Grampian presented for treatment in the previous two years. That figure is higher than the Scottish average of 79.3 per cent, so it is clear that a significant number of patients in Grampian are making use of NHS dentistry services, the provision of which has significantly increased under this Government. I have no doubt that patients will continue to benefit from the increasing level of access that has been made available to them.

The member makes a good point because there were significant difficulties for patients in the NHS Grampian area who wanted to access NHS dentistry. For example, in 2007 only 59.2 per cent of children in NHS Grampian were registered with a dentist under NHS arrangements; as at 30 September 2012, that figure had reached 77.1 per cent. In 2007 only 28.9 per cent of adults in NHS Grampian were registered with a dentist under NHS arrangements; as at 30 September, 2012, that figure had reached 56 per cent. We continue to make provision under the Scottish dental access initiative, which is available in Grampian—particularly in Aberdeenshire and in Morayshire—to target areas where there continues to be limited access so that we can ensure that those patients in NHS Grampian who wish to have access to an NHS dentist are able to do so.

The equality team in NHS Health Scotland is working to strengthen equality of access for all in NHS Scotland through its health inequalities impact assessment, which will include those who use British Sign Language. In addition, we are supporting NHS 24 to provide an in-house centralised resource of BSL interpreters for NHS Scotland by funding four places on the Heriot-Watt University BSL undergraduate degree for four years.

I fully agree with David Torrance that good co-ordination of BSL services is crucial if we are to ensure that patients receive the person-centred care that they require. I am aware of the changes that were made in the NHS Fife area, where the BSL service was brought in-house, which allowed NHS Fife to enhance the quality of provision. Our hospital staff have clear and easy-to-follow protocols for accessing an interpreter for BSL users when they go to hospital. Of course, I have no doubt that we can make further progress on ensuring that patients who are BSL users get the necessary support. However, it is clear that the changes in the NHS Fife area will help to improve the quality of the services that are delivered there.

The Scottish Government supports a number of measures, both local and national, to tackle air pollution successfully. They include the establishment of a statutory framework and clear strategic aims for air quality and transport; supporting the development of renewable energy; providing grant funding for local authority actions; and providing advice and information through the Scottish air quality website and Scotland’s environment web.

I am sure that everyone would agree that improving air quality is important. A range of measures has been progressed nationally and locally, and improvements have been made in some areas. However, I recognise that, in some areas, that improvement has not been as fast or at as great a level as some members would like. I have no doubt that my ministerial colleagues with the environment and transport portfolios will continue to progress measures to drive up standards of air quality in Scotland in the years to come.

Although it has been a short debate, it is fair to say that no health debates in the Parliament lack proper recognition of the challenge that the demographic shift that is taking place in Scotland creates. We are at one in recognising the challenges that that shift creates not only for our health service but for a range of our public services that have to respond to the demands and needs of an ageing population. In itself, it is something to be celebrated that people are living longer, healthier lives, but I will pick up on the twin challenges that our NHS and social care system face because of the ageing population and lifestyle choices that can impact on our health system. Jackie Baillie and Nanette Milne recognised in their speeches the challenges that our ageing population creates. Other speakers also did that—Jackson Carlaw just made the same reference. The biggest challenge that it creates for us is how to configure our NHS and social care system in the future so that it can meet the demand. I do not think that any member is arguing that not changing is an option. Change is required even with an increasing budget. Even if we lived in the land in which Labour believes—the one with the money tree in the corner that can provide everything—we would still have to change our system to allow us to meet the ever-increasing demand that is being placed on it. If we are to do that, it must address what Nanette Milne referred to as the huge train that is speeding its way towards our health service.

The problem that I often have with Labour debates is that a nice, orderly queue of Labour back benchers lines up asking for money for X, Y and Z but at no point do they give any suggestion as to how we should configure services to address the challenge or where the resource will come from. To address the challenge, some key measures need to be taken. They concern getting the balance between our acute and primary care services right; getting the balance between our health service and social care support right; and ensuring that we have the right skills mix among our NHS and social care staff at the acute end and the primary care end. We must ensure that we implement all those measures in a way that is anticipatory and addresses the prevention agenda. I will pick up on a couple of examples of that. Some of the challenges that we have had with unscheduled admissions to our NHS services come about because of inadequate planning and services to prevent the need arising for someone to be admitted to hospital. The issue is also how we deploy our NHS staff to meet that challenge. For example, we know that, if we put allied health professionals in our accident and emergency departments, we can reduce the potential for older people to be admitted to hospital at any given time for certain conditions. Where that has happened in one part of our NHS, we must ensure that it happens across the rest of the NHS. The biggest change that is coming to our NHS and social care system—I believe that it is the biggest one in a generation—is the integration of health and social care. Jackie Baillie mentioned culture and referred to finance, but she did not address the real cultural challenge that will come about from the integration of health and social care. That will come from the different professional viewpoints about how services are provided, not whether they are financially assessed for one thing or another. That will be the real challenge that we face in ensuring that integration works effectively. One of the opportunities with which integration provides us is that it will allow us to ensure through joint commissioning that we bring those services together in a much more targeted and focused way with a clear focus on the long-term outcome. When we consider how we configure our NHS, it is important to look downstream, to some of the things that cause challenges in the health service. No one would dispute that both alcohol and tobacco continue to cause major public health challenges, which contribute to the pressures on our NHS. Minimum unit pricing is an important measure, which I believe can help to address the issue. I was delighted that, only yesterday, the European Union Commissioner for Health and Consumer Policy, Commissioner Borg, said to the European Parliament’s Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety: “All the studies of which I am informed regarding measures to control either tobacco or alcohol have shown that the measures which are most effective are the fiscal ones.” That is why minimum unit pricing has an important part to play in dealing with some of the challenges that we face from alcohol. The Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Act 2012 indeed continues to be challenged by the Scotch Whisky Association, and we have to wait for that legal process to be completed—just as was the case with the tobacco display ban. There are around 13,000 deaths a year and more than 56,000 people are admitted because of tobacco use each year. Those are challenges that we must address if we are to get the balance right in taking forward the NHS and social care system and if we are to ensure that it is fit to meet the challenges that it faces in the years to come.

This is the first published report of Clostridium difficile ribotype 332 in the United Kingdom and worldwide, though new strains have occurred frequently over the past 10 years. On 23 April, Health Protection Scotland alerted clinicians and laboratory staff across the national health service to the emergence of the new strain, and a reference was published in its weekly report on 1 May. Health Protection Scotland advises that the identification of a novel ribotype does not require any immediate changes to surveillance or in the antibiotics that are used to treat CDIs. There is no evidence to suggest that the identification of the ribotype poses a greater health risk to the public than other known strains. The same infection prevention, control and treatment measures apply to CDI caused by ribotype 332 as they do to any other form of CDI. The healthcare associated infection task force national advisory group has been asked to consider the emergence of the new strain as part of its on-going remit to develop responses to emerging new infections.

The member rightly recognises the significant progress that has been made in reducing C difficile infections in NHS Scotland. Since January to March 2007, there has been an 82 per cent drop in the number of C difficile infections among patients over 65. We must build on that. Announced and unannounced inspections by the Healthcare Environment Inspectorate ensure that there is robust evidence of action being taken by individual health boards in their healthcare settings to make sure that there are proper prevention control measures in place. Alongside that, Scottish Government officials review the HEI inspection reports, together with boards’ improvement plans to establish whether and be assured that progress is being made. The HEI task force is also kept informed, where appropriate, of inspection outcomes to identify any additional polish measures that may be needed to improve patient safety and patient care environments.

It is right to recognise that significant improvements have been made to how our healthcare environments are inspected and the quality of the hygiene in them. Although good progress has been made, as I said in my earlier response it is essential that we build on that progress. We review the HEI reports so that we are assured that health boards are taking action where there have been indications of a deficiency in their processes. Boards are in no doubt about the Government’s commitment to address the issue and our desire to see improvement. To assist our boards, we have provided £5 million annually to allow them to employ several hundred additional cleaners to assist with the cleaning of our hospitals and other healthcare facilities. That allows us to ensure that the environments are kept to the highest possible hygiene standards.

I agree. When it comes to such issues, there is the potential for the release of partial information to be misinterpreted as a desire to withhold information. The member is alluding to the concerns that were expressed about how Health Protection Scotland announced the identification of the new ribotype. As I have mentioned, the strain does not raise any further safety issues regarding treatment, surveillance or any action necessary to deal with the infection. There are more than 500 different C difficile ribotypes. On reflection, I think that it is clear that Health Protection Scotland could have been more proactive in making information available from the outset, to balance patient confidentiality issues with the need to reassure the public. The proactive approach that NHS Fife then took helped to address concerns that might have arisen as a result of the information that HPS had made available.

The effect of the zero tolerance approach is illustrated by the significant progress that has been made—I mentioned the 82 per cent reduction in the number of C difficile cases in patients who are over 65. We have an on-going programme of HEI inspections, which we introduced to drive up standards, and we continue to make progress in that regard. We also have an annual programme of work with staff to reinforce the importance of hand hygiene in the context of hospital-acquired infections, and there is on-going auditing work to identify further measures in NHS Scotland to improve the situation. That succession of measures demonstrates the zero tolerance approach that this Government has taken since 2007 to address healthcare associated infections. The marked reduction in the number of cases clearly reflects the strong measures that the Government has taken forward. The member asked about individual reprimands in health boards. I am sure that he recognises that the issue is not the tally of reprimands that have been issued but the creation of a culture in which a robust system of hand hygiene is in place, so that staff do not think twice about hand hygiene but act automatically. We are aiming for such a culture in NHS Scotland, which is why we have seen such a marked reduction in the number of hospital-acquired infections over the past six years.

I am aware of the new technology. NHS Scotland is always keen to consider how to apply new forms of technology, to improve patient safety and the healthcare environment. No doubt NHS Scotland will consider the issue as part of its on-going improvement work around addressing hospital-acquired infections.

NHS Fife is no different from any other NHS board in seeing a marked reduction in the number of C difficile infections in its hospitals. As I said in my earlier response, although this new ribotype has been identified, that does not mean that any treatment, surveillance or preventative measures that are being taken have to be changed. That is why we have also referred the matter to the healthcare associated infection task force, which is the national advisory group that will consider the emergence of this new strain. I stress that this new ribotype is one of several hundred that are out there and that it is sensitive to the antibiotics used to treat C difficile infections. On that basis, NHS Fife has, as any board would do, set up a problem assessment team in partnership with Health Protection Scotland to look at whether it can take further measures to reduce healthcare associated infections such as C difficile. It is important to recognise that NHS Fife has made significant progress and that a process is in place to evaluate whether it can take any further measures to reduce infection rates. However, this new ribotype does not change the way in which we treat, manage and prevent CDIs in our hospitals.

I begin by congratulating George Adam on securing time for this important debate. As a minister who has to respond to members’ business debates on a range of conditions, I should say that the value of someone’s personal experience always throws into relief the impact that a condition can have on the life of an individual and their family. George Adam has done that in debates on MS on a number of occasions and it is to his credit. I am not sure whether Stacey appreciates some of the personal information that he discloses to us, but I congratulate George on the work that he has undertaken to pursue MS issues. I also take this opportunity to congratulate the MS Society on its 60th anniversary. It does a tremendous amount of work with individuals in helping to improve their lives. It also does a vital amount of promoting new research and raising awareness and understanding of the condition. All that is extremely valuable. I welcome the report that the MS Society published this week. It is balanced and it reflects on the areas in which good progress has been made in Scotland and other parts of the UK, as well as illustrating areas in which further work and improvements are required. I share the MS Society’s aims that everyone who has MS should be able to access the care and support that they need, and we clearly need to do more, especially given the high levels of MS in Scotland. A number of members referred to the national neurological standards, which were introduced in January 2010 specifically to address some of the issues that Neil Findlay brought up in his contribution about trying to reduce the variance that can exist between different health board areas. Some detailed work went into the development of those standards, and work was done with all 14 of our territorial boards. Within those standards, three are specific to MS. They cover access to specialist services, diagnosis, and on-going management. The standards specifically state that people who have MS should have access to a multidisciplinary team, including a consultant and an MS nurse. The MS Society acknowledges the fact that, on the whole, people in Scotland who have MS have access to a broad range of specialists. The standards also set out the requirement that people who have MS should have access to a review from an MS specialist service at least once every 12 months. It is important that, if necessary, that review can take place at an earlier stage through self-referral. The implementation of the national neurological standards is key to delivering the improvements that the MS Society’s report is looking for. To achieve that, we have provided health boards with funding of £1.2 million to develop local neurological improvement networks. All 14 boards have demonstrated a real desire to move forward and improve local services, although I recognise that some are starting from different points from others and still have to make progress. I was very conscious that, having established the national neurological standards and completed the peer review, and given the willingness that had been established on the part of boards to make progress, we needed to ensure that we maintained momentum and oversight in the process. That is why we established the national neurological advisory group, which is a collaboration between NHS Scotland and the third sector to oversee and support our boards and to ensure that they continue to improve on their plans. As has been mentioned, the advisory group has already identified as one of its initial workstreams the need to ensure consistent and equitable access to MS services throughout Scotland. I hope that I can reassure members that we are not just taking that forward within NHS Scotland; the MS Society is a key partner in delivering on that workstream and has a member of the workstream group to assist with that. Malcolm Chisholm referred to the work that still has to be taken forward within the boards on the neurological standards and the opportunities resulting from the integration of health and social care. The report recognises that and provides us with good opportunities to build on the progress that has been made. One of the key issues highlighted in the report is the concern about access to disease-modifying drugs. The United Kingdom MS risk share scheme, established in 2002, includes a number of drugs that patients in Scotland can access provided that they meet criteria from the Association of British Neurologists for those who can benefit from the drugs in question. More recently, the Scottish Medicines Consortium has licensed further drugs to help to treat patients with MS. Clinical care is a matter for clinicians directly, and the Routledge review is looking at how access is provided to new drugs. However, if MS patients are unable to access drugs for their condition in their area, whether that is down to lack of knowledge on the part of clinicians or a lack of information about what the options are, it is a matter of concern to me. I have asked officials to explore how we can identify the barriers and what action can be taken to remove them. A number of members talked about the need to ensure that those who have MS receive the type of care and support that they require within the community. I believe that the best type of care and support is person-centred care, which is why I place so much value in the benefits that come from self-directed support. The Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013 will come into force this time next year. The MS Society report highlights the areas where progress is being made and where further progress needs to be made. I can assure the chamber that this Administration is determined to ensure that we build on the progress that has been made so that further improvements are gained in the years to come. Meeting closed at 17:58.

There are no charges for repeat prescriptions. Prescriptions are free to all national health service patients in Scotland. In the 12 months up to the abolition of prescription charges, just under 432,000 prescription prepayment certificates were bought by patients. The certificates covered periods of four or 12 months and were aimed at patients with repeat medicine needs. All those patients are now benefiting from the removal of a tax on ill health. Prior to abolition, it was estimated that some two thirds of paid-for prescriptions could be attributed to treating long-term conditions, for which repeat prescriptions are most common. That shows how our policy on free prescriptions is helping the most vulnerable people in our society to access the medicines that they need, so that they no longer have to put cost before their health.

The prescribing workstream in NHS Scotland’s efficiency and productivity programme aims to develop an information technology tool and a best-practice document to help general practices to improve the quality of their repeat medicine review processes. We are giving careful consideration to the management of repeat prescription lists to reduce the potential for overordering of medicines that are not required by patients—Chic Brodie referred to the issue. The aim of the IT tool will be to support general practitioners, in a straightforward way, to implement the repeat medicines review, polypharmacy and Scottish patient safety programme initiatives. The IT tool and the best-practice document should be available to NHS boards and GP practices during the course of this year.

I am not entirely sure whether Richard Simpson is advocating the reintroduction of prescription charges. If that is the case, it is to be regretted. The free prescription policy that we have introduced in Scotland helps to support the most vulnerable people in our society, who often had to choose between paying for their medication and putting food on the table. We made the decision to end such a tax on ill health, and we will continue to pursue the policy, in the interests of the people of Scotland.

The Scottish Government considers and shares a range of healthcare quality statistics with NHS boards to support improvement and benchmarking. Those statistics include hospital standardised mortality ratios, readmission rates, lengths of stay, accident and emergency waits and hospital-associated infection rates. We encourage health boards to monitor their performance across all those areas and other relevant indicators to drive continuous performance improvement. NHS Lothian will be working with the Information Services Division to understand the factors influencing its readmission rates more fully. The Scottish Government will be updated on the outcome of that work and we will share the findings with other NHS boards as part of our improvement approach.

It is important that we allow NHS Lothian to undertake the review to get to the bottom of why there are variations in its readmission rates, particularly in the medical and surgical units. That review has to be undertaken on a site-by-site basis, so that NHS Lothian can interrogate that data as thoroughly as possible in order to look at what the implications are from the acute end as well as from a primary care and a community care angle. My understanding is that the review work will be reported to the board’s healthcare governance committee in June, which will allow it to look at what further measures may be necessary to address that issue. That will include looking at areas such as delayed discharges and how it is working with different local authorities to address such issues. The board will share those findings with us, and we will then share them with other health boards in Scotland to look at what further improvements can be made as a result of the review.

I, like others, congratulate John Pentland on securing time for this important debate about a significant day that I hope will become increasingly embedded within Scottish consciousness. There have been many worthwhile speeches from members. The Scottish Government first formally recognised international workers memorial day in 2010, when flags on Government buildings were lowered. A number of members have referred to memorial sites within their constituencies and the plans for the memorial on the Ravenscraig site. Only a few weeks ago, I passed the memorial for the Stockline disaster. Such memorials are important in ensuring that tragedies are not forgotten by communities or by individuals. In my constituency in Falkirk, a new workers memorial is planned for the high street, which will make it much more visible and bring it right to the heart of the community from the location of the present plaque within Falkirk Council’s municipal buildings. The new memorial has involved a tremendous amount of work that has been led by Duncan McCallum, who works diligently on behalf of the National Union of Journalists. Although responsibility for workplace health and safety is reserved to the UK Government, the Scottish Government is doing what it can within its existing powers to encourage continuous improvement in occupational health and safety. We recognise the importance of safe, healthy working environments and, equally, the importance of partnership working in addressing those issues. The Scottish centre for healthy working lives, which is funded by the Scottish Government, provides free and confidential advice to employers and employees. The centre has developed a range of partnerships with organisations, including with the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents on managing occupational road risk; with Scottish Business in the Community on training for mentally healthy workplaces; and with the STUC to train trade union representatives. It also runs initiatives in partnership with organisations such as the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland in order to reach smaller and medium-sized enterprises and look at what they can do to improve the work environment for their employees. John Pentland is absolutely right to highlight the significant role that trade unions play in minimising occupational health and safety risks and the incidents that can result from them. Just last week, the First Minister, when he was addressing the STUC, stated: “Trade unions are important partners for the Scottish Government and we value our relationship with them very highly indeed. Strong trade unions mean strong workplaces and a strong economy... and I believe the trade union movement can and will continue to play an important and valuable role in Scotland in the years to come.” The First Minister also stressed that we are totally opposed to blacklisting and to the compiling of blacklists, which some companies have undertaken, and he outlined steps to ensure that blacklisting is not taking place on public contracts in Scotland. On behalf of the Scottish Government and its agencies, the First Minister also invited the unions to work with us on developing guidance for public bodies on addressing the issue in future procurement processes and public contracts. As Neil Findlay mentioned, the Scottish Affairs Committee at Westminster is continuing to conduct an inquiry into blacklisting, and I am aware that Mr Findlay is bringing to the chamber a debate on that issue next week. We welcome that inquiry and will continue to work with the committee following the findings of its interim report, which was published last Tuesday. I share John Pentland’s concerns, which have been reflected in other members’ contributions, about the UK Government’s changes to health and safety regulations. Such changes run the risk of sending out the wrong signal to less scrupulous employers, who may unfortunately see them as an opportunity to abrogate their responsibilities for the health and safety of their workforce. I wrote to the UK Government on that very issue to caution against any moves that could increase the risk to workers. That followed similar correspondence from my predecessor Shona Robison, who expressed concerns about the reduction in the Health and Safety Executive’s budget and in proactive inspections, and the proposed introduction of fee-for-fault charges. I remain concerned about the significant cuts that the UK Government is making to the Health and Safety Executive’s budget, and I believe that the reduction in proactive inspections could result in an increased risk of injury and death among workers. This Government’s view is that now is not the time to put at risk the hard-won improvements in Scotland’s health and safety record. The latest HSE statistics for Scotland, for 2011-12, show a welcome downward trend in workplace injuries over the past five years. The prevalence rate of work-related illness has also fallen from 3 per cent to 2.5 per cent. Sadly, there has been a small increase in fatal injuries at work, which highlights the need to redouble our efforts in this area. We should acknowledge what lies behind the numbers, as 1.7 million working days are lost due to workplace injury and ill health. The economic cost is around £1 billion, but the human cost cannot be calculated.

There are still too many tragic stories of broken lives, unnecessary suffering and families who have lost loved ones. International workers memorial day allows us the opportunity to remember those who have lost their lives or their livelihoods because of unsafe workplaces or practices. It provides us with an opportunity to remember the dead, and to fight for the living.

Losing a loved one is a painful experience and to grieve their loss means, during the mix of joy and agony, remembering their life and living with the memory of them. When the loss is of a child, the pain and grief are amplified because of the futility of the passing of a life never fully lived. I believe that the recent cases of the treatment of ashes of very young children demonstrate that the existing legislation and current industry practice are falling short of what the public deserve. Today, I announce that I am establishing an independent commission to examine the policies and practices that are in place for handling ashes and cremated remains. The commission will be tasked with producing recommendations before the end of this year to inform new legislation and guidance on cremation and burials. Central to the new legislation will be that it must ensure a consistent approach to the treatment of ashes throughout Scotland and that families are treated sensitively and given the support and information that they need.

I agree. It is important that local authorities and other owners of crematoria are accountable for their historical practice. They must respond to any complaints or concerns that are raised by individuals or families, and they should duly investigate those complaints or concerns. I confirm that the Government will provide advice and information to local authorities around best practice in undertaking such investigations or any audits that may be required as a result of complaints that they have received. I also confirm that the national health service will comply fully with any local investigation that takes place.

I recognise the point that the member raises, particularly in relation to the recent case in Glasgow that was highlighted by my colleague Nicola Sturgeon on behalf of her constituent, who raised an issue of concern that I believe Glasgow City Council should investigate. The City of Edinburgh Council has set out a very good way in which that type of investigation can be undertaken independently to inform the council of any issues that may have arisen through its practice. I encourage Glasgow City Council to reflect on the measures that are being taken by the City of Edinburgh Council in considering the approach that it could take to investigating the particular case that has been highlighted by Nicola Sturgeon. The member talked about inconsistency in practice, which is an issue that I have concerns about. It is important that there is consistency in approach regarding how ashes from the cremation process are handled for young children. I am anxious to ensure that the commission is able to look at what practice has given rise to the inconsistency that has occurred in different local authority areas as well as, potentially, private crematoria, so that it can make recommendations that will allow us to produce legislation and guidance to ensure that a consistent approach is taken across the country.

One of the commission’s roles will be to ensure that there is consistency in the information that is provided to families on whether ashes may be available or are not available at that particular point. I understand that there are a number of technical issues that may affect whether ashes are available, but it is important that families are informed of that at the very start of the process, that the process is transparent, and that families can have confidence in it. One role that the commission will have is to explore the different practices and policies that have been taken forward in different crematoria in the country in order to ensure that there is a consistent approach and consistency in the information that is provided to parents at that time.

It is important to remember that the police investigation is the reason that the City of Edinburgh Council’s investigation has not been able to take the full range of evidence that it would have liked to take at this stage. It is important that that due process is recognised, because of the potential for using evidence at a later stage, should any criminal prosecutions take place. I understand that Dame Elish Angiolini and her team have undertaken preliminary work to look at issues that they can establish at an early stage and which do not impinge on the police investigation. Dame Elish Angiolini’s independence in undertaking that investigation into the historical practices at Mortonhall provides a good model that other local authorities, such as Glasgow City Council, could use in considering issues of concern that have been raised. The purpose of the commission is to look at what practices and policies gave rise to the situation occurring in the first place. Its purpose is to establish that and then look at what measures are necessary to ensure that the situation does not happen again and that a consistent approach is taken across all our crematoria in Scotland, and by those in the NHS who may be involved in the process and those in the funeral care industry. It is important that we have a consistent approach and that we look at involving a number of individuals who can provide the support and advice that are necessary to take that forward.

I said that I intend to have commission members who can help to ensure that the process includes as many individuals as possible in considering what practice issues need to be addressed with any future legislation. I will consider who can be on the commission and who could represent parents and their interests when it comes to appointing the commission.

The Scottish Government notes with interest the various recommendations in the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland’s monitoring report, “When parents are detained”. The report highlights some areas where the commission believes that improvements could be made, such as increasing awareness of duties under section 278 of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003; highlighting that care plans should take into account any possible impact on the patient’s family; improving communication between the various professionals involved in a case; and improving child-friendly resources. The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that the effects of parental mental illness on children and families are mitigated as much as possible. We shall, therefore, carefully consider the recommendations in the report and whether there are any ways in which we can assist in the promotion of good practice.

The services that are provided by Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board to which Mr Wilson refers should be at a similar level and of a similar nature to those that are provided in the area of NHS Lanarkshire’s responsibility. The report highlighted issues around section 278 of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, which applies to all health board and local authority areas. I expect to see greater consistency in taking that forward, as is proposed in the seven recommendations in the report. We will look at what further measures can be taken to ensure greater consistency across health board and local authority areas in applying that particular provision of the 2003 act.

Like other members, I congratulate Sandra White on securing time for a timely debate that coincides neatly with the publicity campaign that we are running on taking the test for bowel cancer. I have no doubt that every member in the chamber knows someone who has been affected by cancer and I recognise that people hold a deep fear about the possibility of being diagnosed with cancer because of the consequences and difficulties that can arise from that. It is only natural that people tend to be reluctant or reticent to be tested for the possibility of having cancer. We must balance that issue with the need to inform people that if they do have cancer, then the earlier it is diagnosed the more likely that it can be effectively treated. That is exactly what the bowel cancer screening programme intends to do. Cancer is a key priority for the Scottish Government and for the National Health Service in Scotland and it is essential that we make progress by detecting cancer at a much earlier stage. A number of members referred to the detect cancer early programme, which is a four-year, £30 million programme that is a key part of progressing earlier intervention and prevention. The programme is ambitious, because we are dealing with deeply held cultural views about going to the doctor and getting medical advice and checks at a much earlier stage. Nonetheless, the programme is extremely important and that is why the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, when he launched the campaign to raise awareness of the Scottish bowel screening programme last month, emphasised the point that detecting cancer earlier will, quite literally, save lives. That is why participating in the programme is extremely important for those who are of an age—of which I am not, as yet—to be invited to participate. In their contributions, Sandra White and Jim Eadie highlighted the fact that if bowel cancer is detected early then nine out of 10 people can expect to survive, which is fantastic news. As Jim Eadie illustrated, there is a human story behind those statistics and they highlight how treatable the condition is if it is detected at an early stage. Jackson Carlaw and other members highlighted the fact that Scotland continues to lag behind other European countries on cancer survival rates, and with an aging population we expect to see an increasing number of cancer instances. Clearly we must do more and that is why all men and women aged between 50 and 74 have been invited to participate in the Scottish bowel screening programme every two years, and why, as of April, those who are over 74 will be able to request a screening kit every two years through the Scottish bowel screening helpline. I hope that the campaign, which several members referred to, will help to empower people to talk about things much more openly and frankly. I witnessed the campaign a few weeks ago when I was at Firhill watching Partick Thistle. The campaign team was there on the concourse, mixing with the fans and providing them with information about the screening programme. The club also made some announcements during the course of the half-time break. Obviously, as a fan I am biased about the club, but I congratulate Partick Thistle on participating and on working with the screening programme to progress the campaign. I encourage other football clubs to do that because it is a very good way of reaching a key group, particularly men of the age groups that can participate in the programme. The important thing is that a person diagnosed with bowel cancer will receive the best possible services and treatment available. We have made progress in those areas. In his speech, Malcolm Chisholm asked about future developments. He referred to two particular areas. One was the faecal immunochemical test—FIT—that has been developed. We are carrying out some work on that in Scotland as part of the screening programme. The FIT is a more costly test and we need to evaluate it to determine whether it would be effective as a first-line test. We are currently carrying out some pilot work to find out how effective it could be, because it has the potential to detect some forms of bowel cancer that the existing test may not identify. The second point that he made concerned flexible sigmoidoscopy—I am told that the short term is flexi sig. That screening programme has other benefits, and we have provided some £2 million to run a pilot over the next two years to determine whether that test could be used in Scotland to continue to make progress. We have been making progress and we need to make further progress in the years to come. The public awareness campaign has an important part to play in breaking down some of the existing barriers and encouraging people to participate in the testing scheme. That can help to improve people’s survival of bowel cancer should they be diagnosed with it. I encourage all members to continue to do what they can in their constituencies to encourage their constituents to participate in the screening programme. I have no doubt that all the members who are in the chamber will join Prostate Cancer UK in trying to raise awareness of another cancer that, if diagnosed early, can be treated effectively. That charity is lobbying the Parliament today to try to raise awareness among men about getting treated early for prostate cancer. 13:01 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Our target to ensure that 25 per cent of children and young people have access to insulin pump therapy is due to be reported on after March 2013. Although it is clear that good progress has been made in a number of areas, we are disappointed that some boards will not meet the target by the end of March 2013. We remain determined that boards continue to work towards this rightly ambitious target and ensure that equal access to pumps across Scotland is available. We are working closely with boards to ensure that they have plans in place to achieve the target safely.

The work that we have undertaken with boards over the past year and a half was to make sure that they have an increasing level of capacity among their staff to support patients moving on to insulin therapy. I understand that NHS Grampian has a service level agreement in place with an insulin pump provider to help to support the training and to provide advice to adults who are moving on to insulin pumps. However, the situation is more complex in the paediatrics sector, where there has to be a much more integrated approach across a number of services, such as education and health services, and families and carers, which makes things more difficult. However, I understand that NHS Grampian is continuing to look at what further measures it can take to build on its existing capacity and staff levels to support patients moving on to insulin pumps or getting further advice on them.

I recognise Mr Stewart’s long-standing interest in this issue. He is right to recognise that the target is about improving not only the way in which insulin pumps are provided but the way in which services for those with diabetes are provided. I share his disappointment that a number of boards have not made the progress that I would expect. For example, the performance of NHS Highland, which covers the member’s constituency, is unacceptable. Both the chair and the chief executive need to show much clearer leadership in taking forward this ambitious target much more effectively. We are working with the boards to make sure that they have adequate plans in place locally to increase the provision of insulin pumps in their area. We have asked them to report to us on a monthly basis on how they are building on that progress over the months to come.

The Scottish Government funded the green health project to look at the health benefits of access to green space, building on the existing evidence base. That project found that more green space in urban neighbourhoods is associated with a lower risk of mortality among Scotland’s poorest men. In respect of middle-aged Scots who were not in work and lived in the most deprived urban areas, the research found healthier levels of the stress hormone cortisol among those who had more green space in their neighbourhoods compared with those who had less. Furthermore, the project found that Scots who use green spaces for physical activity have a lower risk of poor mental health than those who use non-natural environments, such as the gym and streets.

I am very aware of that project, as Forth Valley royal hospital is in my constituency. The hospital site is fairly unique, as it is on the old Royal Scottish national hospital site and it has an extensive woodland and grassland area associated with it. The hospital has made good use of that for the benefit of patients and relatives. We have taken forward a number of pieces of work in the area at the national level through the green exercise partnership, which involves the Forestry Commission Scotland, Scottish Natural Heritage and NHS Health Scotland, to look at what further programmes could be used to improve NHS healthcare in green space settings. That partnership is working with eight area health boards in Scotland to support them in collaborating on how they can improve the use of green spaces in local hospital areas. There is a lot of evidence that shows that benefits can be gained from social prescribing, through general practitioner practices referring patients on to different activities that are based in green spaces. That is a way in which primary care can help with the effective use of local green spaces to improve people’s health and wellbeing.

Responsibility for the overall provision of NHS general dental services in the area rests with NHS Orkney. As at 14 March 2013, 1,093 adults were waiting to register with an NHS dentist in the NHS Orkney area.

We have had a considerable level of contact on the issue over the past year or so, and it is fair to say that, as Liam McArthur recognises, NHS Orkney has made significant progress in the area. As I mentioned, 1,093 adults are waiting to register with an NHS dentist in the NHS Orkney area. In July 2012, the figure was 2,120, so there has been almost a 50 per cent reduction over a relatively short period of time. However, I recognise that further progress needs to be made. I understand that NHS Orkney has two permanent dental officer posts that are vacant, for which it is about to advertise. It also has a temporary post that is vacant, into which it hopes to recruit someone. In addition, I have asked the chief dental officer to maintain contact with NHS Orkney to ensure that it is getting the right support and advice to allow it to continue to make progress. The most recent report that I had from the chief dental officer was that the board was confident that it was moving in the right direction and that, should it require any further support from central Government, it would request that. I have asked the board to keep us informed of progress so that we see the improvements that have been made in the NHS Orkney area continuing to be made.

The Scottish Government has established the health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment target to “Deliver faster access to mental health services by delivering 18 weeks referral to treatment for Psychological therapies from December 2014”. Since the HEAT target was set, we have already made improvements in service performance across Scotland. The target is acting as a driver for service improvement. We have published “The Matrix: A Guide to Delivering Evidence-based Psychological Therapies in Scotland”, which gives guidance on what treatments are effective for which conditions. It also stresses that services must provide adequate supervision for staff who deliver psychological interventions, to ensure patient safety and the delivery of evidence-based care. Through NHS Education for Scotland, we are working to assess and develop workforce capacity to ensure that a range of staff are equipped to deliver such therapies.

The member raises an extremely important point. More than any other group, older people are less likely to have mental illness diagnosed and less likely to receive treatment, although some prescribing data suggests that the situation is improving. Delivery of the psychological therapies HEAT target applies to older people in the same way that it applies to the rest of the population, and we will monitor progress on that. In addition, we established a working group to focus on the psychological needs of older people. The group identified the need to improve access to services across the whole of the mental health system. We are working with NHS boards and other partners to take forward the group’s recommendations and to develop outcome measures that are related to older people’s mental health. Some local authorities are taking forward such work through service redesign under the change fund, and NHS Education for Scotland is delivering training to NHS staff on psychological interventions for older people. That work includes the training of a cohort of older people cognitive behavioural therapists. A range of measures are being taken, which I believe can help us to improve the way in which services are delivered to older people with a mental illness. We will monitor that as we move towards achieving the HEAT target in December 2014.

I recognise the issue that the member raises. It is why we published “The Matrix”, which presents a range of psychological therapies and sets out where they can best be applied. It is extremely important that any psychological therapies that are made available in the NHS in Scotland have a good evidence base. We are always open to considering other therapies that can be provided, where there is a good evidence base and if they can be included in “The Matrix”. That was considered prior to the publication of “The Matrix” last year. It is important that we ensure that people can access services in a way that best suits them. That is why, in delivering the services, local authorities and health boards must work in partnership to design services that allow older people to access those services as and when appropriate.

The waiting time for the member’s constituent is unacceptable. The target has been brought in to deal with such issues and to drive improvement. It is worth noting that, as I understand it, the target is the only one of its nature in the world for access to psychological therapies. It is ambitious, but we need to have a target that helps to improve the way in which services are delivered, drive up standards and speed up access to therapies. Some of the work that we are doing is to ensure that boards record information consistently, because the reality is that some boards have not been recording the information. We need to ensure that we have good-quality data so that we have confidence in the progress that boards are making. We can then publish the data so that people can make an informed judgment about how boards are performing. The target is ambitious, but it can help to improve the way in which the services are delivered overall.

I am aware that some communication skills services, such as speech therapy, if provided at an early age, can address communication disorders that can become more difficult in later life, which can lead to a range of issues. That type of early intervention is crucial in tackling some of the issues much more effectively. It is important that all local authorities consider taking a much more preventative approach on the issues. The best way in which local authorities can achieve that is through early intervention. They should seek to support services to allow that to happen effectively in their areas.

We are committed to ensuring that everyone with a neurological condition is able to access the care and support that they need, including support for their families and carers. The national neurological advisory group, which was established with Scottish Government funding to support implementation of the clinical standards for neurological conditions, has reported that all national health service boards now have improvement plans and improvement leads in place and are providing reports on progress. Prior to that, the Scottish Government provided NHS boards with funding of around £1.2 million over two years to assist them in developing local neurological improvement networks.

As I mentioned in my response, the national neurological advisory group was established to help to support the implementation of the clinical standards, which should help to address some of the inconsistencies that Mary Fee has recognised. That is why each board was asked to produce an improvement plan and to put in place improvement leads who can allow that to happen in a consistent way. I recognise that there will continue to be some inconsistencies in how boards take such matters forward, but we now have the infrastructure in place to assist us in ensuring that there is much more consistency. Some of the feedback that I have heard from some organisations is that they are starting to see some improvements as a result of that, but I recognise that further progress needs to be made and I will be keen to see that progress continuing.

This spring, the Scottish Government will launch a consultation on the future use of the resources that will be devolved following Westminster’s decision to close the independent living fund.

The member is inviting me to give a commitment on the basis of information that I do not yet have from the Westminster Government on exactly what level of resource will be devolved to the Scottish Government. Once we have some of that information, we will be in a better place to be able to take forward what may be the appropriate measures here in Scotland. I recognise that many disability organisations were extremely disappointed by the way in which the UK Government conducted the consultation on its decision to close the independent living fund. I can give a commitment to Parliament that we will have a genuine consultation that will seek people’s views on what might be the best approach in Scotland. However, that will be largely dependent on the level of resource that is devolved to the Scottish Government by the UK Government. As yet, we do not have that detail confirmed.

I know that, over several years, the ILF has been subject to a number of changes, which started with the previous Government and continued with the existing Government. We are in a situation in which the UK Government has decided that it wishes to bring the independent living fund to an end. I recognise that that causes uncertainty and anxiety for those who are currently recipients of the fund. I am keen to take forward in a genuine, open and transparent way a consultation with stakeholders that can allow them to express their views on what future plans we can take forward here in Scotland. However, I again issue a note of caution, in that we are not aware of the exact level of finance that will be devolved by the UK Government to the Scottish Government. That will have a significant bearing on any future plans that we have here in Scotland, but there is a willingness on the part of the Scottish Government to engage with stakeholders in a genuine way to allow them to express their views on what the future shape of any service should be like in Scotland.

Like others, I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing time for this important debate. I thank all those members who stayed and have contributed to what has been a powerful debate, and I particularly thank those who shared with us some of their experiences with their loved ones and the impact that dementia has had on their families. I also pay tribute to Tommy Whitelaw. I have met him and I follow him on Twitter. He does extremely important work, including with the Health and Social Care Alliance’s dementia carers’ voices project. I also pay tribute to the work of Alzheimer Scotland’s national dementia carers action network. What is unique about the dementia carers’ voices project was highlighted by Sandra White in her speech. It seeks to capture those moments of experience that come from the carers of those who look after someone with dementia, which can be an extremely powerful tool in helping both us, as policy makers, and others to understand the challenges and the issues that need to be addressed in helping to support individuals who have dementia and their carers. It is a valuable project that will help to shape how we do things in future. It provides an opportunity to ensure that we are well aware of the, at times, intensely challenging experiences for carers who live with someone with dementia and that we can support them as they go through their illness. A number of members mentioned the increasing challenge that we face as a society, given the demographic shift that is taking place in Scotland, as in many other western European countries, and the likelihood that it will lead to an increasing number of individuals within our population having dementia. It is important that we recognise the challenge that exists here and now, which is a challenge that we will also face in the years to come. We need to take appropriate action to address the challenges both now and into the future. That is why the national dementia strategy for Scotland is important. It has started that process in a strategic way. It focuses on meeting two challenges, and we have made good progress in those areas. One of the key challenges was the diagnostic test for individuals with dementia. Scotland has met that challenge extremely well and has outperformed England and Wales in that key area, but we need to ensure that we build on that in moving forward. The other key challenge was around implementing the standards of care for dementia in Scotland and the skills framework, “Promoting Excellence: A framework for all health and social services staff working with people with dementia, their families and carers”. Both are underpinned by the key principle that family carers should be equal partners in care. We have supported the work that Alzheimer Scotland is taking forward in appointing dementia nurse consultants to boards across Scotland. We now have 300 trained dementia champions, with more to come. However, we also know that it is important that professionals who work in healthcare and social care settings recognise the role of family carers in helping to support a loved one when, at times, they require a period in hospital or another care setting. From April, there will be our national guarantee that everyone who is diagnosed with dementia will receive a minimum of one year’s post-diagnostic support, co-ordinated by a named worker. That is very much about trying to do what Jackie Baillie highlighted, which is to ensure that we develop comprehensive, person-centred plans for the on-going and future care of individuals, and that we develop them in a way that is suited to the person’s particular situation. The post-diagnostic guarantee is not dependent on setting, whether it be a social care setting or a person’s home. We will also take forward work with the Life Changes Trust, as it administers grants from the Big Lottery Fund to the tune of some £25 million from this year for initiatives that will benefit people with dementia and their families and carers. As members have said, we are in the process of looking at bringing forward the second phase of our national dementia strategy. We have had an engagement process that has allowed the whole sector to get involved and express its views on how we should move forward. Our proposition paper outlines how we will build on the progress that has been made as we move forward to 2016 and ensure that we continue to upskill the workforce in both health and social care settings. We also want to help to sustain performance in early diagnosis and improve post-diagnostic support and care in hospitals. In all those areas and more, we want to engage with and involve people with dementia, their families and carers as equal partners in care. A number of members have referred to some of the challenges that carers can often face, particularly those who care for someone with dementia. It is extremely important that we continue to ensure that we do what we can to support carers in facing their many challenges. Some of the work that we are taking forward is about trying to ensure that we improve identification of carers, who can often be challenged in getting access to the services and support that might assist them—for example, the Fir Park service to which John Pentland referred. It is important that carers have the skills to allow them to do that, so we are funding NHS Education for Scotland and the Scottish Social Services Council to work on carer workforce development initiatives to help in that regard. One group that is particularly important in acting as a gatekeeper to support services is general practitioners. So far, we have taken forward a number of initiatives with them to help with access to support. The general medical services contract agreement for 2013-14 includes, for the first time, a specific carers indicator. That means that GP practices in Scotland must have systems in place to identify carers and a mechanism for referral of carers to services that can assist and support them. Fiona McLeod raised the dementia card. We are taking forward the young carers card and I have no doubt that that will develop into a carers card, which I think will help to address some of the issues that she mentioned. John Pentland raised employment for carers. One thing that we must do is to engage with the employment sector to ensure that it recognises the role of carers and the value of supporting them. That is something that I have already started, and we are just about to appoint a project worker with Carers Scotland to take forward an employers’ kitemark, which is about helping to ensure that employers have carer-friendly policies in place. There is certainly more that we can do and I am determined to ensure that we do it alongside our carers’ rights charter, carer training initiatives, the funding of the voluntary short breaks fund and the carers Parliament, which will meet here again this year, allowing carers to come together. I hope that I can assure Jim Hume that there is certainly no complacency on the part of the Government in trying to continue the process that we have been taking forward in recent years to help to support carers and to work with organisations that have an important role in supporting carers. Another area that I think is worth mentioning is the value that self-directed support can have for individuals with dementia and their carers. We ran a self-directed support project through Alzheimer Scotland in Ayrshire that proved to be very beneficial for families and individuals in finding ways and solutions that were best suited to them. I believe that the introduction of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013 is an opportunity to build on the work that Alzheimer Scotland is taking forward to ensure that more carers of individuals with dementia and dementia sufferers can benefit from self-directed support. The integration of health and social care provides us with a unique opportunity to ensure that services operate in a much more co-ordinated fashion, that we recognise carers’ roles and that services are much more aligned to individuals’ needs rather than those of organisations. I have no doubt that, as we move that forward, it will help to provide greater certainty across the country that services will be delivered in a much more joined-up fashion. Again, I congratulate Jackie Baillie on bringing the debate to the chamber. The Government regards this area as a key priority, and we will continue to build on the progress that has been made over recent years to ensure that we continue the momentum that has been gained and that it makes a real difference to the lives of both those in Scotland who have dementia and their carers. Meeting closed at 18:05.

As other members have done, I congratulate Mark McDonald on securing time for the debate and on giving the Parliament the opportunity to consider some of the issues that are highlighted in the “Count us in: it pays to listen” report. I welcome the publication of the report, particularly because of the way in which the National Autistic Society has listened to the views of those with autism in shaping some of the key issues that are highlighted in the report. As Mark McDonald mentioned, I attended the recent parliamentary reception and, like Fiona McLeod, I found it affirming. It was a good opportunity to highlight the content of the report and it allowed those who were involved in helping to shape it to engage with elected members and to discuss their views and aspirations. One key aspect of the report and the work that the National Autistic Society has undertaken is the way in which it has looked at the issue of autism across Scotland and considered what quality of life means for individuals with autism and what changes they would like. The driving force behind that approach is that the society very much believes that individuals with autism are experts in their own right about their condition. The society is completely correct on that. As in many other areas such as caring, the experts in the field are often those who have direct personal experience. The report sets out the views and aspirations of those with autism and what they want to be put in place. Members have referred to the four key recommendations in the report. One is on sustained employment and the appointment of an autism employment ambassador to help to provide opportunities for people with autism in workplaces. Local authorities can do work on that. The second recommendation is on choice and control, which is about effective transition planning and support after diagnosis to enable people with autism to self-advocate. The third is on challenging discrimination, which Mark McDonald highlighted. Many people with autism often experience negative attitudes and a lack of understanding and appreciation. The fourth recommendation is on improving professional knowledge and access to support in local authorities, the health service and other services. Those bodies have an important role in helping to address issues of social exclusion and to challenge issues that might be causing difficulties for individuals with autism and their families and carers. The Government is committed to seeking to improve the lives of people with autism and their families and carers in Scotland. In November 2011, I launched the Scottish strategy for autism, which was undertaken in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. If we are to achieve the type of change that I believe is necessary, the key part of the strategy will be partnership working between the statutory and third sectors collectively to deliver the necessary change. If any strategy, whether it be on autism, carers or mental health, does not create real change on the ground for individuals, their families and carers, the words on the page mean very little. I am determined to ensure that the autism strategy delivers real change that has a positive effect on the lives of individuals with autism and on their carers and families. Local authorities have an important part to play in delivering that. Linda Fabiani highlighted a good example of the need to ensure that services operate in a joined-up way that offers carers the best opportunity to continue their caring role. To help to deliver some aspects of the strategy, the Scottish Government made an investment of £13.4 million of funding over the next four years. One part of that is the autism development fund of £1.5 million per annum, which is being made available to local and national organisations to allow them to deliver local services on the ground. To date, 53 organisations across the country have benefited from that funding. Other initiatives are being funded to drive forward the work of the strategy to address the gap in services and to achieve the strategy’s two-year, five-year and 10-year goals, including the roll-out of six new one-stop shops across the country, funding for training courses, and investment in a 10-month national mapping project. That mapping project will be extremely important in helping us to identify what services exist, where the gaps are, and what action needs to be taken at the local level to address the issues. Only yesterday, I met representatives from a local autism initiative in my constituency, which continues to be challenged by gaps in services. If we are to make progress, it is important that we identify those gaps. It is equally important that, when an individual is diagnosed with autism, that individual and their carers and families have somewhere to go to get information about the services that are available. The one-stop shops have a key role in helping to deliver that. The one-stop shop in Edinburgh has already been established, and I had the pleasure of opening the one-stop shop in Glasgow a few weeks ago. There is one in Fife, and the Lanarkshire one opened on 8 March. Other one-stop shops are being planned for Grampian, Highlands, Tayside and Ayrshire. The Highlands shop will open very soon and the others will open later in spring. We have also been providing support to research areas to increase our understanding of autism. I am keen to see progress in research into waiting times for people who are waiting for a diagnosis, and we are providing funding to assist the progress of that research. Mark McDonald referred to the fact that I have asked the national ASD reference group to look at the recommendations in the “Count us in: it pays to listen” report to see how we can implement them as part of the delivery of our autism strategy. Since its launch, the strategy has started to make a difference, but I recognise that much more remains to be done in the area. Working along with our partners in the third sector and local government, and with those who have autism and their families, we can continue to make progress. The Government is committed to implementing its strategy in the coming years and delivering the change that many individuals are looking for. Meeting closed at 17:42.

As everyone in the chamber does, I recognise that we all have a shared interest in ensuring that our NHS is the best health service that can be provided to the public. I have no doubt that many members have made use of it themselves or have family members who have made use of it. We all want patients to receive the best possible service. We have always recognised that the service does not always get it right. I have seen it not get it right for members of my family, and I speak to constituents for whom the NHS does not get it right. However, I also speak to constituents and members of my family for whom the NHS gets it right time and again because of the hard work and dedication of its staff. I recognise that when there is clear evidence that the NHS is getting it wrong, we as a Government have a responsibility to take action to address those errors and to ensure that we rectify them when they occur. That has always been the case with this Government. We recognise that we need to continue to build on the improvements that have been made, and to improve the service overall. There is one respect in which I disagree with what some members have said. On issues to do with our NHS, there are times when assertion is presented as fact, and time and again there is a lack of evidence for the criticisms that are made. People such as Jackie Baillie can make such assertions over and over on certain issues, but that does not mean that they automatically become fact. When it is a fact that errors are being made, we can take action. Jackie Baillie asserted that there are fewer staff in the NHS now than there were in the NHS that we inherited. The fact is that that is not the case; there are more staff in our NHS now than there were when we inherited it. I will put the issue in context. There are more qualified nurses and midwives per 1,000 of the population in Scotland than there are in the rest of the UK; there are 7.9 nurses and midwives per 1,000 of the population in Scotland, and there are 5.8 in England, 7.1 in Wales and 7.8 in Northern Ireland. Therefore, we have a significant number of NHS staff in comparison with other parts of the UK. Jackie Baillie said that we have an inadequate number of staff in our A and E departments. It is worth bearing it in mind that, under this Government, there has been a 92.7 per cent increase in the number of A and E consultants in Scotland. I recognise that, despite the improvements that we have made, we continue to face significant challenges. In our A and E departments, we face the challenge of ensuring that patients are treated as quickly as possible and moved on to the next place where their care can be provided. We need to take the concerted action that is necessary to address those challenges. That is why the Scottish Government has brought forward its programme for unscheduled care—it wants to ensure that we plan for such issues more effectively so that the move from the community to the front end of the hospital and on into the other departments in the hospital is handled much more effectively than is the case in some areas. Mark McDonald made an important point in his speech; in the scramble to have a go at the Scottish Government and the NHS, the progress that has been made in a number of areas is very often forgotten. For example, significant progress has been made in our treatment of people with cardiovascular disease and of people who have suffered strokes, and there have been improvements in cancer treatment in Scotland. However, we can certainly do more to prevent avoidable ill health and, thereby, to reduce the pressure on our NHS. Another very significant area of progress in recent years has been the reduction in HAIs. As of 9 January, the number of cases of Clostridium difficile in patients over 65 has decreased by 79.2 per cent—I said 79.2 per cent, not 7.9 per cent—compared with the figure for 2007. That massive improvement is a result of the dedication and work of our NHS staff. Moreover, in the latest quarter from July to September 2012, there were 33 cases of MRSA, which represents a decrease of 86.7 per cent—I said 86.7 per cent, not 8.6 per cent—from the figure for the equivalent period in 2007. That is another reflection of the progress that our staff are making. We have also increased the budget for that from £15 million to £50 million in order to continue the improvements. Our NHS has also made very significant improvements as a result of the five-year Scottish patient safety programme, which was launched in January 2008 and focuses on the acute sector with the key objectives of reducing HAI, adverse surgical incidents and adverse drug events, and of improving critical care outcomes and organisational and leadership safety culture. The programme, whose primary aim is to reduce mortality by 20 per cent by 2015, has reaped significant benefits for our NHS in Scotland. That is not just my view, but the international view. Don Berwick, the person who has been brought in by the Prime Minister to help to repair the damage that has been caused off the back of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust report, has stated: “The Scottish Patient Safety Programme is without doubt one of the most ambitious patient safety initiatives in the world—national in scale, bold in aims, and disciplined in science ... aligned toward a common vision, making Scotland the safest nation on earth from the viewpoint of health care.”

That view has been internationally recognised; indeed, Sweden, Norway and Denmark are all looking at adapting our patient safety programme. The programme applies not only in the acute setting. We have already moved it into mental health services, tomorrow I will launch it in our maternity care services, and next week the cabinet secretary will launch it in our primary care service. These significant improvements are a result of the changes that have been made over the past six years. I recognise that there are still areas where we can make further improvements, but I point out that at last week’s meeting of the Public Audit Committee the Auditor General said on waiting times: “we have not found ... evidence of manipulation at all”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 27 February; c 1238.] That does not mean that the Audit Scotland report did not highlight areas of inconsistency where further improvements can be made. Indeed, that is why we have accepted every single one of its recommendations and why three quarters of them have already been implemented. We want to ensure that we address the areas where further improvements can be made.

This Government is committed to building on the improvements that we have made in our NHS in Scotland over the past six years. Parliament can be confident that the cabinet secretary and I will continue to ensure that we build on that progress in the years to come.

You had them worried there, Presiding Officer. Like others, I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing the debate, on the constructive manner in which he has taken it forward and on his stout defence of the Vikings with regard to their role or otherwise in the incidence of MS in Orkney. Often, one of the most effective ways to get across the impact that a condition such as MS can have on someone’s life is through speaking about our personal experience of it. This was not the first time that George Adam has spoken about his and his wife Stacey’s experience of MS and how it has affected their lives. His words give us an insight into the challenges, both physical and emotional, that MS poses for individuals and couples. I should say that, knowing Stacey, I wish George Adam well when he gets home tonight. I am sure that everyone would recognise that it is in all our interests to try to ensure that individuals who are diagnosed with MS can access the best possible care and support. A number of members referred to the neurological standards that were implemented two years ago. We see them as being one of the key measures that can assist us in trying to drive forward greater consistency and equity in the way in which services are delivered for individuals with MS, and to ensure that patients receive care that is safe, effective and person-centred. Although the standards are generic, there are three that are specific to MS: access to specialist services, diagnosis, and on-going management. To take forward the standards, we provided boards with about £1.2 million over two years to develop neurological improvement networks. Several members have referred to the peer review papers that were published last year, reflecting on the progress that had been made by some boards and comparing them with the progress that had been made in other boards. I accept that they have highlighted some areas in which there continue to be deficiencies, but they have also highlighted areas in which there has been progress on the part of some boards. In order to continue the momentum in that work, we established a national neurological advisory group, which is a partnership between the third sector and NHS Scotland. It is a collaborative group that helps to oversee and support NHS boards in continuing to develop improvement plans in their areas. The group is made up of individuals who come from neurology-focused charities, clinicians, Scottish Government officials and various other people. Its role is to consider what boards are doing and to support them to make further progress on a collaborative basis, so that further improvement can be supported. Members might be aware that the national neurological advisory group has developed a work plan and has identified as one of its initial work streams the need to ensure consistency and equity of access to MS services across Scotland. I expect it to work in partnership with NHS boards to take the issue further. Rhoda Grant and a couple of other members touched on access to specialist nurses. For a number of years, there has been an ever-increasing number of specialist nurses in NHS Scotland for a number of different conditions. MS nurses can play an important role in helping individuals to receive the best possible care, and in signposting them to services of which they are aware and which can be used by MS patients. MS nurses can also bridge the gap between patient and consultants, which can ensure that people get the right type of advice and support. That type of specialist support is recognised in the neurological standards. It is clear that specialist nurses have an important role to play in achieving the neurological standards. I expect NHS boards across the country to reflect on that and on how they work on their local plans for improving neurological services. We must recognise that, although specialist nurses have a crucial role to play, other members of the multidisciplinary team—the medical staff, the allied health professional staff, the physiotherapists, the occupational therapists and the speech therapists—also have crucial roles in supporting people with MS. In planning services, NHS boards need to ensure that they have capacity to support individual patients and their needs. When we are improving services, it is important that we ensure that we hear the voices of individuals who have MS or who suffer from other neurological conditions. It is important to allow them to play a role in shaping the way in which services are improved at local level. That is why we provided funding to the Neurological Alliance of Scotland’s voices programme, which has been specifically designed to support individuals to engage with health boards and other service providers and to influence the shape of specific services. A number of health boards have made use of that service. I am not sure whether NHS Highland is one of them, but it is a service that we have funded and it is available for individual health boards. I will turn briefly to a couple of other issues that members have raised. The motion rightly makes it clear that Scotland has one of the highest incidences of MS in the world. Better data and better research will be critical to improving our understanding of why that is the case. There is often speculation about MS being linked to vitamin D deficiency, but there is, at present, no definitive evidence on that. However, we continue to monitor the emerging evidence in that area closely and if there is a recommendation that vitamin D provision needs to change, we will not hesitate to respond. We have provided pump-prime funding for the establishment of the Scottish MS register, which aims to collect information on all people in Scotland who have a new diagnosis of MS. Its purpose is to ensure a better understanding of the data, which will assist us in building up more information and help to drive forward further service improvements in Scotland overall. Another area that has been highlighted is the importance of research. The chief scientist office is supporting a number of areas of research. Liam McArthur mentioned the high incidence of MS in Orkney. The CSO is providing some £240,000 to the Orkney complex disease study. The primary objective of the project is to identify key genetic markers, some of which are relevant to MS. We are also providing funding to multiple sclerosis prevalence studies that are being carried out in Orkney, Shetland and Aberdeen. It is hoped that the results of those studies will, in the long term, improve our understanding of MS. Members have raised a number of important issues. The need to continue to improve services for those with MS and other neurological conditions is often raised in the chamber. They can be assured that the Government is committed to doing that, where it can, and to working with others who can help us to drive improvement. Meeting closed at 17:33.

I would like to update Parliament on the specific action that the Government is taking to reinforce and improve the food safety and standards regime in Scotland, and on the horsemeat scandal. Members will be aware that work is on-going in relation to the horsemeat scandal, which has affected at least 14 European Union member states and has had an impact here in Scotland. Following the discovery of horse DNA in a frozen burger that was supplied to Cumbernauld high school, local authorities have been advised to hold the use of all frozen beef products pending further investigation. Mr Russell and Mr Lochhead are meeting the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities next week to discuss how we can work together on the standards and processes that are in place for school meals and to discuss ways in which we can drive up standards and quality even further. In the meantime, by close of play today, local authorities will have completed all but one of the inspections of premises that manufacture processed meat products in Scotland, with no evidence to date of horsemeat food fraud occurring. Turning to the reasons for my statement, the scandal has made it clear that a single independent public body should have clear responsibility for all aspects of food safety and standards. In 2010, the United Kingdom Government moved responsibility for food labelling policy in England from the Food Standards Agency to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. It also moved responsibility for nutrition to the Department of Health. Although the Food Standards Agency is a shared public body, those changes took place without consultation with the devolved Administrations. As a result, three different bodies were dealing with food labelling in England. The confusion was highlighted by Westminster’s Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee in its criticism of the decision to split responsibility for food. The changes had significant consequences for Scotland. The staff in the Food Standards Agency headquarters who were responsible for labelling and nutrition were removed from the FSA and taken into Whitehall departments that are responsible for England only. At a stroke, the FSA lost much of its capacity to support us on labelling and nutrition policy. Given the negative impact that that would have on Scotland, I asked Professor Jim Scudamore, the former Scottish and UK chief veterinary officer, to set up an expert panel to consider how the Food Standards Agency should operate in Scotland, in light of the changes in Westminster. Last year, Professor Scudamore recommended that nutrition, labelling and food safety should be considered together, and that advice should be focused on protecting consumers and should be evidence based, transparent and independent. He also recommended that we should create a new stand-alone food body here in Scotland. We accepted all the recommendations, and I announced in June last year that we would create a new food body. Our vision for Scotland’s new food body is that its primary focus will be consumer protection. It will make sure that food in Scotland is safe to eat and it will improve the diet and nutrition of people in Scotland. The new body will be independent, open and transparent and will base its advice on the best available science and evidence. There is much at stake, as the food that we eat is vital to ensuring that we live longer and healthier lives. Bad eating habits are the second major cause of ill-health in Scotland after smoking. Scotland has one of the highest levels of obesity in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, and obesity increases the risk of diabetes, heart disease and cancer. We will give the new body the ability to be more responsive to Scottish needs. The new food body will be the basis of decisive action to improve diet and nutrition—just as we are making progress on reducing smoking and drinking. The new body will carry out the devolved functions that are currently delivered by the UK-wide Food Standards Agency: food safety and standards; feed safety and standards; nutrition; food labelling; and meat inspection policy and operational delivery. Most of us think about food safety only when there is a problem. We rightly expect the food that we eat to be safe. However, it is estimated that 124,000 consumers contract food-borne diseases each year. Around 2,300 people will be hospitalised and around 43 will die. We can do better, and I expect the new food body to identify ways in which we can be more effective in tackling food-borne diseases in future. The new body will take a risk-based approach, using the best intelligence and evidence, to ensure that inspections are as well targeted as possible, within the European framework. That will, in turn, support the Scottish food and drink industry in growing its strong international reputation for safe, quality food. As the horsemeat scandal has shown, food supply chains cover the world. The new food body will work closely with the FSA, other European food safety bodies and the European Food Safety Authority on many issues, such as dealing with food incidents, European developments and collaboration on science and research. This afternoon we are publishing a consultation on the roles, responsibilities and functions of the new food safety body. As part of the development of the consultation, the Government carefully considered the implications of the horsemeat scandal. The consultation will run for 12 weeks and presents an opportunity for consumers as well as industry to tell us what they think that the new food body should do. The new body will take on existing Food Standards Agency functions, but we are interested in hearing views on whether it should have a broader role and new responsibilities. We also seek views on how the new body’s independence from Government and the food industry can be assured. I am open to creative and innovative ideas about all those issues. The consultation will give us a solid basis on which to build to ensure better food safety and standards in future. However, creating a new body and passing legislation take time, and people in Scotland rightly want improvements now. Therefore, today I am announcing that I have asked Professor Scudamore to lead a short-life expert group to consider the lessons that have been learned from the recent horsemeat scandal. The interests that are covered by the membership of the group will be consumer protection, the meat industry, food retail and enforcement. I have asked Professor Scudamore to recommend improvements in the food safety and standards regime that can be made quickly, ahead of the creation of the new body, and I have asked for recommendations before the summer recess. The short-life expert group will focus on the regulation of food, but there are broader issues to consider. Richard Lochhead has asked Ray Jones, the chairman of Scotland Food and Drink, to lead a food expert group. The group’s remit will be to explore what is required to extend to the whole Scottish meat supply chain the excellent principles of traceability, assurance and provenance that are associated with primary red meat production. The food expert group will also provide recommendations before the summer recess. We have the opportunity to learn from the current situation. The short-life expert group that I am announcing today will identify lessons from the horsemeat scandal, so that we can improve our food safety and standards regime. We want our new food body to be as effective as possible. Through the consultation, we will ensure that in designing the new body we draw on the best ideas and expertise. Given the importance of food safety and the value of the Scottish food industry to our economy, we must ensure that we have robust regulatory regimes for food in Scotland. Eating safe, healthy food will help people in Scotland to live longer and healthier lives.

I thank Richard Simpson for welcoming the approach that we are taking in establishing a new food body here in Scotland. He referred to the timeframe since the publication of the Scudamore review, which was towards the end of June last year. I am sure that he will appreciate that creating a new food safety body is a very complex task and that it is important that we take the time to ensure that we manage that properly. We have been engaging with stakeholders. At the end of last year, the Food Standards Agency held a major event with 57 different organisations, which all had a view on how the new food safety body in Scotland should be shaped. We wanted to take the time to gather those views and feed them into the consultation that we are now undertaking as part of our move towards legislating in this area. I reassure Richard Simpson that this is nothing to do with the horsemeat scandal; it is part of the process that we were following anyway. We have taken a bit of extra time over the past couple of weeks to make sure that the consultation document that we are publishing this afternoon reflects some of the issues around the horsemeat scandal that have been picked up over the past few weeks. Richard Simpson asked about the provision of lab facilities and resources. One of the things that the expert group that I am setting up, which will report before the recess, will do is engage with local authorities and others to look at current capacity to see whether additional capacity needs to be provided here in Scotland. It will also feed into the consultation exercise views on what immediate action we can take and what further action the new body should take. We have protected the FSA’s resources here in Scotland. The underspend that I referred to was due to the fact that some research and consumer affairs engagement programmes did not materialise as intended. We have given a commitment to maintain the budget going forward. If we add further functions to the new food standards agency, we will have to reflect on the resources that are deployed to allow it to carry them out effectively. The people of Scotland can have great confidence in the way in which the Food Standards Agency in Scotland has performed over the past couple of weeks in relation to the horsemeat scandal. They can have confidence that it will continue to function effectively as we move towards creating the new body in Scotland. It is appropriate that we take our time to do that in a managed way, so that we can make sure that we have a system that is robust and in which the public can have confidence.

One of the things that was considered in Professor Scudamore’s review of the changes to the FSA and the changes that should take place here in Scotland was how the system would fit in with the wider European agenda. The review consulted the European Commission, which was quite clear that it had no concerns about Scotland moving towards having its own food safety body. In the second part of her question, Nanette Milne answered the first part of her question. The horsemeat scandal is a matter of fraud and, by its very nature, fraud can be difficult to detect. However, more than 14 member states are affected by the scandal. The regulatory bodies in all those countries—some of which have several regulatory bodies on food safety—are all dealing with the issue. It is therefore extremely important that the European Commission ensures that there is an effective co-ordinated response from those bodies. With a food standards body in Scotland, we can ensure that we co-operate well with European agencies, UK agencies and other international agencies on food safety and share intelligence, good practice and research. Such broad co-operation will allow us to ensure not only that we are plugged into the international agenda but that we have a system that is geared towards dealing with the specific challenges and issues that we face in Scotland.

The scandal has highlighted the extent to which individuals will go to defraud the system and a weakness in the actions and responsibilities of manufacturers and retailers in respect of the authenticity testing that, as suppliers, they are meant to undertake. We need to ensure that the industry recognises that when an individual buys a product, what it says on the packet should be in that product. We must consider what further measures may be necessary to ensure that robust mechanisms are in place to identify such issues much earlier and that manufacturers and retailers are undertaking their responsibilities effectively and consistently.

I hope that the member has been reassured by my statement that the primary focus and overall objective of the new food safety body in Scotland will be consumer protection. The member asked about the number of meat inspectors. Meat inspectors are provided at a UK level and operate throughout UK, rather than specifically through the Food Standards Agency in Scotland. Their numbers have changed for a variety of reasons. For example, the number of abattoirs has reduced. In addition, during incidents such as the BSE and foot-and-mouth outbreaks, inspectors were put into premises but, once the restrictions that followed those incidents were reduced or removed, the number of inspectors that had to be present in those premises also reduced. The new food body in Scotland and the review group that I have set up give us the opportunity to look at what we have at the moment. Are there ways in which we could do things better? Do we need to look at how we can improve the inspection and regulatory regimes to get them fit for purpose in a way that best suits Scotland’s needs? There is no intention of having a lighter touch with existing regulation, but we need to make sure that we have a proportionate, intelligence-based system that uses the best science and evidence to support its work.

A lesson that we can learn from the current incident is that the public would like to be made much more readily available information about the type of testing that retailers and manufacturers undertake on their food products. Progress has been made on that, with retailers providing test results to the FSA, as they will do every three months. I detect that retailers recognise that the public want more information in this area. The new food body and the review group have an opportunity to look at whether we should take that further in Scotland, and whether there is a need for more regulation in this area or whether the industry is prepared to take action itself to provide the public with greater reassurance and greater availability of such information.

The new food body in Scotland will be funded in the same way that the FSA in Scotland is funded, which is through the consolidated grant to the Scottish Government. The horsemeat scandal gives us the opportunity to look at procurement in much more detail. On Tuesday, I mentioned that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning are keen to explore some issues with local authorities. The percentage of public sector contracts that include Scottish produce has increased from the mid-30s up to almost 50. There is an opportunity to look at getting more Scottish produce into public sector procurement contracts. We have to look at the most effective way of doing that. The expert group that Richard Lochhead has set up gives us an opportunity to look at how we can shorten the food chain. Some of the issues that have arisen over the horsemeat scandal demonstrate the scale of and distances involved in the food chain. Any opportunity to reduce those will be good for the consumer and good for public health.

Christine Grahame raises a very important point. Some Scottish abattoirs have found the UK regulations that have been introduced challenging—there has been a disproportionate impact on some of our smaller abattoirs. The move towards having our own stand-alone food safety body gives us the opportunity to make sure that the way in which we implement regulations is proportionate and reflects the different nature of the Scottish industry. If we can get that right, it will create the opportunity to have more local abattoirs in different parts of the country.

The East Ayrshire example can certainly be discussed by Richard Lochhead and Mike Russell at next week’s meeting as they explore whether lessons learned from one local authority’s procurement of particular food products can benefit other local authorities. If we can encourage more local produce to be procured, it will be good for the children, those who benefit from those public sector contracts and, indeed, the Scottish industry.

I entirely agree. One benefit of our quality Scottish produce is its traceability and the farm-to-plate quality assurance programmes that have been built in over the number of years. Richard Lochhead’s working group gives us an opportunity to examine how we might extend that approach to other meat products in Scotland in order to make the system much more comprehensive and to give the public even greater confidence in the quality of the products that they purchase.

First of all, we have not reduced our funding for the FSA; indeed, over the term of this Government, we have probably increased our proportion of spend on the agency in Scotland. We have not reduced its budget, but there have been marked reductions in the Food Standards Agency’s budget at a UK level. That aside, I am open to considering the wider areas in which the FSA could play a role. I have said that it could play a greater role in public health, in improving diet and in promoting healthy eating in Scotland, and I encourage it to move in that direction. The consultation on the new body’s establishment provides an opportunity for people to give their views on how the agency’s role should be further expanded, and we can consider how those suggestions sit with the new body itself. Of course, if any expansion of the body’s role requires further resources, we will have to reflect on how we will provide that additional funding. However, I am open to looking at any aspect of expanding the new body’s role; indeed, I am open to considering a range of suggestions, if they are constructive.

When I announced that we were accepting Jim Scudamore’s recommendations and moving towards the creation of Scotland’s own food safety body, the staff were one of the first groups to be informed of the decision to ensure that they were fully versed in the Government’s intentions. We have no plans to change the location of the FSA; the new body will be based in Aberdeen and it is likely that its creation will require additional staff. The staff in the Aberdeen office and those who are involved in meat inspection can rest assured that their jobs remain important to us and that it is likely that we will have to add to the staff complement to allow the new body to carry out the new functions that we intend it to have.

We have announced who will be chairing both the expert groups. I am more than happy to ensure that we write to all members who have an interest in the matter to inform them of the full details of those who will sit on those groups. The expert group that has been set up by Richard Lochhead is very much focused on the meat producer side of the industry, to give particular focus on traceability in that area. However, I would be more than happy, once we have the full details of the membership of both groups, to inform the member about those details.

We are making very good progress. As of Monday, 96 per cent of the additional inspections of meat processing plants in Scotland that were requested on 24 January have been completed. Meanwhile, across the United Kingdom, over 99 per cent of the 3,634 industry tests that have been completed have been negative, with the Food Standards Agency reporting that the 35 positive tests relate to 13 products, all of which have been withdrawn. A further 428 industry tests have to be completed and are expected to be reported on on Friday. The third strand of testing, which is being carried out by 28 local authorities across the UK, is due to provide a progress report early in March and, on Thursday, I will provide further details to Parliament about the consultation on a new food safety body for Scotland and the expert groups that Mr Lochhead outlined in last Tuesday’s statement.

Mr Lochhead’s statement was very clear. Additional advice has also been provided to local authorities through “Catering for Change: Buying food sustainably in the public sector”, which was published in 2011 and advises, for example, that seasonal and fresh produce be specified in procurement by public bodies. It is important that public bodies consider the range of options available to them in the contracts that they take forward through public procurement bodies such as Scotland Excel. The positive DNA test in Lanarkshire gives us an opportunity to look at how we might further improve the standard of food provided to children in schools. That is why the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and the Cabinet Secretary for the Environment and Rural Affairs have invited local authorities to meet them to discuss the matter further. We should also bear in mind that, since 2007 and with the introduction in 2008 of the statutory food and nutrition standards for schools, the quality of food provided in schools has significantly improved. Those standards are regulated in part through Education Scotland’s use of nutritionists to evaluate the quality of that food to ensure that it complies with those higher standards. However, I, like everyone else, want even better standards where we can get them, which is why the cabinet secretaries have invited local authorities to discuss opportunities for improving them further.

I am sure that the member will recognise that local authorities are responsible for resourcing environmental health departments and ensuring that they maintain food testing standards in their areas. However, in recent years and as a result of changes at European level, there has been a move towards more of a risk-based assessment in the undertaking of these tests. As for the member’s reference to FSA Scotland’s budget, I point out that, unlike the UK Government, we have maintained the agency’s budget in Scotland. Its underspend has arisen by and large as a result of a number of initiatives that did not materialise in the timeframe that was set for them. Those were largely research projects, some of which took longer than intended to come through the system. However, that money will be retained by the agency, whose budget next year is being maintained yet again to allow it to continue its important work in Scotland. I should add that, over the past couple of weeks, our staff in the Food Standards Agency in Scotland have worked tremendously hard to do everything they can to address the issue. I am sure that all members recognise that the issue has not just affected us, here in the UK. Some 14 countries in Europe have been affected by this food fraud, which is completely unacceptable. Staff in the Food Standards Agency in Scotland have worked extremely hard and I thank them for the tremendous amount of work that they have put in over recent weeks.

It is entirely unacceptable that a company provided one of our local authorities with a product that contained horse DNA in the first place. Scotland Excel has taken the right approach by asking all local authorities in Scotland to withhold all frozen meat products until further checks have been undertaken. Of course, we also expect suppliers to undertake further checks on their processes for procuring the ingredients for their products. Yes, standards have improved over recent years, and yes, there will always be room to make improvements. The Government is more than happy to consider what further action could be taken to do that. However, it is important that we are not distracted from the fact that, every day, children get good-quality, nutritious meals from our schools. North Lanarkshire Council’s results give us an opportunity to reflect on what further action could be taken, and the meeting to which local authorities have been invited, which is being taken forward by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, will allow councils such as North Lanarkshire Council to explore with them what measures could be taken to continue to improve the standard of food in the meals that are provided in our schools.

Local authorities are not compelled to use Scotland Excel. Four local authorities do not use Scotland Excel and procure in a different way, so that they have a choice about how to procure goods locally. A key aspect of the regulations on improving nutritional standards in school meals is traceability of products. A company cannot bid for a contract if it cannot provide traceability. The contract process makes the quality and traceability of the product a requirement, and that is a key part of the ability to get on to the Scotland Excel programme to take forward contracts that come through it.

The member will be aware that, since 2009, the Scottish Government has been funding work with the Soil Association on its food for life catering mark. The three-year programme promotes unprocessed food, local sourcing and provenance and food education. We have renewed the programme and we are looking to enhance the work and consider how we take the programme forward over a further three years. Something that we can do as a result of the horsemeat scandal is consider whether there is a greater opportunity to expand the programme and accelerate the process. The meeting on school meals that the two cabinet secretaries will have will give us an opportunity to explore the issue with local authorities and see whether we can accelerate the programme, given the good progress that has been made since 2009.

Like other members, I congratulate Jim Eadie on securing time for this important members’ business debate. I add my congratulations to Lothiansound talking newspaper on reaching its 25th anniversary. I am sure that members will recognise that services such as Lothiansound are only as strong and successful as their volunteers and those who work for them. I congratulate all the workers, volunteers and those who have supported Lothiansound over the past 25 years, some of whom have joined us in the public gallery. The world has moved on rapidly since Lothiansound was started in 1988, as can be seen from the way in which people listen to newspapers today. In 1988, tapes were sent to users of the services in the way that Jim Eadie mentioned but, some 20 years later, compact discs were being sent out. However, any good organisation listens closely to its service users, and Lothiansound has continued to provide a taped version of news, but in better quality through a digital recording. In the world of eyecare and vision loss, technology has also advanced rapidly since 1988. New eyecare technology and techniques mean that people who in 1988 would have experienced sight loss can now keep their sight longer. Throughout that period of advancement in technology and techniques, Lothiansound has continued to thrive and has increased its listeners by more than 10 times. At times, people with sight loss can feel isolated and withdrawn. Although they can listen to the national and international news on television or radio, they cannot always get the same level of detail about local news. Lothiansound exists to allow people with sight loss to keep up to date with their local news and about the things that happen in their communities, outside their doors and in their local streets. Over the past few years, the Government has been working closely with organisations that represent people with sensory impairment to improve those people’s lives. Since 2009, the Government has provided funding to pilot a number of sensory impairment one-stop shops across the country from the Western Isles to the Borders and from Moray to Dumfries and Galloway. I have visited some of those one-stop shops and seen the work that is done there. Like services such as Lothiansound, those one-stop shops provide local services that are appropriate to the needs of the local population. The services might be started from nothing, as I saw in Stornoway. They might involve reaching out to black and ethnic minority communities, as was explained to me in Glasgow. Alternatively, they might allow people who previously felt isolated and lonely to meet and discuss what is important to them, as I experienced in Galashiels. Like Lothiansound, those one-stop shops are about providing local people with services and support that mean something to them and continue to involve them in their communities. However, that is not where Government investment ends. The Government has also provided funding for the development of the first lip-reading tutors course to be held in Scotland for more than seven years. That course was oversubscribed, and we have already identified students to begin the second course later this year, which will, again, be funded by the Government. I have also recently approved funding to provide training to front-line staff in local authorities to allow them to improve their skills in providing rehabilitation services to people with hearing, vision and dual sensory loss. Along with that, I have provided funding to third sector partners to work with, and deliver training to, staff in care homes to allow them better to identify and address hidden sensory loss, such as a loss of visual function. That will allow them to make contact with organisations such as Lothiansound and make use of their services. The Government will shortly issue for consultation the Scottish sensory impairment strategy. The strategy will look to improve, and make more appropriate use of, sensory services and how they are delivered in Scotland. It will take individuals right through from childhood into adult services. It is important that we use that opportunity not only to build on the progress that has been made but to continue to deliver the best possible services for those who have a sensory loss. I again congratulate Lothiansound. Passing on 25 years’ worth of news, information and a sense of community is a great achievement. Lothiansound is a great example of a small, local organisation that represents and supports its local community. I am delighted to hear about the benefit that many individuals have received from the service over years and the way in which MSPs recognise the value of Lothiansound as a key part of the Lothian community. Meeting closed at 17:27.

I am moving straight to my answer: ministers and Scottish Government officials regularly discuss a wide range of matters of local importance, including future plans, with all national health service boards.

I appreciate the strong local feeling in support of the in-patient mental health unit at Monklands hospital. At this stage, we have not received a proposal from NHS Lanarkshire for a major service change in mental health services. Should such a proposal be submitted to ministers, it will of course be given careful consideration.

I have no doubt that the cabinet secretary will want to ensure that the member gets his reply within the next week.

Last month, our Scottish cooking bus visited St Patrick’s primary school in Kilsyth, where local children and parents enjoyed healthy cooking sessions. Last week, I saw the cooking bus in action at Merkland school in nearby Kirkintilloch. The bus is just one part of a suite of actions to improve diet. We are also spending £7.5 million over three years to encourage healthy eating. We are also discussing actively with the food industry what more it can do to promote healthy eating.

Jamie Hepburn has made an important point. It is important that we support young people to make healthy choices because we know that, if we help to educate their palates at an early stage by encouraging them to eat healthy foods, that is likely to continue with them as they develop. Abronhill primary school is clearly on the front foot in that respect, so I join the constituency member in congratulating the pupils and teachers on winning the healthy eating initiative award 2012. I wish them well with their on-going work in the area.

The equally well test site programme set out to support new ways of working in community planning partnerships—to do things differently and to do different things. Several key factors have been associated with local success across all the test sites, including those in Glasgow. Those are the need for a skilled co-ordinator; clear shared outcomes; empowerment of staff; space for reflection and learning; and senior-level commitment and leadership. The evaluation has suggested that the more those building blocks are taken forward as part of partnership redesign and enthusiastically and consistently pursued, the more success there will be for projects. The reconvened ministerial task force on health inequalities, which I chair, is already scheduled to examine, at its next meeting, the lessons learned and the outcomes derived from the test sites.

The Scottish Government is reviewing the national planning framework and Scottish planning policy. We are considering how best to reflect in those policy documents the lessons from equally well and from the good places, better health initiative. We aim to publish both those documents for consultation around the end of March this year.

As Kezia Dugdale will be aware, I met with representatives from SANDS Lothians on 17 January. Mr MacAskill also attended the meeting in his constituency role. Following the meeting, I asked officials to explore what assistance we may be able to provide to SANDS, given the exceptional circumstances. As a result, the Scottish Government has provided the charity with some one-off funding to support its work with those affected by the practices at Mortonhall crematorium. The Scottish Government has also made an offer to the City of Edinburgh Council to provide to the independent inquiry any support and information that may be helpful. That offer will stand throughout the work of the inquiry. I have asked my officials to continue to liaise closely with SANDS and the City of Edinburgh Council over the coming weeks.

I thank the member for that question. I recognise that this is a very sensitive issue and it is important that those who have been affected by it get the answers that they require. I have no doubt that the independent investigation that Elish Angiolini will conduct, for which the City of Edinburgh Council will be responsible, will provide answers to those parents who still have questions. On guidance for and regulations on crematoriums, we have already given a commitment to look at the issues in the coming year, with a view to bringing forward further legislation, possibly in 2014, to update the laws in this area, some of which are more than 100 years old. Some work has already been undertaken to look at where we need to make improvements.

I urge anyone who was directly affected by the practices at Mortonhall and wishes answers to contact the City of Edinburgh Council. It has committed to investigating every case that is reported to it and making answers available. Information is available on the council’s website, and there is a dedicated phone number and a form that can be used to contact the council. I encourage any families who may have been affected and wish answers to make use of those facilities.

Like others, I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing time for what has been, although short, a very interesting debate focusing on a couple of specific issues. I had not anticipated that the debate might include the possibility of a Robertson-Baillie duet or the spectre of Michael Forsyth, but I am more than happy to acknowledge the work that Michael Forsyth undertook when he was in a position to do so.

I would obviously need to get the glasses, but I will take that as a compliment. Heart disease has been a clinical priority for the Scottish Government and for NHS Scotland for more than 15 years now. Over that period, thanks to the dedication of the staff within the NHS, we have achieved a dramatic 60 per cent decrease in the number of premature deaths from heart disease. As I am sure everyone agrees, that has been achieved through the fantastic efforts of our NHS staff. Jackson Carlaw is correct that such achievements bring additional challenges. As more people survive heart attacks and live with heart disease, there is a need for more access to high-quality rehabilitation and support. Those needs have been recognised both within the NHS and by campaigning organisations such as Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland and the British Heart Foundation, which have a long-standing commitment to cardiac rehabilitation. The key messages from those organisations’ campaigns were incorporated into our “Better Heart Disease and Stroke Care Action Plan”, which places a greater emphasis on the importance of proper support following an acute episode of treatment. The action plan recognises the wealth of evidence supporting the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of cardiac rehabilitation, which several members have referred to. The importance of cardiac rehabilitation is also echoed in Scotland’s SIGN guidelines and in the clinical standards for heart disease. Put simply, cardiac rehabilitation is an inexpensive treatment that saves lives. We want everyone who could benefit from cardiac rehabilitation to get appropriate access, and we want to ensure they have the best possible chance of a full recovery. In recent years, we have been making excellent progress towards achieving that goal. According to ISD Scotland, uptake of cardiac rehabilitation for people with either myocardial infarction or a cardiac intervention has increased from 45 per cent in 2006 to 65 per cent in 2011. Equally impressive is the evidence that shows the high quality of services now being delivered in Scotland. Most areas have a full range of psychosocial, health, lifestyle and medical risk management provisions in place—all areas that were recently highlighted in the BACPR standards. The audit findings have triggered a range of improvement works in services, and I want to see evidence of further improvements by all boards when further audit results are published later this year. Like BACPR, we want to ensure that cardiovascular prevention and rehabilitation services are safe, effective and person centred. The revised BACPR standards emphasise the need for rehabilitation to be provided in a way that meets an individual’s needs. That fits the Scottish Government’s person-centred approach to the delivery of healthcare, and it is reassuring that the audit found that many NHS boards already offer a menu-based approach to cardiac rehabilitation. The national advisory committee on heart disease has already identified cardiac rehabilitation as a priority. As part of our heart disease programme, we have supported the most comprehensive audit of cardiac rehabilitation ever undertaken in Scotland; provided some £20,000 funding to the Angus activity programme for people with a long-term condition; and funded the development of an online version of the Lothian heart manual. There remains much more to do. Helen Eadie is correct to highlight that the clinical standards for heart disease are clear that all people with heart failure and acute angina should be assessed for their suitability for cardiac rehabilitation. We know that referral rates for those groups continue to be low. Rehabilitation services in NHS Scotland are working to address that through service redesign. They are implementing a menu-based approach, anticipating that that will enable an increase in service capacity. I expect the work, which is being developed by boards, to achieve improved outcomes for patients. We also need to look at the rehabilitation services that can, and should, be made available for people with heart failure and unstable angina. Only a proportion of heart failure and angina patients will be suitable for cardiac rehabilitation programmes that are based in secondary care. It is essential that people with heart failure and angina get the support that they need in their homes and communities. Clearly, there remains further scope for promoting exercise for people with cardiovascular disease and, indeed, other long-term conditions within the community, particularly within our leisure centres. There are several examples of excellent programmes, including one in Lanarkshire, and I want to see those approaches explored further and rolled out elsewhere. In terms of our next steps, I have asked our national advisory committee to consider, at its next meeting in February, how we ensure that people with heart failure and acute angina get the support and rehabilitation that they need. The establishment of a new heart failure group will support that process. The development of a HEAT target proposal for cardiac rehabilitation is one of the options that I will ask the group to consider. The revised BACPR standards make clear the importance of on-going audit. The enthusiasm for the previous audit was extremely heartening. We have therefore explicitly committed NHS Scotland to the on-going monitoring of the provision of cardiac rehabilitation. A further audit report will be issued later in spring. We have provided substantial funding to Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland, the British Lung Foundation and the British Heart Foundation Scotland on a programme aimed at supporting people with conditions, including those with heart failure and acute angina, to access appropriate exercise and support. I expect to provide further information to Parliament on that later in the year. I thank NHS Scotland staff for all the work that they have done to improve the care of people with heart disease. I restate the Government’s commitment to supporting on-going improvements in cardiac services, including rehabilitation services. 13:04 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

We published Scotland’s mental health strategy—“Mental Health Strategy for Scotland 2012-2015”—in August last year, and I will use this opportunity to set out some of the priorities and commitments in that strategy. I also want to hear from members about their views on the strategy and the feedback that they have received on it from other stakeholders. Mental illness is one of the top public health challenges in Europe. The challenge that we face in improving mental health and mental health services in Scotland is great. However, it is not that different from the challenge anywhere else in the western world. Across a range of mental health indicators, Scotland is broadly in the middle. The picture is similar with the rates of suicide, and mental disorder is strongly related to suicide. The average annual suicide rate in Europe is 13.9 per 100,000; in Scotland, in 2010, the rate was 14.5. That puts us a little above the European average, but our suicide rate has continued to fall. It is also worth noting that the prevalence of mental illness does not seem to have changed significantly over time. In Scotland, we have made good progress in closing the treatment gap and ensuring that people with mental health problems are more likely to seek help, get a diagnosis and receive evidence-based treatment. In particular, we have had success with depression and alcohol misuse. However, the bigger challenge is in the detail under the headline figures. Mental ill health affects our communities unequally. People from our most deprived communities are much more likely to experience mental illness. Again, Scotland is not unusual in that, as the picture is similar in other countries in Europe. Scotland has much to be proud of in how seriously the country takes mental health. It is telling that the Parliament has debated mental health issues on a number of occasions. Those debates have been initiated by the Government, by committees and in members’ business. That demonstrates the progress that has been made in tackling stigma and being able to talk about and debate mental health issues openly and frankly. Although the challenge is big, we have made some significant changes in recent years, and I will mention a few of those. Each is an area that the Scottish Government set as a priority and in which it supported delivery of the change. However, one of the key messages is that the change and improvement were delivered locally by national health service boards, local authorities and the third sector working with service users and carers. I want to carry that theme into how we implement the new mental health strategy. I want to build consensus on what to prioritise and to work in partnership with those who wish to support change.

As I mentioned, the changes and improvements are delivered locally. It is for the NHS board to make any changes that it thinks are appropriate and to refer to ministers any matters that must be referred to ministers. As the cabinet secretary has made clear, if there are any changes that require ministerial input, I will consider them at the time, when NHS Lanarkshire brings them forward. There has been a steady reduction in the number of people who are discharged from hospital and then readmitted. Between 2004 and 2009, there was a 25 per cent reduction in the number of readmissions. Being admitted to hospital has social and economic implications, so reducing the number of readmissions is important. The reductions have been delivered through work to improve the quality of in-patient and community services, and by improving discharge planning. We intend to build on that as part of the new strategy, in which we will look to develop better indicators of the quality of community services. Another area in which progress has been made is the prevention of suicide. Between 2000 to 2002 and 2009 to 2011, there was a 17 per cent reduction in the suicide rate. That figure is based on the three-year rolling average. I will discuss how we intend to do further work to reduce the incidence of suicide and self-harm in Scotland later in my speech. I want us to continue to work to deliver our existing commitment to offer faster access to specialist mental health services for children and young people, and to psychological therapies. I want to capitalise on what we have achieved and to deliver a set of commitments that are designed to increase the pace of change across the system. To do that, we need to focus on a number of areas. For example, we must reduce variation in the availability of good-quality mental health services, such as intensive home treatment and first-episode-psychosis services. We will build on the prevention agenda by placing a greater focus on the first years of life, and we will work with other policy areas, such as employment, justice and the early years, in which mental health has an important contribution to make. There are two areas in which we are making developments outwith the mental health strategy, the first of which is dementia. We are in the middle of an engagement process to develop a successor to Scotland’s first dementia strategy, which will be published in June. We have also made a commitment to engage on a new suicide and self-harm strategy that will follow on from the suicide reduction and choose life work that has been done to date. That engagement will start in the next few weeks. We had a great response to our consultation on the mental health strategy. We received more than 340 responses to the written consultation, and people attended our national event and numerous local events. Seven themes emerged from the consultation, which we have used to describe the way in which we want to deliver the commitments in the strategy. Those themes, a few of which I will mention, support the quality ambitions that healthcare should be person centred, safe and effective. Families and carers have an important role to play in providing support to people with mental illness, but they can often feel excluded from making the contribution that they would like to make. Learning from suicides tells us that better work with families can lead to safer care and better outcomes, so we are working with VOX—Voices of Experience—and others to identify how we can increase the involvement of families and carers in mental health service delivery. Another key theme that has come through in the consultation is tackling discrimination. Through the see me campaign, Scotland is internationally recognised for tackling the stigma of mental illness. As part of our work with the Scottish Association for Mental Health and other partners to continue to develop our anti-stigma agenda, we will work to reduce the discrimination and exclusion that many people with mental illness experience.

If Mary Scanlon will bear with me, I will come on to that issue. As well as the themes, we identified four key change areas. I will talk a little about each one. The period between pregnancy and four years is a crucial period in shaping children’s life chances. Secure attachment and competent and confident parenting are significant protective factors, which provide a child with confidence, resilience and adaptability. Poor attachment in infancy has been linked to a number of severe mental health problems in later life. Evidence-based parenting programmes, such as incredible years and triple P—the positive parenting programme—are powerful ways of addressing conduct disorders, which produce long-term benefits to the child and to society. They take a positive, assets-based approach to strengthening parenting competency. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and Glasgow City Council are in the process of making triple P available to all parents in Glasgow and, through NHS Education for Scotland, we are starting a national roll-out of triple P and incredible years to the parents of all three and four-year-olds with severely disruptive behaviour.

That is part of the wider, holistic approach that we must take, to ensure that we address issues that might affect a child in the early years, such as the mother experiencing postnatal depression. I want continued improvement across child and adolescent mental health services. We have supported a 35 per cent increase in the specialist CAMHS workforce since 2008. As a result, there have been significant improvements in access to services. The most recent data show that 89 per cent of children and young people are being seen within the existing 26-week target and that the average wait is eight weeks. The 26-week target is to be replaced by an 18-week target by the end of 2014. We have not seen the scale of change that I hoped for on reducing admissions of young people to adult beds. There has been progress across Scotland, particularly in the south of Scotland, where the development of new models of care in the community has created additional capacity in the in-patient unit and significantly reduced admissions of young people to adult beds. I want the rest of Scotland to perform at a similar level. Another key change area is to do with rethinking how we respond to common mental health problems. How people access treatment services is an important aspect of addressing the challenge in that regard. There is evidence of significant health service delivery in relation to psychological therapies, which is why it is right that we focus on improving that part of the system. Scotland is the only country that has introduced a waiting times target in the area. We want a system in which psychological therapies are readily available to the people who require such support. We also want a wider range of services to be available, including social prescribing, self-help and peer-group support, so that people can get the service that best meets their needs and addresses their mental health issues. A well-functioning mental health system needs a range of community, in-patient and crisis services. We set out a range of areas in which we intend to build on developments in services, to ensure that we implement the strategy effectively. A strong message that emerged from the consultation was about the importance of employability. A person being in the right work can have a benefit on their health, quality of life and wellbeing. That is true for people with mental health problems, too, so we want to make further progress in the area.

I am afraid that I have very limited time and I want to cover the issue that Mary Scanlon raised.

Yes. We recognise that there is a particular need for work around the justice system. The report of the commission on women offenders identified mental illness and personality disorder as key contributors to women’s offending and the likelihood of their going to prison. We are building on the work that has already been undertaken in Cornton Vale to test the effectiveness of training prison staff to use a mentalisation approach to working with women with a personality disorder or women who have experienced trauma. We are already extending that work into NHS Lothian with a community-based personality disorder programme to see how we can learn from that and roll it out nationally. I have not had the opportunity to cover all the areas of the strategy, but I am sure that all members will recognise that good progress has been made in improving Scotland’s mental health services in recent years. The new strategy provides us with an opportunity to ensure that we build on the momentum that has already been achieved. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of Scotland’s Mental Health Strategy; recognises the challenges that Scotland, in common with other western nations, faces in tackling mental ill-health; notes the significant progress that has been made in mental health improvement, improving mental health services and reducing suicide, and believes that the priorities identified in the strategy will build on and increase the pace of change in mental health in Scotland.

I do not know whether the member is aware of a change in the prescribing guidance that was issued to doctors. That change was about moving away from using low doses of antidepressants over a short period of time to using higher doses over a longer period. Some of the statistics that the member mentioned actually refer to the definable daily dose, which means that the figures show not that more people receive the medication but that the level of the dose is higher, which gives the impression that more people receive the medication.

Like other members who have given closing speeches, I think that this has been a very good debate, with some excellent speeches in which members have raised significant issues that they wish to see addressed. Members will recognise that, in taking forward the strategy, we had a debate in Parliament before the consultation started. I asked all members to feel free to engage in that process and to make their views known because, as I am sure all members will recognise, the Government does not always have the answers when it comes to dealing with all the issues and challenges that the mental health system faces. We need to prioritise areas in which we believe that we can make good and sustained progress. Since the publication of the strategy, the general feedback that I have had from the sector is that the strategy is moving in the right direction and allows us to build on the progress that has been made in previous years—not just by this Government but by previous ones. That progress is a tremendous credit to the Scottish Parliament and to the way in which NHS Scotland has taken forward the reform of our mental health services over the past 12 to 13 years, if not longer. One of the most important areas in the mental health field that we need to focus on much more is the early years. To date, work on the early years has largely been associated with dealing with health inequalities, but mental health issues do not necessarily register among the health inequalities that we face in our society. One aspect of the strategy is that it seeks to work with other areas of Government policy to ensure that we have a greater focus on the early years interventions that can make a difference—not only in improving people’s future health and wellbeing but in reducing the potential for them to drift into the criminal justice system or anything else that may arise from a poor experience in their early years. As Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, today is the launch of the early years collaborative. That provides an exciting opportunity to ensure that we have much greater collaboration among agencies so that we can make a real difference in the early years where it is appropriate. I accept Richard Simpson’s point that we should not look at the early years as purely being the pre-school years. His suggestions for work that could be taken forward in schools, particularly in primary education, are worth further consideration to see whether we can take that forward as a preventative approach as well. Richard Simpson also raised the issue of the ministerial task force. The evidence base that is now emerging in a whole range of areas to do with physical or mental health issues shows that tackling health inequalities is not just about physical health; it is also about mental health. It is about social justice and, if we are to get to the root causes of it, we have to tackle the issues of social injustice much more effectively than has happened over many years. A number of members referred to CAMHS and the changes that have happened to those services. Richard Simpson and Christine Grahame will recall their Health and Sport Committee inquiry into the provision of CAMHS in the previous parliamentary session. Mary Scanlon was a member of that committee as well—I apologise if I have forgotten anyone else who was a member of the committee who is in the chamber. All those members identified the need to improve access to CAMHS and the need for much earlier intervention when issues arise. I think that all members recognise that the additional resource that has been provided over the past four years has made a marked difference in improving access to services earlier. That ensures that we can intervene at the earliest opportunity to support a young person who is exhibiting mental health issues. That brings me to the issue of improving access to psychological therapies. Although it is difficult to give exact figures at present, because the data is incomplete and not to a level that allows us to be fully confident about the scale of it, some of the data indicates that a significant number of people are making use of different psychological therapies in NHS Scotland. I hope to be in a position, when the data is of a higher quality, to publish it later this year—it is an issue of data quality rather than anything else. I have no doubt that, once that data is published, it will help to give focus to ensuring that we maintain improvement in this area and it will demonstrate the scale to which patients are benefiting from psychological therapies. The issue of psychological therapies also sits alongside some of the issues and some of the discussion around antidepressants. Too often, there can be the simplistic read-across that the level of antidepressant prescribing means that we do not have enough psychological therapies. That is not necessarily the case. A combination of approaches may be appropriate and, in some cases, antidepressants may be the best course of action rather than some form of psychological therapy. We should not make an automatic link between the level of antidepressant prescribing and the availability of psychological therapies. I hope that members are reassured that we will try to publish the data this year once we have addressed some of the issues with its quality. Several speakers, including Malcolm Chisholm and Richard Simpson, referred to older people and mental health issues. With people in my constituency such as Eddie Kelly, who works with Falkirk & District Association for Mental Health and is a passionate advocate of the need to improve services for older people with mental health problems, there is no way that a strategy for which I am responsible would not recognise that issue. A number of members mentioned dementia. If we improve services for older people with mental health problems, people with dementia will be able to benefit from the improved access to psychological therapies, because those therapies are not simply for younger people or any particular age group. However, it is necessary that we recognise the number of older people who experience mental health problems. There is still some work to do to achieve that. Dennis Robertson made a good observation about the opportunity that arises from the integration of health and social care to ensure that our local authorities and health services deliver services for older people in a much more co-ordinated, and the most effective, way. One of the important points about improving access to psychological therapies is that the therapist does not always have to be a psychologist. Sometimes, it is about improving access to social prescribing, which the strategy also sets out, or increasing physical activity. All of those have an important contribution to make to improving older people’s mental health.

I am trying to cover a lot from the debate, if John Pentland does not mind. Dennis Robertson also mentioned eating disorders. I met him yesterday to discuss the progress that we are making on that and the further work that is necessary. I will continue to work with him to ensure that we do what we can to improve the delivery of services for those who experience an eating disorder. Some members also referred to crisis services. We must get much better at delivering such services in Scotland. I had the pleasure of opening the crisis centre in Leith to which Malcolm Chisholm referred. There is real benefit in giving people an opportunity to go to a venue that is not necessarily a health facility but gives them the time out and support that are necessary to enable them to address the issues that they find difficult. In NHS Tayside, we are also doing pilot work to determine how we can become much better at identifying individuals who present in distress or crisis and ensure that agencies are better at tracking them when they present to services. We know from research on suicide that many such individuals, far from not having presented to services, have presented to services time in, time out but have not been picked up effectively. We must get much better at picking up such individuals. I refer not only to health services but to local authority social work departments. The criminal justice system must also be much more effective at that. To touch briefly on the criminal justice system, I accept the points that Mary Fee and Christine Grahame raised. We need to make more progress on that. The fact that the mental health services in our prisons are now part of NHS Scotland gives us a greater opportunity to address some of the challenges. One of the most important areas that have been highlighted is the continuing work on reducing the stigma that is associated with mental ill health in Scotland. David Stewart made a very good speech on that. We need to ensure that we maintain momentum on that to remove the stigma that can often be associated with mental health problems, but we should also take that work further. We must tackle not only stigma but the discrimination that prevents those who have a mental health issue from engaging in services in the way in which they should or receiving the services that they deserve to receive. The work that I wish to be taken forward as part of the strategy involves a focus on the discrimination that many people with a mental health problem experience. Malcolm Chisholm said that he noticed the difference between the draft strategy and the final strategy. I hope that members will be reassured that we have genuinely listened to all those stakeholders who have an interest in mental health services in Scotland with a view to ensuring that we have a mental health strategy that is fit for the 21st century and which will deliver real change and build on the improvements that we have made over recent years.

The Scottish ministers take advice on that issue from a number of sources. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has restricted access to certain parts of the beach and has posted advice notices to the public. In October last year, the Health Protection Agency reported that there was no public health reason for individuals to stop using the area, subject to those restrictions already in place. As Helen Eadie will be aware, we met last week and I was able to tell her that I had received advice from the committee on medical aspects of radiation in the environment—COMARE—that concluded that increased rates of certain types of cancer that were reported in the media in November are very unlikely to be linked to radioactive contamination.

At the meeting last week, I gave Helen Eadie an undertaking to try to ensure that there was better co-ordination between the various agencies involved in the matter to ensure that they impart information to the residents of Dalgety Bay in a more planned way. Unfortunately, not all those agencies are within my control—for example, the Ministry of Defence. I have given an undertaking to ensure that the COMARE report is made available to the Dalgety Bay residents forum, which will provide the residents with the assurance that the experts have considered the matter and that, on the basis of the information provided by NHS Fife, they do not believe that there is a link between the radioactive contamination and elevated levels of types of cancer that were identified. Following the provision of that report and the work that my officials will take forward, I will be more than happy to continue a dialogue with Helen Eadie to see what further measures can be taken to help to ensure that the residents are properly informed of various matters on this issue.

I agree that the safety of the people of Fife must come first. That is why SEPA is working closely with the Ministry of Defence on investigations into the radioactive contamination at Dalgety Bay. Should SEPA identify the MOD as being wholly or partly responsible for the contamination, we will expect it to fund its portion of the remediation costs as determined by SEPA at that time.

I will attempt to do so, Presiding Officer. Like others, I congratulate Bob Doris on securing this important debate. I have listened to the views expressed across the chamber and am aware of the concerns that have been expressed by different bodies representing those with a learning disability, their families and their carers about Glasgow City Council’s approach. The issue has also received considerable media coverage. Like Patricia Ferguson, I have some concerns about the way in which Glasgow City Council has gone about the consultation exercise. It strikes me that, given the nature of the proposed changes, the written consultation period has been extremely short. Indeed, I hope that the council will reflect on that point because, as I am sure all members recognise, meaningful consultation must be more than a simple paper exercise; it has to be accessible to all those who might be affected by any change. Glasgow’s written consultation asked whether people understood why a new model of day services was needed and whether there should be age-appropriate services for people over 65. It also asked about the type of community services that people would like to see for adults with learning disabilities. In my view, the proposals seem to be more specific than the rationale for reform suggested in those questions and actually set out what the envisaged service would look like. I am not clear what involvement people in the community have had in shaping those proposals. I understand that in a tight economic climate Glasgow City Council needs to make best use of its existing resources, but service development needs to maximise the opportunity for people with learning disabilities to take part in their community. There remains a question about how firm Glasgow City Council’s proposals are. If the people of Glasgow support a direction of travel in which better use is made of available resources, that raises the question whether they will be involved in deciding which services are to be closed. Will people with a learning disability and their carers have a say in the day services that will be available in future? I understand that Glasgow City Council intends to make a decision on the proposals next week. I have seen no analysis of the consultation’s findings, but I will watch the proceedings with particular interest and hope that the council will listen to the concerns that have been expressed and will give the people who will be most affected by the changes a chance to influence the way forward. I also take this opportunity to inform the chamber that the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013 secured royal assent last week. I reaffirm that national self-directed support policy and the new act are nothing to do with delivering savings but are about giving citizens meaningful and informed choice. I am sure that all members who have had an interest in the personalisation agenda for many years will recognise that it is not a recent development; indeed, the process has been taking place for more than a decade now. Informed choice is crucial in making it work. Glasgow City Council has made a particular decision on how it wishes to take forward self-directed support in advance of the new duties in the 2013 act coming into force. Of course, those duties go beyond personalised budgets, but I note that Glasgow’s route has not been taken by other Scottish local authorities. Like all councils, Glasgow will have to commission services differently. There is no doubt that hard choices will have to be made but when services become unsustainable the replacement has to deliver better outcomes. If commissioning is informed by real understanding of what communities want as a result of the proper involvement of the people in them, they will be more likely to accept that services cannot be sustained and need to change. Members may be interested to know that in many ways, the learning disability strategy in 2000 led the way in demands for personalised social care and support. Development and delivery of that policy shifted our focus from service structures to people and what people want from service providers. Following the review of the achievements of the strategy, we held a public consultation asking what should be included in the new learning disability strategy. The consultation responses are being analysed, but early indications show that people want a variety of opportunities and options during the day, including traditional day centres. We are taking forward our work through a number of different national strategy groups, and working with people with learning disabilities, parents and carers. I am acutely aware, as I am sure all members are, of the significant contribution that unpaid carers make. We owe our carers a debt of gratitude and we need to take action to support them. That action must include listening to carers and hearing about what works for them as well as what works for the family members and friends that they support. The 2013 act introduces powers to support carers in their own right and ensures that they have a choice about how support services are provided. I believe that Glasgow is the first council to identify a carers’ champion. That should be welcomed. Dr Christopher Mason has taken on that important role and I hope that the concerns that he has expressed on behalf of Glasgow carers on the proposed changes will be taken seriously and considered in detail by the council. Day centre redesign is not easy or straightforward. The centres provide a valuable resource for many people. Even discussion about changes to existing services can be unsettling for those concerned. I encourage Glasgow City Council to engage with communities in a way that allows them to shape the development of services in future, and I ask it to reflect on the concerns that have been expressed in the chamber and elsewhere before it makes a final decision on the future of those facilities. 13:17 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

We are putting record levels of investment into football, with almost £8.5 million being invested in 2011-12 to support the development of youth and grassroots football in Scotland. Our investment has seen increases in participation, with 14 per cent more players in Scottish Football Association accredited community clubs, 10,000 more registered players, including 1,500 registered female players, and 2,000 more registered volunteers and coaches. Through the cashback for communities programme, we are investing some £8 million in Scottish football up to 2014. That investment is delivering free football activities, a network of six female development officers and 22 new high-quality 3G football facilities in communities across Scotland, which will allow people to access excellent quality facilities all year round.

I cannot profess to be an expert on football in Uruguay, although I recall that the last time Scotland played Uruguay was at the Mexico world cup in 1986. It was a nothing-each draw and it was a rather ill-tempered game, if I remember correctly, particularly for Gordon Strachan. As a Government, we have set aside some £25 million to help to support a new national performance centre for sport, which will be completed by 2016. [Interruption.]

The centre will provide world-class facilities for high-performance sports, including football, and offer elite performers outstanding facilities and specialist support services in a single place where athletes can come together with their coaches to train, develop and go on to do as well as possible on the international stage.

I join other members in congratulating Kenny Gibson on securing a debate that is incredibly important in bringing a number of highly significant issues to the Parliament’s attention. I have listened with great interest to those who have participated in the debate. As those members will be aware, “The Origins of Addiction” report raises a number of very complex issues. Ultimately, it shows that there is a clear link between early childhood experience and negative outcomes in adulthood. I am sure that we all share the goal of finding better ways to address those issues. In doing so, we must treat the problems that come about as a result of early childhood experiences more effectively, but we must also—as several members have said—focus on prevention, so that those problems do not occur in the first place. The early years of a child’s development are one of the most important times at which to start that prevention process. As a Government, we have made it clear that we have a simple but ambitious aspiration for Scotland to be the best place in the world for children to grow up. For our children to become the successful, confident and effective individuals our nation needs, we must nurture every element of their wellbeing. We know that early childhood experiences have lifelong effects on cognitive and emotional development and that chronic, unrelenting stress in early childhood, whether caused by neglect or repeated abuse, can be toxic to the development of a child’s brain. We also know that children are more likely to experience some form of mistreatment between birth and three years of age—16 out of every 1,000 children experience that. I am sure that all members would agree that that should not be tolerated. Our children have the right to be cared for and protected from harm and to grow up in a safe environment in which their needs are addressed quickly and effectively. Their wellbeing and safety are key priorities for this Government. To ensure that that is the case, we must support the practitioners who work in the field to address such issues and to provide a safe environment. I will give a few examples of the work that we are doing to support that work. The “National Framework for Child Protection Learning and Development in Scotland 2012”, which was published in November, sets out the necessary skills for all staff and volunteers who come into contact with children to keep them safe. We have published Scotland’s first national risk assessment toolkit for child protection, which will help professionals to better identify concerns among vulnerable children. In addition, we are taking action to ensure that child sexual exploitation in Scotland is detected, dealt with and ultimately prevented. We also have stronger arrangements for preventing children from being exposed to individuals who perpetrate such offences. The Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007, which came into force in 2011, introduced a new membership scheme for people who work with vulnerable groups that allows Disclosure Scotland to act much more promptly when new information is received that indicates that someone might pose a risk to vulnerable groups. Looking to the future, we recently consulted on proposals for the children and young people bill, which aims to provide real and sustained long-term benefits to children and their families. The bill will seek to embed partnership working in our services to ensure that the design and delivery of services are centred on a child’s whole wellbeing and that, ultimately—in the context of this evening’s debate—services are better able to prevent the horrors of sexual abuse and to act more quickly to identify and support victims when it occurs. We must also continue to work with the whole of society as it is right now. As part of our commitment to the health and wellbeing of adult survivors of childhood abuse, we launched Survivor Scotland, our national strategy for childhood abuse, in 2005. We have raised awareness of childhood abuse, supported training for front-line staff and provided services for survivors with an investment of £5 million since 2007. We have also agreed to extend the time to be heard model since its successful pilot in 2010 to all institutional care residents through a national confidential forum. We consulted on proposals for the forum and will take those forward this year through the provisions of the proposed victims and witnesses bill. That will offer survivors an opportunity to talk about their experiences as children in care and have those experiences acknowledged. We also need to ensure better support for individuals who are addicted to alcohol or drugs. Through our national drugs strategy, the road to recovery, we aim to tackle drug use by focusing on recovery, acknowledging that individuals have a range of needs to be addressed, including the underlying causes to which members have referred tonight, and ensuring that individuals have a say in their treatment and their path to long-term sustained recovery, whether it be clinical or psychological. However, recovery only starts with the ambition for a better life. When an individual reaches out for help, it is crucial that they get the right help at the right time, because it is a crucial milestone in their life. Addiction services in Scotland are undergoing redesign to focus on the whole person and their journey to recovery. To support that, we have invested a record £30 million via NHS boards in alcohol and drug partnerships, to provide front-line drug services and offer support to those who require it. We have also provided £39 million to ADPs to deliver local alcohol strategies in line with local need and priorities. We also reduced treatment waiting times to a maximum of three weeks for more than 90 per cent of the people who started drug and alcohol treatment within the period of referral between July and September 2012. Alongside that, we created a network of alcohol and drug partnerships to deliver appropriate health and social care services at a local level, taking account of local needs and individual circumstances. All that will support individuals to become contributing members of society once again. In drawing my remarks to a close, I emphasise the importance of this very complex issue. I fully acknowledge the link between early childhood experience and the negative outcomes in adulthood that are clearly highlighted in “The Origins of Addiction” report. I firmly believe that addiction can be treated more effectively as an experience-dependent condition, not just as a substance-dependent condition. We can do more in this area, and we are determined to do more to stop people being damaged by substance misuse. I am grateful to Kenny Gibson for bringing this debate before Parliament. Knowing Mr Gibson, I know that he will continue to pursue the issues outwith the chamber. Meeting closed at 17:28.

The Government is working with statutory and third sector partners to develop a Scottish sensory impairment strategy, which I expect to be issued for consultation early in 2013 and which will build on the success of the sensory impairment one-stop shops. As the member knows, Scotland has a world-renowned eye-care system. The Government has introduced free eye examinations for everyone in Scotland and the eye-care integration project provides an innovative link between optometrists and local hospital ophthalmology departments to allow fast and efficient patient referrals.

I am sure that no member in the chamber will be unaware of the concerns and difficulties arising from the impact of work capability assessments on disabled people such as Stuart McMillan’s constituent. It is important that individuals who find themselves in such situations are provided with the best possible advice and support in pursuing their claims; indeed, I often provide my constituents with advice through a welfare benefits adviser or a specialist service. Over a number of years, we have rolled out 11 one-stop shops across the country to provide support and assistance, including advice on welfare benefits, to those with a sensory impairment. However, I fully recognise the concerns of Mr McMillan’s constituent and the difficulties that they are experiencing. I would far prefer it if we as a Government were able to take direct action on such issues and ensure that thing were more aligned with the views and values of the people of Scotland.

Since rolling out childsmile services to schools and nurseries, NHS Forth Valley has recruited all private, council and partnership nurseries in its area into the toothbrushing programme and has also had 100 per cent engagement from all independent dental practitioners in childsmile practice. Within the past three months, the health board has achieved a full complement of childsmile staff, which, subject to parental consent and child participation, will increase the number of pre-school and primary school children able to access the fluoride varnish programmes.

The member makes a good point. Since the dental action plan was published in 2005, real progress has been made in improving oral healthcare in Scotland overall, and it is drawing a considerable level of international interest as a result of the success that is demonstrated by the fact that 67 per cent of children in primary 1 have no sign of obvious decay, which the member referred to. I am determined to ensure that we continue to build on that success. I understand that NHS Forth Valley does not offer targeted primary schools the option of non-participation in childsmile. Nineteen primary schools in the most deprived areas were targeted. The board has exceeded its target, and has recruited 29 primary schools to the scheme. I understand that only one primary school in the NHS Forth Valley area has not participated in the scheme to date, and the health board’s childsmile team is in dialogue with it to encourage it to do so. Given the benefits that have been gained by the other schools that have participated in the scheme, I encourage that school to take up the opportunity to participate in childsmile.

We are committed to maintaining Scotland’s position as a world leader on tobacco control. That is why we are developing a new tobacco control strategy for publication early next year. The strategy will set out ambitious targets for moving towards a smoke-free Scotland, underpinned by a range of actions that are focused on prevention, cessation and reducing health inequalities. If we are to make smoking a thing of the past, it is essential that we reduce the number of young people who take it up. Our ban on the display of tobacco in shops has a key role to play in that regard. I welcome the Supreme Court’s rejection of Imperial Tobacco’s legal challenge to the legislation. The ban will come into force in April next year for large shops.

It is important, when we use the term “smoke-free”, to state that we are talking about tobacco smoke—we do not want to put fear into the hearts of people with coal fires. Our aim to make Scotland smoke-free is an important recognition of our country’s intention to be progressive in continuing to reduce smoking. It is estimated that the yearly cost to the NHS of conditions that are associated with smoking is between £320 million and £510 million. When we include the other costs related to smoking, such as those involving loss of productivity, clearing up the litter associated with smoking and the damage that is caused by smoking-related fires, the total yearly cost to Scottish society is estimated to be in the region of £1.1 billion. Of course, that is just the financial cost. There is also tobacco’s human cost and the damage that it causes to families and communities across the country, with one quarter of all deaths in Scotland attributable to smoking. I am sure that members in the chamber agree that that cost is simply too high, and shows why we need to continue to move towards a tobacco-free Scotland.

Addressing determinants of health and health inequalities requires concerted leadership along with targeted and tailored action in true partnership with the communities that are affected. It also requires a preventative agenda to break the cycle of inequalities that is repeated in a number of our communities. The Government is taking action across three key social policy areas: the early years framework; the achieving our potential framework; and the equally well framework. I have also reconvened the ministerial task force on health inequalities so that we can review progress to date and consider what further action is required in the years ahead.

I am sure that all members in the chamber will recognise that tackling Scotland’s health inequalities effectively requires a multi-agency approach and that a short-term approach will never be effective in dealing with inequalities that have developed over generations in our country. It is important that we take all the action that is required to close those health inequalities, but the reality is that a health response to tackling health inequalities will not, in itself, deal with the issue. We must deal with a range of determinants that impact on health inequalities. Finance and poverty are key factors in tackling those inequalities. As things stand, the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government do not have the control over key areas of welfare reform and measures to tackle child poverty that is necessary to address such health inequalities. That is not to say that we cannot make progress in tackling health inequalities, but we could make greater progress if we had greater control over all of Scotland’s resources.

Sadly, Jackie Baillie has just demonstrated a real lack of understanding about the complex nature of health inequalities. All the evidence demonstrates clearly that there is not a simple health solution to health inequalities. [Interruption.]

All the evidence demonstrates that fact clearly. We need to have a range of social policies to tackle health inequalities. I have outlined to Jackie Baillie the action that the Government is taking to tackle such issues, but I say to her that one thing that can contribute towards that action is universal provision of some of our health service benefits, which she, as the Labour spokesperson for health, has now given up on as the result of her cuts commission. The Government will take all the necessary action—

The Labour members may choose to stick their heads in the sand when it comes to tackling health inequalities, along with their colleagues on the Tory benches, but the reality is that matters such as welfare and finance are key to tackling health inequalities in Scotland.

I fully agree with the chief medical officer, who has made my point clearly. We must ensure that all those policies work in an integrated way. One difficulty that we have in dealing with some of the issues is that we do not have control over such areas as welfare and benefits. No one should be in any doubt about the potential negative impact that the welfare reform agenda of the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats will have on tackling health inequalities in Scotland. Jim Hume asks when I met my colleagues to discuss the issue. I met them a fortnight ago at the ministerial task force on tackling health inequalities, and we will meet again in the new year to continue making progress on the issue.

A range of factors contributes to health inequalities. I have no doubt that alcohol and Scotland’s relationship with it contribute to such inequalities. Minimum pricing is one measure that can help to deal with some of the health inequalities in our society. I hope that, once minimum pricing is introduced, we will start to see the benefits that can be gained from it. I am delighted that the Westminster Government has now recognised the benefits of minimum pricing and that it intends to produce arrangements to introduce minimum pricing in England and Wales.

The cabinet secretary met representatives of Healthcare Improvement Scotland when he conducted the HIS annual review on 9 October 2012.

The member will be aware that the purpose of thematic inspections is to identify areas where there is inadequate practice, to ensure that health boards and hospitals are taking action to address matters. The purpose is also to illustrate areas where good practice is being undertaken. The member will acknowledge that a number of the inspections to which he referred highlighted good practice in our national health service facilities, where staff are treating patients with compassion and dignity as they support and care for them while they are in hospital. It is extremely important that when inspection reports have been completed, our boards take the necessary action to address issues of concern, to ensure that patients receive the appropriate care.

There are no second thoughts whatever. I understand that the draft inspection report for Ninewells went through a quality assurance process, which was undertaken by Healthcare Improvement Scotland. A number of issues to do with the report’s content were raised, which are currently being worked through. Healthcare Improvement Scotland publishes reports as and when appropriate. Some scheduled inspections have been reorganised to assist boards, given the pressures that they are experiencing during the winter months, but the inspection programme will continue into the new year and thereafter.

As others have done, I congratulate Richard Baker on securing time for the debate and on bringing to the chamber an important issue that a number of members have said has made them aware of a condition of which they were previously not aware. I became aware of the condition only about a year ago, when a friend’s sister had a baby with Edwards syndrome, which led me to find out more about the syndrome. As any parent would recognise, having a child with a life-limiting illness is hugely challenging for the parents and the whole family. The work of organisations such as Caoimhe’s Trust provides an essential form of help and support to such families. I commend Caoimhe’s parents for the way in which they have gone about that and have used their experience to try to help and support other parents and families. Through the current antenatal screening programme that is offered to pregnant women, the majority of cases with Edwards syndrome will be detected halfway through pregnancy. A number of members have referred to the importance of early diagnosis. It may be helpful if I point out that the United Kingdom National Screening Committee is considering specific screening for Edwards syndrome and Patau syndrome in the first trimester. We expect to receive the conclusions of that work by spring next year; we will then consider how to take that forward as national policy. I am sure that members will appreciate that maternity care for women should be person centred, safe and effective, that all pregnant women should have an initial assessment of their health, obstetric and social needs, and that they should be offered appropriate screening referral and care options by 12 weeks’ gestation. We recognise that many babies who are affected by Edwards syndrome die either before or during childbirth. The death of a child is distressing for any parent, so every effort should be made to support parents through that difficult time and to ensure that they are treated with the appropriate dignity and the required care. We have provided some funding over two years to the charity SANDS—the Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Society—to enable it to work with NHS boards to ensure that relevant staff receive appropriate education and training to support parents during that painful time. As a Government, we are also committed to ensuring that sick and vulnerable children receive the highest-quality care from the most appropriate professionals at all times, and we recognise the vital role of neonatal units in providing intensive and specialist care for sick and premature babies. Through our neonatal quality framework, which will be published soon, neonatal services will be required to provide evidence of person-centred care, including palliative care. Families, including siblings, should be offered access to communication, information and advocacy services, including referrals for counselling and bereavement support. That is intended to support them in their participation around discussions, clinical care decisions, palliative care planning and end-of-life care, if that is required. Such planning should also take account of families’ cultural and religious preferences, needs and values. Palliative care planning and end-of-life decisions should be made in partnership with professionals and parents, and care should be provided in an appropriate environment, whether that is a hospice or a home setting. Children and young people have different needs from adults when it comes to palliative care. It has been said before and it is worth reiterating that children are not mini-adults in such situations. That is why Scotland’s national action plan for palliative and end-of-life care recognises the need for a specific framework for children and young people. Members have mentioned the children and young people’s palliative care executive, which consists of experts in the field. It has produced a framework that aims to ensure that there are recognised pathways of palliative care within and among health boards for every child and young person from the point of diagnosis of a life-limiting condition through to living with their condition until the end of life. The framework has five key outcomes and they have been highlighted to all chief executives of NHS boards in Scotland. In advancing those outcomes, they will deliver the palliative care services that children and young people need. I expect all boards to implement the outcomes as a matter of priority. A managed clinical network for children with exceptional health care needs was set up in 2009 as part of the on-going work to improve specialist services for children and young people. It is an important way in which to develop the services that are provided for children who have exceptional health care needs while also helping to share good practice across Scotland and agree pathways of care. That should help practitioners to support children. Dennis Robertson mentioned “Shaping Bereavement Care: A Framework for Action for Bereavement Care in NHSScotland”, which was published in February 2011 to provide guidance and support to NHS Scotland on how to develop and deliver bereavement care. It sets out a framework of action for boards and recognises the need for better co-ordination and understanding of the needs of people who are bereaved. A national bereavement pack and information leaflet were developed to support health boards in implementing the guidance, and the series of modules that have been rolled out to help to raise awareness and provide further support for staff include a specific module on the death of a child. I hope that I have given members some insight into the work that is being done to support individuals who have a child with a life-limiting condition, including those with Edwards syndrome. I am always happy to hear from members if they feel that further actions could be taken. Should members wish to raise any points with me, I will be more than happy to discuss them. I wish Caoimhe’s Trust continued success in the work that it does. I hope that all members will give it the support that it needs and help it to spread greater knowledge of Edwards syndrome.

Health Protection Scotland monitors and publishes snapshot information on affected hospitals and wards that have been closed by weekly point prevalence surveillance. That information is published on its website. As at the week beginning 26 November 2012, there were 16 hospitals and 20 wards affected. Substantial preparations for winter are carried out every year across NHS Scotland, including work to minimise the frequency and size of norovirus outbreaks, and the Scottish Government has supported national health service boards throughout the year to develop and refine their winter plans for 2012-13.

The member highlights the important fact that norovirus is currently very active. The norovirus season appears to have started earlier than it has in previous years. That is not peculiar to Scotland; it is the situation internationally and the experience in other countries around the world. We and local boards have taken forward a number of initiatives in order to inform relatives of patients that, should they have such symptoms, they should not enter the hospital until 48 hours after their symptoms have receded. It is important that people take that message forward and act on it, and it is extremely important that everyone has a part to play, including those who visit hospitals, in ensuring that we do everything that we can to reduce the possibility of norovirus being taken into clinical settings.

The Government remains committed to the important but challenging four-hour accident and emergency waiting times standard and to maintaining local access to accident and emergency services. We will continue to provide additional advice and support to the boards that are most challenged. We have drawn together an unscheduled care action plan, which is being reviewed by an expert group of doctors, nurses and senior managers. This winter, we have provided an additional £3.19 million to help NHS boards and their partners to manage winter pressures and to make the most effective use of capacity and resources.

A number of boards in Scotland have met the standard. Presently, we are at a level of some 95 per cent across the country, and we are continuing to work with the boards that are not presently meeting the standard. I should point out to the member that, back in 2006, when a survey of performance in A and E departments was carried out, the figure was 88 per cent. Therefore, there has been significant improvement in recent years. We recognise that some boards have specific challenges, and we are working with them to continue to make improvements in the area to ensure that patients get the care that they require as early as possible.

Under provisions that are set out in the National Health Service (Pharmaceutical Services) (Scotland) Regulations 2009, the responsibility for considering applications to open a community pharmacy is given to national health service boards, and the responsibility for considering appeals relating to those applications is given to the national appeal panel. The Scottish Government has no role in monitoring applications or appeals, as securing the adequate provision of NHS pharmaceutical services is a matter for local service planning and delivery.

I should inform the member that there was a review of the process two years ago, when there was an extensive consultation exercise, so that people could express their views on the process. I am content that the current system is operating well, but I note the member’s concerns. If he wants to bring to my attention specific experience in his constituency, I am more than happy for him to write to me and I will give him a full and detailed response.

I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on securing time for this important debate. The debate is of particular interest to me because I had the pleasure of visiting the Bobath centre earlier this year to learn at first hand about the work that is done there. I was already aware of Bobath from my previous career as an occupational therapist. I confess that when I went to the centre I was a little surprised to find that my former maths teacher is a member of the board of Bobath Scotland—he was still looking for my homework. It was good to be able to meet the professionals and other staff in the centre. Of course, it is essential that those with cerebral palsy and other conditions receive the appropriate therapeutic assessment, treatment and intervention that best suits and meets their needs. I recognise—I say this as a therapist rather than as a minister—the specialism that exists within the centre in Glasgow, but I also recognise that that has to be balanced against the fact that different models may be appropriate for different individuals in different circumstances. That is to say that, in some instances, Bobath may not be the best approach for some individuals with cerebral palsy. Sometimes, Bobath will provide part of the answer along with other forms of therapeutic intervention. Very often, the evidence base will suggest that a range of therapeutic interventions may be needed in order to maximise and improve the independence and quality of life of individuals with conditions such as cerebral palsy. However, that is not to say that, in some instances, Bobath will not be the most appropriate intervention for some individuals. In taking forward this type of approach, the challenge is not so much whether the centre should be in Glasgow or Edinburgh but how we ensure that we have a range of skill sets within the allied health professional workforce that therapists can make best use of when they are working with individual patients. That is a matter of giving people the skills and assets that they need so that they can deploy the best therapeutic intervention for the patient. That is why there is provision for therapists within NHS Scotland to receive training in Bobath so that they can use the technique with patients for whom it is appropriate. Some work that has been taking place in the north-east is a very good example of partnership working with Bobath Scotland to expand and develop people’s skills so that they can discharge the Bobath therapeutic intervention in whichever setting is most appropriate to the individual patient. That means, therefore, that the centre in Glasgow is not the key; the issue is about the skill sets that the therapists can deploy in different settings at a local level. The challenge going forward, in particular for Bobath Scotland, is how we can continue to scale up the work with AHP teams in different health board areas so that Bobath can work with and support people on an outreach basis to deliver Bobath interventions to patients in different areas as they see appropriate. The allied health professionals delivery plan provides a good opportunity for that. I am acutely aware from my previous professional experience that AHPs have not been properly valued within our NHS in the way that they should have been and in the way that they can be. With the AHP delivery plan—the first of its type in the UK—I was determined to ensure that we recognise their work much more effectively. Part of that is about ensuring that boards recognise the role that AHPs can play. If we can ensure that that role is given a greater priority, there will be a greater opportunity for more young people and adults to be given access to services such as those provided by Bobath. Ultimately, however, the decision on the best and most appropriate therapeutic intervention for a given patient is for the therapists themselves in partnership with the patient.

I recognise that it can be difficult to create in the NHS the same type of intensity that might be provided in a specialist centre, but my point is that the approach of having a single specialist centre in Scotland does not always serve people in other parts of Scotland who need to travel a considerable distance to get to it. The challenge is to have a model that allows the intensity of service to be delivered in the locations where individuals actually require it. That is why it is important that Bobath Scotland engages with AHPs within individual territorial health boards, to look both at what skill sets AHPs need in order to take forward Bobath therapy for patients who may benefit from it and at how Bobath Scotland can support that. The work in the north-east is a good example of how that can be taken forward. I encourage Bobath Scotland to continue with the approach that it has taken in the north-east, engaging with boards—either with local boards or with professionals within individual board areas—to look at how it can scale up that approach and create some of the intensity that I acknowledge can be provided in a single specialist centre. Giving a greater profile to AHPs and the role that they can play in helping to support individuals will assist in making sure that boards recognise that resource allocation in therapies such as Bobath is of value and can provide a real benefit to patients. There is an opportunity for Bobath Scotland to work with our AHP teams within NHS Scotland and to look at how those teams can develop their skills so that they can provide the quality of services that we wish to see being provided across the country, in a way that allows people to receive therapeutic intervention in their own local area. Jackie Baillie made a suggestion, and I am always open to looking at positive suggestions. However, to go back to the original point, it is not for Government to prescribe a particular type of therapeutic intervention, which Bobath is. The situation is different for CHAS, for example, because of the type of care and support that it provides. However, it is important that Bobath engages with AHP teams in territorial board areas and looks at how they can develop the service further. From the discussions that I had with Bobath Scotland, I have no doubt that it will be keen to look at taking that forward. 13:26 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

As other members have done, I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate, which has been helpful in highlighting the excellent work that the Samaritans have undertaken nationally in Scotland since the 1950s and the celebrations of 40 years of the Samaritans’ activity in the Lanarkshire area. As all members in the chamber do, I recognise the importance of the work that the Samaritans undertake locally in Lanarkshire and nationally across the country to help people who may be going through difficult times. I know that the public, too, sees the Samaritans as a highly valuable service. To a large extent, the Samaritans has a fairly unique position in society in that it is an organisation that has a lot of public trust because of the role that it fulfils. In Lanarkshire, the Samaritans have 80 trained volunteers who answer some 18,000 calls for help each year. The volunteers offer support to individuals who are feeling low or are struggling. As others have done, I offer my warm welcome to the volunteers, Nancy and Christine, in the gallery. The Lanarkshire branch also works closely with our choose life team. That close partnership working has been successful in raising local awareness of a range of programmes around suicide prevention. The Government has provided core grant funding to the Samaritans at national level for some years. In addition, we have provided one-off grant funding to it over the past couple of years to support some early work on developing a new telephony system, which will—when completed—ensure that people who call the Samaritans can speak to someone, even at busy times, through the system redirecting them to a free call in another establishment. The funding has also provided support for work with Citizens Advice Scotland on suicide risk awareness, which is designed to help bureau staff to identify and support clients who may be at risk of suicide and to help bureau managers to support their advisers in handling such distressing contacts. That work with Citizens Advice Scotland and the work that the Samaritans does in the prisons and elsewhere shows the variety of work that the organisation undertakes over and above the call service that it provides. I want to look more widely at some of the suicide prevention work that has been taking place in Scotland, and to which several members have referred. In recent years, there has been an overall downward trend in suicide rates—a decrease of just under 17 per cent. That reflects the fact that we have largely met the planned reduction that was set out in the choose life strategy. However, as Elaine Smith and others have highlighted, there is much more that we need to do to reduce the number of suicides in Scotland. We know that periods of economic difficulty cause difficulties in that regard. There is also emerging evidence that highlights that some of the factors that may contribute to a person’s being vulnerable to committing suicide are closely associated with factors that contribute to health inequalities in Scotland, which means that we must take a much more holistic approach to how we deal with such issues. Alongside the choose life programme, NHS Health Scotland has recently launched a new campaign called reading between the lines. Its purpose is to help people to know what they should do for someone they know who is exhibiting risk signs of committing suicide, and to help them to feel confident about assisting those who are at risk. Another key part of the choose life strategy was to improve training in the national health service, so that our front-line staff would be more aware of suicide risk and more able to assess patients effectively. The data from 2010 show that at least 50 per cent of front-line NHS staff have been educated and trained in the use of suicide assessment tools and in suicide prevention. NHS boards continue to provide such training. In August this year, I published the Scottish Government’s “Mental Health Strategy for Scotland: 2012-2015”, which sets out a programme for the next three to five years on how we intend to improve mental health and wellbeing and mental health services. There are several elements of the strategy that are relevant to reduction of suicide, such as effective work with families and carers and increased support for self-management and self-help approaches. We will undertake a consultation early in the new year on how we can take forward our new suicide and self-harm prevention strategy. The consultation will involve a public engagement programme. We intend to publish the strategy next summer and the working group that has been established to take forward the work includes a representative from the Samaritans. I have no doubt that we can make much progress. We need to ensure that all services are working in a co-ordinated fashion to achieve that. Prevention of suicide remains a significant challenge, but the progress that we have made in recent years gives me great encouragement. We have achieved a considerable amount, but there is certainly more that we can do, and that is the intention behind the new strategy. I have no doubt that the Samaritans will continue to play a valuable role in Scottish society, by helping to support people who experience distress. I congratulate Lanarkshire Samaritans again on reaching its 40th anniversary and I wish the organisation the very best for the coming 40 years. Meeting closed at 18:42.

I will respond to the amendments proposed by Neil Bibby and Jim Hume and speak to my own. Neil Bibby’s amendment 30 would introduce a new general principle that, in carrying out its functions under the bill in relation to a child, a local authority should take a child-centred approach that reflects the needs and wishes of the child as far as is possible. I am not convinced that the amendment is necessary, as all the general principles in the bill apply to anyone—both adults and children—who receives support under its provisions. In carrying out its functions under the bill in respect of a child, a local authority must pay due regard to the principles of involvement, informed choice and collaboration. It must also respect the dignity of the child and their desire to participate in the wider life of the community. Therefore, I do not think that amendment 30 adds to the principles that already apply to every child who receives services under the bill. I appreciate that Neil Bibby and the organisations that have informed the amendment want to make a difference to the way in which services are delivered to children. In seeking to underpin the child-centred approach, I encourage them to engage fully in the development of the proposed children and young people bill. I also encourage them to continue to engage with our officials on the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill as we move towards its implementation, particularly through the dialogue that we can have on improving the statutory guidance in this area. However, I do not support Neil Bibby’s amendment. Jim Hume’s amendments 31 to 33 seek to ensure that carers are recognised as key partners in care and that, when the person who is being cared for so wishes, the carer must be involved in the assessment for and provision of services. It is clear to the Scottish Government that carers are key partners. That principle is already enshrined in statutory and other guidance. At the request of the national carers organisations and carers, we built on that approach in the carers strategy to make it clear that carers should be seen as equal partners. I understand the intentions behind amendments 31 and 32. We know, from practice, that there is merit in involving carers in issues that local authorities take forward in relation to cared-for people when both the carer and the cared-for person want that. However, I am not convinced that we need to extend that provision at this stage, and we should certainly not do so without adequate consultation. Amendment 32 proposes a greater role for carers in the assessment of the cared-for person and proposes that the local authority should collaborate with the carer, subject to the wishes of the person who is being cared for. Moreover, for the purposes of the amendment, the definition of “carer” would be broadened out to mean a regular carer rather than a carer who provides a substantial amount of care on a regular basis, as set out in statute for the purposes of eligibility for a carers assessment. That means that carers whose caring role is regular but not intensive or substantial—perhaps they do a weekly shop or monthly gardening, or they pick up prescriptions for a friend or neighbour—could be involved in decisions about the assessment and the provision of services for the person. Amendment 32 is incomplete in that it makes no provision for persons without capacity to express their wishes. Although I am sympathetic to some of the intention behind Jim Hume’s amendments, the omission in amendment 32 is important. As a Parliament, we would need to have a wider consultation before introducing such a provision. I propose an alternative course of action. We have awarded a contract to Carers Scotland and the Minority Ethnic Carers of People Project to provide a carers rights charter. We will ask those two organisations to explore the principles behind the amendments through the work that they will carry out on the charter. Depending on the results of that work, we will decide whether to pursue the matter further at a more suitable time. Given what I have said about the consequences of the amendments and about the carers rights charter, I invite Jim Hume to not move his amendments 31 to 33. My amendments 14 to 16 make further adjustments to the general principles on independent living. As members of the committee will no doubt recall, I brought forward the independent living principles in response to a recommendation from the committee, which itself was a response to the views of the independent living community in Scotland. As members will know, the inspiration for and ultimately the source of our understanding of independent living stem from the wider fundamental rights that are contained in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the European convention on human rights. My amendments 15 and 16 convey the importance of independent living by better reflecting the rights that are conferred on individuals by those conventions. My amendment 14 adjusts the general principles in order to strengthen them. It requires local authorities to “take reasonable steps to facilitate” the principles. In other words, it places an obligation on local authorities to do all that they reasonably can do to ensure that people’s rights are facilitated. I urge the Parliament to support the amendments in my name.

I will speak to the amendments from Jim Hume and Jackie Baillie. Jim Hume’s amendment 34 would remove the power in the bill to support carers and replace it with a duty to support them instead. As I made clear in previous correspondence to the lead committee, that is not, in fact, straightforward. Introducing a duty to support carers may lead to formal national eligibility criteria and a much less flexible approach. In some cases, carer support may be narrowed to the most critical level of carer need only. I want to adopt as flexible an approach as possible. That is why the bill includes a strong power that will be supported by clear and empowering guidelines to local authorities. I turn to the arguments that Jackie Baillie put forward for amendment 3. As she is no doubt aware, charging is a complex matter. It would be wrong to assume that, simply by removing section 16, we would strengthen the position of carers with respect to charging. In fact, the opposite is true: the position of carers with respect to charging would actually be weakened. I will also put to rest some of the misplaced speculation that the Government intends to use the bill to widen councils’ discretion to charge carers. I plan to use the powers that are provided in section 16 to issue regulations that make it clear that all charges for support to carers should be waived in whole. To be abundantly clear, carers will not be charged for support that they receive directly under section 2 of the bill.

I will come to that point. Unfortunately, Ms Baillie is wrong on that. Our approach, for the first time, recognises carers as providers of a service to those for whom they care. I appreciate that some members may question, as Jackie Baillie does, why we wish to retain a power to charge carers when our policy is to restrict charges on them. The answer is straightforward. If we chose to do as Jackie Baillie suggests—to dispense with section 16—we would have no legislative basis on which to make the regulations and would be left in the position that we are in right now, in which carers do not know what they might be charged for and in which carers can be charged for different services in different parts of the country. I make it clear that section 16 creates the provision for ministers to limit the discretion of councils to charge. In other words, it allows us to narrow councils’ discretion to charge as little or as much as the Parliament wishes.

Again, that is actually incorrect. Local authorities are using some of their financial discretion powers in order to levy charges against carers, and the way in which we can regulate that is through the use of section 16. I am afraid that Jackie Baillie is wrong on the matter. Additionally, regulation will provide Parliament with the flexibility to respond to any effort to circumvent our restrictions. Some local authorities are using those general powers to charge carers; my approach will limit that discretion in a much more specific way. I also point out that the Scottish Government will consult carefully and fully on the draft regulations before they are brought to Parliament and that any regulations will take effect at the same time as we commence the act. Let me now make some wider comments following on from our discussion on the amendments in this group and on those in the previous group on the general principles. I understand the desire of carers organisations to see improvements to policy and practice with regards to carer support. That is why the regulations that I intend to bring forward are only part of a package of support that I intend for carers. I am pleased to inform Parliament today that, in addition to my commitment on charging, I will also issue directions to local authorities about the way in which they should approach the “substantial and regular” test on access to carers assessments. Ministers do not issue directions lightly, so I hope that members will appreciate the importance of this step and the advantages that directions provide. As members will be aware, access to a carers assessment is the first step on the road to getting some support. Together with our work to support the national roll-out of carers assessments, the directions will result in the provision of greater consistency in the approach that is taken across the country on the provision of carers assessments. Furthermore, as many in the chamber will know, some carers do not meet the threshold for a carers assessment. Carers in that situation should be supported on a preventative basis to maintain their health and wellbeing. I therefore intend to issue statutory guidance to local authorities about the benefits of intervening early to support carers and to encourage local authorities to provide such support. The support could include information, advice, signposting or directing the carer towards another organisation. It is important that carers get the support that is right and necessary for them. I am confident that these further measures will help to address the issues that have been raised by the national carers organisations. In conclusion, I do not support either of the amendments. I urge Jackie Baillie not to move amendment 3, which would make the situation worse, and I ask Jim Hume to withdraw amendment 34.

I will speak first to my own amendments and then to those in Dr Simpson’s name. Section 3 defines the self-directed support options that will be available to all individuals when they are eligible for social care. Amendments 17 and 18 are minor technical amendments to section 3. They recognise the possibility that local authorities themselves may provide services under options 2 and 4. The proposed adjustments to those options take account of the fact that where a local authority is providing such services it does not have to make a payment to itself. That is consistent with the changes that were made to option 3 at stage 2. I will now deal with the amendments in Dr Simpson’s name. Dr Simpson lodged similar amendments at stage 2. I said in committee that the Scottish Government could not support amendments that would “restrict flexibility without a full understanding of the potential consequences of doing so.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 30 October 2012; c 2914.] That is still my position. I accept that, by proposing his amendments, Richard Simpson is attempting to address unfairness in the setting of rates between the various options, but the changes that we made at stage 2 to the provisions already ensure greater transparency in how local authorities allocate payment under the available options. The bill as amended at stage 2 already provides for a transparent budget for all four self-directed support options. Statutory guidance, training and further implementation of the national strategy will encourage greater fairness without interfering with the bill. The guidance will fully consider issues around commissioning, procurement and finance that can lead to discrepancies in the allocation of resources. I ask members to support amendments 17 and 18, and to reject Richard Simpson’s amendments. I move amendment 17.

As I have set out, we amended the bill at stage 2 to ensure greater transparency. The bill will therefore deliver that. Through statutory guidance, we will also implement further measures to ensure greater consistency in how local authorities operate in this area. To a large extent, rather than creating any fundamental difference in relation to how the system is delivered, Richard Simpson’s amendments would create nothing more than a paper exercise. That is why it would be better and more effective to try to address some of the issues through statutory guidance. Amendment 17 agreed to. Amendment 18 moved—[Michael Matheson]—and agreed to. Amendment 6 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson].

I will respond to Bob Doris’s and Richard Simpson’s amendments. As Bob Doris said, his amendments address a point of clarity that was raised by Capability Scotland. I consider that sections 5 and 15 would benefit from the small adjustments proposed, so I recommend that the Parliament supports Bob Doris’s amendments. Richard Simpson lodged similar amendments at stage 2. I recommended then that the committee should reject them, and that remains my view. His amendments would require any person who provided assistance to an individual in undertaking their assessment or making their choices to be “suitable” in the view of the local authority. They would place a duty on the local authority to be satisfied that the supported person would not come under undue influence from the person who provided them with assistance in agreeing to that assistance and in selecting an option for SDS. In addition, Richard Simpson’s amendments would require the local authority to have regard to the accessibility of the person to the supported person, the ability of the person to assist the supported person in the decision-making process, any likely conflict of interest between the person and the supported person, and any likely undue concentration in the person of power over the supported person. Richard Simpson’s amendments are well intentioned. He stated at stage 2 that some relatives can act in a manner that is overly restrictive of individuals who have capacity. As I understand his position, he is seeking to place on the face of the bill formal tests that would have to be gone through before an individual would be allowed to provide assistance. However, we must return to the purpose of the provisions, which is to enable and encourage local authorities to maximise individuals’ capability to understand, make decisions and communicate decisions, and to identify persons who, with the agreement of the supported person, can assist. The challenge in that respect is to define and articulate in statutory guidance appropriate and inappropriate forms of assistance. I intend to elaborate on that in the statutory guidance that will accompany the bill. I recommend that Parliament supports Bob Doris’s amendments and rejects Richard Simpson’s amendments.

During the stage 1 debate I told Parliament that I would give full consideration to how we could enhance section 8 with regard to advocacy. Amendment 23 makes explicit the Scottish Government’s position that local authorities should provide information on how to access advocacy services to anyone who would benefit from that type of support. The amendment builds on existing legislation in the form of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, which already provides a right to advocacy for everyone—adults and children—with a mental disorder, as defined in the act, including people with learning disabilities and mental ill health. On Drew Smith’s amendment 1, we must ensure that advocacy support is targeted at those who will benefit from it. Not everyone will want or require an independent advocate in every instance and I am not convinced that providing a right to advocacy to everyone who receives social care, as Drew Smith proposes, would be a proportionate measure. I am aware that many people will want to access support from a range of sources, such as carers organisations and user-led support organisations. Indeed, people will want to access a variety of support at different points on their SDS journey. We need a solution that promotes the sustainable development of advocacy services and recognises their important place within a wider framework of support services. I hope that Drew Smith will support my amendment 23. Accompanied by statutory guidance, it will support social work professionals in using their professional judgment to consider whether advocacy is required each time that they have a discussion with or assess an individual. I ask Drew Smith not to move his amendment 1. If it is pressed to a vote, I ask members to reject it. I move amendment 23.

I have listened carefully to members’ comments, but I go back to the committee’s stage 1 report, which highlighted that not everyone would require access to independent advocacy and that people may wish to make use of other services. I believe that my amendment 23 strikes the right balance, and I ask the Parliament to support it. Amendment 23 agreed to. After section 8

There is considerable scope to extend the benefits of self-directed support to children, and I am pleased both that section 7 will give children the opportunity to express their views about their support and that those views must be considered by the local authority, in so far as that is reasonably practicable. My amendment 24 complements those provisions by placing a duty on the local authority to give a child an explanation of, and information relating to, the options for self-directed support in a form that is appropriate to the child and which takes into account their maturity and needs. In practice, that means that when a child is given the opportunity to express a view on his or her support, they will receive information in a way that will genuinely help them to understand the implications of any views that they might express. That will allow children under 16 an appropriate degree of informed choice and control over their support. I am grateful to Barnardo’s Scotland and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children for bringing this important matter of detail to my attention. I move amendment 24.

I ask members to agree to amendment 24. Amendment 24 agreed to. Amendment 1 moved—[Drew Smith].

The Scottish Government does not support the amendments. Amendment 2 would introduce a regulation-making power to enable ministers to establish a scheme that would regulate the quality of support that is provided by personal assistants who are employed through a direct payment. I did not support similar amendments at stage 2 and I do not support these amendments at stage 3. A number of disabled people’s organisations have made it clear that a scheme to require registration of personal assistants would remove from individuals decision-making power over whom they employ to meet their support needs. The bill and current direct payment practice do not function on their own, but are part of a wider legal framework. A framework of protection already exists to provide proportionate safeguards to protect people who employ or receive support from a personal assistant without restricting their choice. A personal employer who chooses to employ a PA who is a member of the protecting vulnerable groups scheme is entitled to see that person’s scheme membership statement to confirm that they are not barred from doing regulated work with adults or children. Social workers have clear adult and child protection duties, including a responsibility to ensure that a personal employer—whether they are the supported adult, the parent of a supported child or the guardian of an adult who lacks capacity—understands the importance of PVG scheme membership. It is true that taking on the role of a personal employer brings with it significant responsibility. Social workers need to be confident that the person who chooses that route understands the safeguards that the PVG scheme brings, which include rules on seeking and sharing information, and understands the risks of employing an unsuitable person. The update to our guidance on self-directed support last year addressed those matters. The framework that I have outlined strikes an appropriate balance that keeps people safe while respecting their right to make decisions about their care. In any case, if a future Government changed the policy, it would already have the mechanism to do what Jackie Baillie wants via its regulation-making powers under the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, which contains powers to provide for registration and regulation of different types of social service workers. I stress again that we have no plans to use such a power—for the clear policy reasons that I have outlined—but, if it was necessary in the future, that other power could be used to enable the Scottish Social Services Council to regulate personal assistants. It would be unnecessary—and, more important, it would be undesirable—to include in the bill a regulation-making power that was intended to be used to regulate PAs, for the good policy reasons that I have outlined. As I do not support Jackie Baillie’s first amendment in the group, which is clearly not required, I do not support her other amendments in the group, either.

I welcome amendment 29. The bill is about choice and, to deliver real choice, local authorities must strive to encourage suitable diversity in the choices that are available to people. Nanette Milne lodged an amendment on the topic at stage 2. However, as members of the Health and Sport Committee will recall, although I agreed with aspects of that amendment I had difficulty with others. I was glad to meet her to discuss a way forward, which has found us with the amendment that is before us today. I am happy to support amendment 29 and urge Parliament to do likewise.

I am pleased to open the debate on the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill. I thank the conveners and members of the various committees—in particular, the Health and Sport Committee—for their scrutiny of the bill. I also thank the members who lodged amendments to the bill at stages 2 and 3. The committee took great care in considering every aspect of the bill and in challenging, probing and questioning every provision. In many respects, we have followed the bill’s principles in adopting a truly collaborative approach to framing the legislation. I am sure that Parliament will join me in acknowledging the considerable contributions that have been made by disabled people’s organisations, carers’ organisations, provider organisations and the many others who have played a crucial role in developing and informing the bill. Perhaps more than most legislation, the bill is a testament to the conviction and detailed work of individuals and groups who work every day to make a real difference to people’s lives. It is their bill as much as it is Parliament’s bill. We are debating legislation that is very close to the hearts of citizens and professionals who are involved in the health and social care sector. Scotland is a diverse place and we have a diverse people. We should not be surprised when we hear that people want a rich and varied range of options, that they have higher expectations and that they want to shape their own support and lives. In 21st century Scotland, we must adopt a more collaborative approach to delivering our public services. The Christie commission set the benchmark, and self-directed support is one of the many reforms that will help to deliver against that benchmark. We should consider what the bill means for public services as a whole. In my opinion, it means that we should challenge our services to become much more flexible and creative. It means that public services should have confidence in sharing control and should, when a person wants it, pass control to that citizen—in short, they should respond to people’s desire to shape their own lives. We should also acknowledge the roots of the bill, which go back to the activism of disabled people who claimed their support to be their own and not a service to which they must adapt. Independent living is at the heart of the bill. That is why disabled people’s organisations approached the committee to include a general principle on independent living, and it is why I was happy to make further adjustments to that principle at stage 3. However, collaboration involves more than one party, and this is about professionals as well as citizens. The Scottish Association of Social Workers has stated that its profession “promotes social change, problem solving in human relationships and the empowerment and liberation of people to enhance well-being.” Self-directed support helps to deliver the core values and principles of the profession—to work alongside individuals and to develop creative solutions to the problems that people face. Indeed, in some respects, the bill helps us to return to the original principles of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968—the principles of promoting social welfare and taking a broad and flexible interpretation of what it means. I move on to the bill’s content. The general principles within it set out the aspirations for care and support and the basis for the collaborative approach between the professional and the citizen. The bill contains a variety of options for individuals to choose, it places a clear duty on councils to give effect to people’s choice, and it imposes further duties on councils to facilitate that choice through information, advice and support. In some respects, that might sound fairly straightforward, but too often that approach has been sidelined as being too difficult and having too many challenges. However, a number of social work professionals, adults, children and carers have proved that it can be done, and the bill enshrines such an approach for all. We should take a few minutes to reflect on some of the challenges that lie ahead for the sector as it is called upon to implement the legislation. Our regulations and statutory guidance will help in that respect. The guidance framework will help to clarify the limits of choice, and where it is simply not appropriate for choice to be offered. It will seek to provide reassurance to professionals in balancing their duties on protection with their duties to enable and to support. It will also encourage; it will provide practical examples that demonstrate instances in which self-directed support works, which will help professionals to overcome barriers, be they real or imagined. Of course, the legislation on its own will only go so far. That is why we will develop and issue further regulations and statutory guidance. In addition, the Scottish Government intends to provide a robust and comprehensive framework for monitoring and evaluating the legislation—an aspect that will become more important as we move towards implementation. We must also remember that self-directed support, important though it is, is only one part of the solution to the challenges that we face in health and social care. In the not-too-distant future, Parliament will consider proposals for greater integration of health and social care. We are implementing a number of strategies across a diverse range of user groups, including strategies relating to people with mental health problems, people with dementia, carers and young carers, people with learning disabilities and people with autism. The legislation forms one part of a much wider strategy to deal with the challenges of an ageing population, increased expectations and pressure on resources. In choosing to pass the bill, Parliament will play its part in delivering choice and control for people and ensure that there is greater flexibility and creativity across the sector. In short, the bill marks a significant step towards meeting the expectations of those who receive social care now and into the future. I look forward to the debate. It gives me great pleasure to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I thank all members for their contributions in the debate, which has been considered and thoughtful. There is a clear sense of cross-party support for this important piece of legislation. From stage 1, when the bill’s scrutiny process started in the Health and Sport Committee, right through stages 2 and 3, there has been a real and genuine desire across the parties to make further improvements to it, and the bill that we have at the end of the process is better than that which was introduced in Parliament in February this year. I started out in my career in a health and social care setting around 20 years ago. I know that many people will be looking at me and thinking that I could not have started my career then. [Interruption.] I hear noises of approval from Jackie Baillie, which I am particularly surprised about. There was a culture that we should give people much greater choice about how their care should be provided, but the choice was very constrained. It was defined by the local authority and the professionals. Direct payments were introduced, but uptake of them has been very slow over 20 years. I think that there has been resistance at times, which professionals and local authorities can often create, to encouraging people to take up direct payments; that resistance is unhelpful, given the way in which direct payments give individuals much greater choice. The bill is crucial to changing that environment and giving people much greater choice and opportunities to make decisions for themselves and to take more control over their lives. We should not underestimate the direction of travel over the past 20 years to get to this point with the bill, where that level of personal control will be provided in a way that simply has not been provided universally before. The bill is relatively short, but I see it as one that will create considerable change in the way in which care will be delivered to people in the future. It is much more about doing things with people rather than to them, and it is much more based on the co-production model of working with people to find the best solutions for them in managing their care. It is often said that the people who are the experts in knowing what their care needs are are the cared-for people themselves, who know more than anyone else in that regard. Jackie Baillie raised a point about the use of self-directed support for health. We have had health pilots in Lothian, which have thrown up a number of issues around the way in which self-directed support can be used in that field. We now have a group working on statutory guidance for that area and on how we can take that forward with the integration of health and social care, and how the joint budgets can be used much more effectively. Some of the findings from the Lothian pilots are informing that discussion on how we can shape matters.

A number of members raised the issue of carers charges. I recognise the importance of that issue. The technical provision in section 16 is to provide us with the route to regulate in that area. As it stands, it relates to specific pieces of legislation—Jackie Baillie referred to the provisions of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968—that allow us to regulate on areas of charging. Section 2 creates a new area that allows us to regulate in the area of charging in a way that is not available at present. That is why removing section 16 would have left us with the status quo, which is that local authorities could charge if they chose to do so. However, by creating a system, we can regulate the process. It is for that reason that the provision in section 16 was largely technical.

I do not think that Mr Chisholm was at the committee meeting at which, because of time constraints, we had an abbreviated discussion on the issue. However, in the discussion that I had with Jackie Baillie I intimated that there would be regulations in that area. When it is recognised that someone is wrong, they should just admit that they are wrong. I know that that is hard for Jackie Baillie, but in this instance she is simply wrong. That is why we are taking forward the regulations in this area.

I give way to Jackie Baillie because she has been wrong today and I am sure that she wants to correct the record on that matter.

No, that is simply not the case. We were always going to regulate in this area. We had to create the provision that would allow us to do so. Today, carers are in a much better position as a result of the actions that we have taken rather than following Jackie Baillie into a situation that would have created greater uncertainty and the possibility of carers being subject to charges. It is important to recognise that carers have often been dealt with piecemeal, in that issues have been dealt with here and there. As a society, we must look at how we can deal with carers issues much more comprehensively and effectively. I intend to discuss that with the national carers organisations to explore the best way in which to address some of the fundamental issues more effectively in the future. A point that has not been touched on during the debate is that we intend to make greater provision for individuals to be able to employ a member of their family as a personal assistant. There has been a real barrier to people taking direct payments because of the thresholds that are set around employing a family member only in exceptional circumstances. We intend to produce statutory guidance to allow us to increase the numbers of people who can employ a relative. On the regulation of personal assistants, we already have the powers that allow us to do that, hence there was no reason to agree to the amendment that Jackie Baillie proposed in that regard. There is strong support for the bill’s general principles and for its aims and objectives. I believe that the bill will command support across the chamber today, because it will make a real change in people’s lives by giving them the power to make decisions and to arrange care in a way that best suits them. I call on members to support the bill at decision time.

Like other members, I offer my congratulations to James Dornan on securing time for this debate. It is a debate to which I have listened with interest, particularly on the history of St Andrew’s First Aid, which was first established in Glasgow. Fiona McLeod was even able to track down the history of her local branch. This is also an opportunity to congratulate St Andrew’s First Aid on the work that it is doing in general and, in particular, on first aid week. It is important that we recognise the work of St Andrew’s First Aid and help to promote its message that together we can save lives. We should also recognise the valuable contribution that I have no doubt it will make to many of the significant events that will take place in 2014—to which David Torrance referred—not least the Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup and the homecoming. I am certain that the people responsible for organising those events will regard first aid provision as a key part of their planning and preparation. In considering the debate, I have been struck by the many and varied ways in which people work together to support each other to save lives. For many years, the Scottish Ambulance Service has been working with a significant range of partners to support community resilience, including our health boards, healthcare professionals, emergency services, community groups, carers organisations, schools, nurseries, and charitable and voluntary organisations. The list goes on. Members will be familiar with some of the work that goes on in their own communities: the community first responders, who provide vital support while an ambulance is on its way to an emergency; the community resuscitation development officers, who recruit and train community members to provide care; the public access defibrillators in a range of locations, supported by training and awareness raising; and the first aid awareness and training in schools and communities. All of those are examples of how we are working towards our bigger objective of delivering better outcomes and experiences for individuals, to avoid unnecessary hospital admissions and attendances, and to strengthen and empower our local communities to be safer and healthier. As members have said, first aid training is hugely important to our communities. I was a proud holder of my St Andrew’s First Aid badge when I was in the scouts, and I had extensive casualty care training when I was in mountain rescue. The value of such training was summed up by the experiences of Nanette Milne and David Torrance that involved a golf tee and a boiled sweet. Those incidents ended in all being well, but one would not want to think about what the consequences could have been if someone had not known how to act appropriately. It is not just formal training that can make a difference to people in such circumstances. Many of us will have seen the British Heart Foundation’s TV advert that features Vinnie Jones, to which Drew Smith referred. In it, someone suddenly collapses, is not breathing normally and is unresponsive, and they might have had a cardiac arrest. The advert advises the public not to worry about giving the kiss of life during CPR but to concentrate on performing hard and fast chest compressions, to the tune of the Bee Gees track “Stayin’ Alive”. The latest version of that advert features Alan Linton, who suffered a heart attack while playing golf with friends in Fife. His friends had seen the advert and they kept him alive until an ambulance arrived. He is in no doubt that the fact that his friends saw and acted on that advert means that he can tell his story today. Such tips really can help people to make the time-critical interventions that can save lives. The debate focuses on St Andrew’s First Aid week. I was interested in the information that St Andrew’s First Aid gathered about Scottish parents and their children. Many members will relate to the experiences that people have with their children—as David Torrance did—and to questions about what we can do to ensure that children are safe and that we have the right knowledge to intervene when necessary. The Scottish Government, with partners, recognises fully the importance of supporting individuals and carers to be confident and equipped with the skills to deal with such situations. That is why in recent years we have taken forward work with organisations such as the Child Accident Prevention Trust, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, Barnardo’s and Volunteer Development Scotland. We have also provided financial support for work on injury prevention and safety initiatives. Our commitment to this important agenda is set out in a number of ways, which include pursuing it through the curriculum for excellence in our schools. We are aware that work to tackle unintended injuries takes place in a range of areas, from road safety, fire safety and falls prevention to inland water safety. It is important that we work together so that we learn from one another and share experience about what works best. James Dornan asked about St Andrew’s First Aid working with the Scottish Government and using the Scottish Government’s logo. I am more than happy to consider that, to respond to him in detail and to set out the assistance that we might be able to provide. I thank first-aiders across Scotland and the organisations that train and support them for all their dedication and effort. I congratulate in advance all those who will be recognised at the Scottish first aid awards in Glasgow on Thursday. I have no doubt that St Andrew’s First Aid will continue to provide an invaluable service in the years to come, and I look forward to working with it and supporting it in any way that we can. Meeting closed at 17:39.

Ministers and Scottish Government officials regularly meet national health service boards and discuss matters of importance to local people. I last met the chair of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde on 12 November.

Like Bob Doris, I welcome the recent figures that show a drop in cancer deaths in Glasgow over the past 25 years. However, there is more to be done to make further improvements on reducing the rates of death from cancer. I assure him that tackling health inequalities is one of the Scottish Government’s top priorities. As part of the detect cancer early programme, we are working with general practices in the most deprived areas in greater Glasgow and Clyde to improve access to cancer services and on the uptake of screening. We are committed to ensuring that the patients who require the most urgent treatment have swift access to the full range of services that they need from the NHS. The detect cancer early programme throughout Scotland is backed by some £30 million over the next three years. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is also delivering the keep well anticipatory care programme, which targets people who are at high risk of ill-health in the most deprived areas of Scotland. For greater Glasgow and Clyde, that is supported by some £4.2 million of funding each year over the next three years.

It is important that, as NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde undertakes the review, it considers all the options that are available to it and how it can best deliver services to the people of its area. I expect it to consult local organisations and elected members in the area on how it intends to take the consultation forward.

Like other members, I begin by congratulating Jim Eadie on securing the time for such an important debate and on the way in which he has raised the issues that he wanted to highlight in the debate and his motion. I have no doubt that all members who are in the chamber share the same ambition: that a cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy will be developed. DMD is a devastating disease that, at any one time, affects around 150 boys and young men in Scotland. Jim Eadie set out the impact that it can have on individuals, and Graeme Dey highlighted the challenges and difficulties that the Mathieson family faced in losing their son James while their son Daniel has the same condition. I wish Daniel well for his trip to Florida in the next few weeks. However, these are also exciting times in the search for a treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. As Jim Eadie highlighted, it is around 25 years since the genetic variation in the dystrophin gene was identified as being the cause of DMD. Advances in medicine mean that experimental treatments are now being trialled in ways that were unimaginable at that time. For example, DNA patches have been designed to override the genetic variation; they have shown promise in laboratory trials and are currently being tested in clinical trials. They are part of the exon skipping approach to which Jim Eadie referred. Jim Eadie’s motion refers to the AAV-U7 clinical trial that is being conducted by Royal Holloway College, University of London. The basis of the trial is that the DNA patches are packaged into a virus that allows them to be effectively delivered into the patient’s cells. That involves very exciting technology that is at the forefront of research into an effective treatment. It is only right that we record our thanks to those with DMD who are participating in the present trials. Those trials are an essential step in developing a safe and effective treatment, and we must go through a process of evaluating the effectiveness of that type of treatment. It is through the dedication and selflessness of those patients and their families that we will eventually arrive at the point at which—I believe—we will achieve more effective treatment. A particular challenge in the treatment of DMD is how to protect and restore the function of the heart muscle. I am aware that Dr Keith Foster, who is one of the leaders of the AAV-U7 trial, is developing a research project on that subject with a group of Glasgow cardiologists. I reassure members that the Scottish Government’s chief scientist office is happy to consider co-funding arrangements with leading UK medical charities in particular areas of research. I also reassure members that a large amount of the research that takes place in Scotland involves international collaboration. I can confirm that officials from the chief scientist office have spoken to Action Duchenne with a view to co-funding such a project. Action Duchenne provides an example of the importance of the charitable sector in the area of medical research. Its role in partnership with the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign and the Duchenne Family Support Group in establishing the MDEX consortium to develop treatment for DMD is particularly worthy of recognition. Action Duchenne funds cutting-edge research and has established a registry of DMD patients—to which some members have referred—that plays an essential role in identifying those who are most suitable for particular clinical trials that may be available or are being considered at any given time. The motion calls for simplified governance for trials of genetic medicines. Ethical oversight of proposals to conduct clinical trials that involve gene therapy is currently a reserved matter. However, the Scottish Government notes that operational responsibility for gene therapy in the form of the gene therapy advisory committee was transferred to the NHS Health Research Authority in December last year, and we are monitoring the effectiveness of that new arrangement. Clinical trials need to obtain NHS research and development approval. I assure members that we have recently streamlined that process so that it is co-ordinated centrally in Scotland. The streamlined approach means that approval times for multicentre clinical trials in Scotland are among the quickest in Europe, which makes Scotland an attractive place in which to conduct world-leading clinical research. I assure members that we recognise the importance of ensuring that people with Duchenne muscular dystrophy get access to the care and support that they need. I highlight the important role of the Scottish muscle network, which Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, in strengthening the specialist neuromuscular centres in Scotland, through a collaborative approach. The network brings together clinicians in various disciplines that contribute to the care of those with muscular dystrophy. It provides on a Scotland-wide basis the multidisciplinary focus that Action Duchenne is looking for, and it gives families a strong voice in the development of services. I heard what Mary Fee said about the creation of a centre of excellence. In Scotland, our population is dispersed over a much greater area than is the case in England, where populations are much more concentrated. That makes it challenging to provide a single centre of excellence in the way that has been done in England. We regard the muscle network as Scotland’s virtual centre of excellence, because it links the five paediatric centres in Scotland that deliver specialist services for those who have any form of muscular dystrophy or neuromuscular disorder. I am sure that members appreciate that it would be difficult to set up a single centre in Scotland, given the impact that that could have on families, who might have to travel a considerable distance to access such a centre. The Scottish muscle network has developed multidisciplinary care standards for the management of Duchenne that are based on the care standards of the international network of translational research in Europe: assessment and treatment of neuromuscular diseases, which is known as TREAT-NMD. The implementation of the standards will be key to improving healthcare services for people with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. We have agreed two years’ funding to pilot neuromuscular care advisers posts in the south-east and Tayside, the west of Scotland and the north of Scotland. Two posts are already in place, and we remain committed to posts in all three regions. Jackie Baillie asked about the post in the north of Scotland regional planning area. I advise her that there have been recruitment difficulties, but the north of Scotland has confirmed that it intends to re-advertise the post. We will monitor the situation closely, because we want the care adviser post in the north of Scotland to be filled as soon as possible. Many people with DMD will benefit from the £16 million that we have invested in the wheelchair and seating service, to support the timely provision of wheelchairs in a personalised way, responding to individuals’ needs at an early stage. Nanette Milne expressed concern about the issue. We recently issued a wheelchair and seating services quality improvement framework, to which standards are attached. That approach will bring further improvements for people with neuromuscular conditions. We have also put £1.5 million towards improving services for people with complex respiratory conditions. That investment will help to recruit new specialists, whether they are consultants, dieticians, physiotherapists, nurses or allied health professionals, so that people can be treated more effectively locally. Progress has been made, but it is clear that we need to continue to build on that progress to improve services. We remain committed to doing that. I look forward to working with members and the charities and organisations that seek further improvement in Scotland, to ensure that people receive the best quality of service that they can receive in Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:49.

All national health service boards in Scotland have local respiratory managed clinical networks that aim to deliver and improve respiratory services for people with all respiratory conditions. Patients with respiratory conditions sit on those networks to help to ensure that their voice is heard and that services are developed in a person-centred way. In addition, our national advisory group on respiratory conditions is working to develop a co-ordinated approach to improving respiratory services throughout Scotland. It provides an opportunity for local managed clinical networks, patient representatives and other stakeholders to discuss issues, identify solutions and share best practice.

I assure Jim Eadie that we are very much committed to ensuring that patients with any condition—regardless of what it may be—receive the highest quality care in the NHS. That is set out clearly in the Scottish Government’s equalities strategy, and we are focused on a person-centred, safe and effective healthcare system in Scotland. We continue to advocate that we should improve respiratory services through the managed clinical networks. We are aware that NHS Lothian is progressing work on providing guidelines and a service pathway. Once that work has been completed, our plan is that the national advisory group will look at those guidelines and see how they can be dispersed across the rest of the NHS in Scotland so that we can continue to improve overall service delivery. With regard to Jim Eadie’s invitation to meet his constituent and other members of the group, I will be happy to arrange a meeting with them at some point in the future.

It is difficult to estimate the number of people with long-term health conditions who did not qualify for free prescriptions before charges were abolished in 2011 as we do not have a conclusive list of those long-term conditions. Before we announced in 2007 our intention to phase out prescription charges, we looked at extending the list of long-term conditions that entitled people to free prescriptions. The long-term conditions that were not included in the list of statutory medical exemptions included cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, asthma and HIV, and the list went on. Indeed, it went on so far that the Scottish Government concluded that, given the time that it would take to deal with the issue and the difficulties that arose from it, the fairest solution was to abolish prescription charges completely.

I very much agree with Marco Biagi. I remember that at the time the medical profession expressed concern about the difficulty of compiling a list of long-term conditions; indeed, we could have had a situation in which an individual with three or four conditions would have received free prescriptions for only two of them. Moreover, the list would have to be continually updated. I can also tell Marco Biagi that since we abolished prescription charges, more than 8,000 of his constituents in Edinburgh Central have directly benefited from the move.

As I told Dr Simpson and his colleagues yesterday in the chamber, the Government remains committed to free prescriptions. I remind the member that he was elected last year on a manifesto that said that Scottish Labour remained committed to “no reintroduction” of prescription charges, and we as a Government remain committed to the promise that we made in our own manifesto last year to ensure that people get prescriptions free of charge.

Tackling inequalities in health is one of the Scottish Government’s top priorities. We recognise that work is a key social determinant of health and that one of the best ways of reducing inequalities in health in Scotland is to ensure that as many people who can work get the opportunity to do so. We support through NHS Health Scotland the Scottish centre for healthy working lives, which offers advice to employers on improving and promoting the health and wellbeing of their employees. Working in partnership with organisations such as the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland, the centre specifically targets small and medium-sized enterprises that have high levels of low-paid workers who are most vulnerable to inequalities in health.

Murdo Fraser has raised a very important point. The British Heart Foundation’s campaign can have real value in closing down some of the health inequalities in Scotland. However, the member should also recognise that some of those health inequalities have been around for many decades and that it will probably take many decades to address them effectively. We have a range of measures to ensure that we address them as effectively as possible in partnership with the national health service and the third and independent sectors, where they can play a part. That said, I must caution the member that the changes that are set out in the United Kingdom’s welfare reform programme are in danger of exacerbating some of those health inequalities and of undoing some of the good work that has been carried out in recent years to close the gaps.

In the recently published mental health strategy, work with families and carers was identified as one of the key themes that emerged from the consultation. The involvement of families and carers is important in the provision of safe and effective care and treatment. It is vital that service providers involve service users, families and carers as an integrated part of the service design. We have developed that in two ways. First, NHS Education Scotland is working with clinicians to develop clinical confidence in involving families and carers while maintaining the principle of patient confidentiality. Secondly, we are working with VOX—Voices of Experience—to engage service users in exploring how families and carers can be involved in care and treatment, while recognising that some people do not want their family to be involved.

The member has raised an important point. One way in which we can make progress in how we deliver mental health services in Scotland is by being much more responsive to individuals who present themselves as being in crisis or in distress. We are taking forward work in the NHS Tayside area to ensure that agencies are much better co-ordinated in their response to individuals who present in those circumstances and that, when those agencies do respond, they follow it up appropriately to give the individual the greatest opportunity to take benefit from the services that those agencies offer. The use of crisis houses is an approach that could lend itself to addressing that issue. It has been highlighted in the mental health strategy as an area in which I wish further progress to be made.

The Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition is in the process of reviewing all relevant scientific literature on vitamin D as part of its review of the current vitamin D recommendations. The review will consider a wide range of health outcomes associated with vitamin D status, and its findings will be published in late 2014.

I am aware that there is research linking vitamin D to a number of illnesses, including multiple sclerosis. My understanding is that, as part of its review, the Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition is examining all currently available and emerging research linking vitamin D to multiple sclerosis. A key part of the review will be to identify whether there are any gaps in the research and, if there are, what further research may be required. I can assure the member that, once the review has been completed, we will consider both how best to take forward any recommendations that it may contain and whether there is any need for further research on the link with MS.

The issue of long waiting times for IVF treatment was specifically raised at NHS Forth Valley’s annual review in 2011. Since then, the board has committed to funding an additional 28 cycles on an on-going basis, and waiting times have reduced from four to three years. As the member will be aware, not only has the Scottish Government committed to a 12-month waiting time for IVF, but we have committed £12 million over three years to support that and to ensure, for the first time ever in Scotland, a maximum wait of 12 months for eligible patients by 31 March 2015, regardless of where they live. In the past 12 months, the Scottish Government has been involved in on-going dialogue with all NHS boards on the provision of IVF treatment. All NHS boards will be asked to produce robust implementation plans detailing how they will reach the 12-month waiting time.

The practice of NHS boards throughout Scotland is for couples with unexplained infertility to try to conceive naturally for three years before being referred for IVF, although couples will receive some investigations during that period. That practice is followed for clinical reasons, as couples with unexplained infertility are more likely to conceive naturally in the first two to three years of trying to conceive than they are with IVF. However, the national fertility group is reviewing that particular criterion. Returning patients to the bottom of the waiting list for a second, fresh cycle of IVF treatment when waiting times are very long is not acceptable. As I have just set out, funding from the Scottish Government will, over the next two years, reduce waiting times throughout Scotland to 12 months and ensure that patients do not have unacceptably long waits for cycles of IVF. NHS Forth Valley has been making progress, and I expect it to make further progress so that, by early next year, the waiting time will be down from three years to two years.

This has been an interesting debate. There have been some reruns from the previous debate on the subject, but in the time between that debate and this debate Labour still has not come up with a single policy in the area of universal benefits. Universal benefits are often viewed as the touchstone of a progressive society and as a progressive policy for any Government. They are often also viewed as a touchstone issue that reflects how progressive a Parliament is, and they set out how we want to define the society that we all choose to live in. They are part of creating a society that some on the Labour benches do not believe in—one that is fair and just for all. I regret the fact that there are those who like to talk about universal benefits as though they are something for nothing. They are certainly not something for nothing, because the people who get those benefits have often paid their tax and worked hard to get the benefit of them. When we look at the issue of universal benefits, we must reflect on the financial climate that was created by the disaster that was started under the Labour Party and continued under the Tories and Lib Dems at Westminster, and on the way in which they have ravaged public service spending through the cuts that they have imposed on the Scottish Government’s budget and on public service budgets in England. It is also right that, when we look at this issue, we do so in the way that Gavin Brown recognised. Not only do we face the financial constraints within which we are operating; we also face a demographic shift as a society. People are living longer, which is great, and more people are living with long-term conditions. The issue is not about deciding whether we should get rid of universal benefits; it is about looking at how we can support people with long-term conditions much more effectively in the community and what we can do to prevent long-term conditions in the future. Gavin Brown referred to the free eye test. He will be aware that the free eye test is much more than a sight test—it is an eye health test. The evidence suggests that some £40 million is gained in preventative benefits from that free eye health check. It is a good example of making an investment now to get the benefits in the future through the preventative spend that this Government has given a commitment to making, ensuring that we have the right policies in place to serve us in the future.

In the previous debate, John Swinney set out very clearly how we will take forward our spending commitment on universal benefits. We have made it clear that preventative spend is a key part of ensuring that we have sustainability in our public finances. John Swinney is taking that forward, which is the first time that that has happened in this Parliament in 13 years. People question why we abolished prescription charges. Some called it nothing more than a fig leaf to the electorate. At one point it had the support of the Labour Party, but the Labour Party has now abandoned the whole idea of free prescriptions. Dr Simpson rose— Have a seat, Richard Simpson, because I am coming to you. We abolished prescription charges because 600,000 people in Scotland on a yearly income of less than £16,000 found themselves having to pay for their prescriptions and having to worry about what they could afford—whether they could take all the items or only some of them. We decided that it was much fairer and more just to abolish prescription charges for everyone in Scotland.

Have a seat just now, Richard Simpson.

We now know that the Labour Party has abandoned free prescriptions for the people of Scotland. I turn to the issue of free personal care and free nursing care, which is often referred to as one of the touchstone policies of the Parliament. Some of us have been here long enough to remember that the Labour Party was not united on the introduction of free nursing care for the elderly. There was great division within the Labour Party over it, but it is a policy that some 77,000 older people in this country benefit from day in, day out. I am proud that I supported a policy from which those 77,000 people benefit on a daily basis. I recognise that some Labour members support universal benefits: some of them support the provision of free personal care; some of them supported the provision of free eye checks; and, at one point, some of them even supported free bus passes and free prescriptions. After today’s debate and the debate that we had a couple of weeks ago, however, I am none the wiser about where Labour now stands in the debate that it is locked into on the something-for-nothing culture. I do not know whether, in Labour’s view, the something-for-nothing culture is one in which an elderly person benefits from free personal care. I do not know whether Labour no longer supports something for nothing in the form of free eye checks. I do not know whether it is Labour’s view that the veteran who benefits from the free bus pass is getting something for nothing. I do not know whether Labour thinks that the 600,000 people in Scotland who benefit from free prescriptions are examples of the something-for-nothing culture. Johann Lamont asked for some honesty in the debate. I will give her some honesty. We support free prescriptions, the free bus pass and free personal care for the elderly. Where honesty is missing in the debate is in the Labour Party’s position on those important issues. Johann Lamont rose— I give way to Johann Lamont to see whether she can make amends.

We go back to the old chestnut of people getting 15 minutes of home care. It is always interesting that Johann Lamont wants to define free personal care by reference to people getting more time from the carers who come into their home. What she chooses not to refer to is the £300 million of attendance allowance that has been denied to the Scottish Government by the UK Government, which was cut when we introduced free personal care. Johann Lamont has been in the Parliament long enough to recall that, when Henry McLeish was First Minister, he made it clear that he was unhappy about the response that he got from the UK Government, a position that was continued by Alistair Darling. If we had access to that £300 million, we could be investing it in services for the elderly in Scotland. Richard Simpson questions the provision of free prescriptions. [Interruption.]

Did he ever consider the £91 million that it now costs us, annually, to pay for the private finance initiative deals that were signed under Labour in Scotland? That money could be better used for our NHS and for investing in public services.

Richard Simpson asks for some reality. Just over a year ago, he stood for election on a manifesto that was committed to the policies that he now wants to get rid of. That is the reality that people in Scotland recognise—that they cannot trust the Labour Party to stand up for the needy and to create a socially just society. The debate is much more than a debate that sets the needy against the needy, which some may wish to characterise it as. We do not accept the confines of the debate, which is set within the limited vision of the Westminster budget. This is about being able to make decisions for ourselves and creating the society that we want to create—a socially just and fair Scotland, in which people can rightly know that services will be there in their time of need. We are not here simply to manage the Tory cuts for the people of Scotland; we have a vision that goes beyond the Westminster system. It is only sad that we now have a Labour Party that wants to throw out social justice in its desperation to create some meaning for itself. However, as a society, the people of Scotland can be sure that the Scottish Government will remain committed to delivering a socially just and fair Scotland.

The Scottish Government has set a target of 75 per cent for the final uptake rate for over-65s and under-65s at risk for influenza vaccination. We do not set interim targets for uptake. As in previous years, the Scottish Government is running an extensive public information campaign throughout the flu season. The rates of uptake are closely monitored by Health Protection Scotland.

I thank Mary Scanlon for her question. I recall the launch of the campaign at Firhill. As a Partick Thistle fan, I was jealous that the cabinet secretary got the opportunity to launch that campaign there with some of the players. Over the past three years, uptake of the influenza vaccination in Scotland has been increasing; last year, it was over the 75 per cent level for those aged over 65. We have been making good progress in increasing the number of people who are making use of the vaccination programme. Mary Scanlon made a specific point about uptake among NHS staff. I agree that there is a need to make sure that more of our health service workers who work with patients access the vaccination programme. We have asked all our NHS boards to ensure that they have a member of nursing staff within each hospital who will be responsible, as a champion, for encouraging colleagues to make use of the vaccination programme. We have also hosted a couple of events for those local champions to assist them in the work in their areas. We will review that in March to see what has worked and what more we can do in the coming year to increase the number of healthcare workers who make use of the vaccination programme.

It is important to recognise that at board level, we now have our local immunisation co-ordinators. Their role is to examine uptake in their board area among segment groups—whether they are carers or people who work within the care sector—and to encourage them to make use of the immunisation programme. The co-ordinators are considering what they can provide at local level to increase uptake of the vaccination among the various groups so that we can continue to increase the overall rate of uptake for those who are eligible for the vaccination programme.

I am conscious that sometimes such rumours develop. I am informed that the vaccine is not a live vaccine and should therefore not result in a person’s developing the flu. If I can use myself as a human guinea pig, I say that I had the flu vaccine last week and do not have the flu this week.

Like others, I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing time for this important debate. I thank all members who contributed, particularly those who have shared their personal experience around organ donation, which has been extremely powerful. I recognise that this is a topic on which people hold strong views, but I am sure that all of us share the ultimate goal of finding a way to address the growing shortage of organs for transplantation. As members are aware, we do not currently have a policy of opt-out here in Scotland and that position is informed by the recommendations of the organ donation task force, which considered the issue in great detail. It may be helpful if I go over some of the reasons why the task force did not recommend a move to an opt-out system. The task force highlighted what health professionals told it about their concerns about the potentially negative implications that a move to opt-out could have for clinical practice, as alluded to by Jackson Carlaw and further referred to by Christine Grahame. There was also a suggestion that, if opt-out were introduced, some intensive care practitioners might opt out of participating in the donation programme. I am sure that all members recognise that that could have potentially very serious consequences, as many of the organ donation task force’s recommendations are dependent upon practitioners’ co-operation. Several members have also made reference to experience of such schemes in other parts of the world, in particular in Europe. The task force report commented on the fact that high donation rates in other European countries are often seen as the product of an opt-out system. The task force heard from experts in Spain, which has among the highest rates of organ donation in the world and has an opt-out scheme that was introduced by the Spanish Government back in 1979. However, those experts were clear that presumed consent was not the reason for their success. Donation rates started to go up in Spain only when changes were made to the transplant infrastructure, not the law on consent. That infrastructure change took place in 1989—Kenny Gibson referred to the increasing numbers of transplants from that point on in Spain. It is also worth noting that the United States, which has a consistently higher donation rate than many parts of Europe, do not have an opt-out system.

Sure, I appreciate Liam McArthur’s point. I am going through the particular points raised to show some of the issues that the task force considered at the time and the complexities in this area. It is reasonable for the task force to have concluded that although moving to an opt-out system might deliver some benefits, doing so also carries significant risks and the potential danger of making the situation worse.

I do not want the debate to become polarised, with members either for or against opt-out. I am setting out some of the evidence that was presented to the task force when it considered the matter, after which that expert group presented its recommendations. It may be helpful if I take members through some of the detail of the progress that has been made—of which there has been a great deal—in Scotland in recent years. As a Government, we are committed to implementing the recommendations of the organ donation task force, which have the goal of increasing the number of deceased organ donors by 50 per cent by 2013. In Scotland, we achieved that target one year early. We now have more than 40 per cent of the population on the register compared with the 31 per cent UK average. We have also developed work to strengthen the infrastructure across NHS Scotland. Specifically, we have appointed seven additional organ donation specialist nurses; we have employed clinical leads for organ donation in every large hospital across the country; and we have established organ donation committees in every NHS board. Unlike other parts of the UK, we continue to run high-profile national publicity campaigns to raise awareness about organ donation annually. Members will be aware that I launched the new campaign earlier this week. That campaign encourages people to talk about organ donation and going on the donor register. Importantly, the campaign encourages people who are on the register to explain to their friends and relatives what their views are. The campaign is supported by a new Organ Donation Scotland website. Between November 2012 and March 2013, we are also sending out 200,000 direct mail packs to Scots about the campaign, and information will be available in supermarkets and shopping centres over the coming weeks and months. As in previous years, I believe that the campaign will prove to be successful. In Scotland, we have legislation that allows everyone from the age of 12 to make their own decision about whether or not they want to donate their organs. That is based on the principle of authorisation, which is intended to convey that people have the right to express, during their life time, how they wish their body to be dealt with after death. The expectation is that those wishes will be respected. It is telling that Scotland has the highest authorisation rate in the UK for donations after brainstem death. It is just below 80 per cent, which compares very favourably with the UK average of 63 per cent. Members will recognise that the developments over the past three years have started to make a real difference. In 2011-12, there were 81 deceased organ donors in Scotland—the highest number ever. There were also the highest number of transplants, the highest proportion of our population signing up to the register and the highest authorisation rate for donations after brainstem death. However, for the sake of the 600 or so people in Scotland who are on the waiting list for new organs, we must ensure that those improvements are sustainable. That is why we have said that opt-out is not completely off the agenda. There is a commitment to review the position throughout the UK in 2013, and we will take part in that review. The Welsh Assembly is currently looking to move to a system of soft opt-out, and I am sure that we will learn more from its experience. However, we must acknowledge that progress has been made without an opt-out system and recognise the real risks that present themselves with such a system. It is important to emphasise to all members that, no matter our position on opt-out, we share the same overarching aim of increasing the number of organ donors in Scotland. We all want to ensure that as many people as possible can benefit from the wonderful, life-saving gift that organ donors provide. I have no doubt that, over the coming year, we will have more debate and discussion on the issue, and I am grateful for the contributions that members have made this afternoon. 13:41 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

We have introduced a range of measures to improve diet and are spending over £7.5 million to March 2015 on projects to encourage healthy eating, from community initiatives in deprived areas, to the healthy living award in catering settings. We are also working closely with the food industry—including manufacturers, retailers and caterers—to reduce the salt, fat and added sugar content of products, and we are working with the education sector to teach people about the importance of healthy eating. Further, in a significant step forward, as I announced yesterday, we are recommending traffic-light colours on all pre-packaged foods sold in Scotland, which will make it easier for consumers to make healthier food choices.

We have since 2007 taken forward a range of measures to extend provision of free school meals to children and young people, which includes providing free school meals to children from families who are in receipt of working tax credits and child tax credits so that they can receive a healthy meal at school. Those actions have seen the number of children and young people who are registered to receive free school meals rising from 16 per cent when we inherited the scheme in 2007 to almost 20 per cent of pupils in 2012, which totals 130,000. The Government recognises the benefits that can be gained by extending provision of free school meals, but in the present financial climate there are difficulties in extending provision further. However, we will continue to look at what steps we can take to increase provision of healthy free school meals.

Breastfeeding has a very important part to play in helping to promote healthy eating among young children. We have set a range of targets for NHS boards to promote breastfeeding within their areas and to focus particularly on those in more deprived communities. We wish to see boards making progress in this area, and it is an issue that we continue to pursue with them.

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing time for this debate and I thank her for lodging a motion on an important issue that affects many women in Scotland—and has done for many years. Breast cancer awareness month presents an important opportunity for us not just to reflect on what has happened over the years and the campaign for more effective treatment and support for women who are diagnosed with breast cancer, but to ensure that we consider the future and the opportunities that will arise as a result of advances in medical science. Alongside that, we need to keep focused on a cancer that continues to affect so many people in Scotland. I thank in particular the range of charities that do a tremendous amount of work not only to raise awareness among women and the general public, but to support women and their families as they undergo treatment after their diagnosis. Although that bit can often be forgotten, it should not be underestimated. For most of us, being diagnosed with cancer is probably the worst scenario that we can imagine. Our response might well be informed by past experience of seeing a friend or loved one with the disease. Although I am not sure that we will ever be able to eradicate that fear, it is worth bearing it in mind that the outcomes from a cancer diagnosis are, for many cancers, radically different from what they were 20 or 30 years ago. In the debate, a number of members have mentioned how breast cancer has touched their lives and has resulted, perhaps, in the loss of a friend. However, many of us who might not have lost a friend through breast cancer are likely to know someone who has survived it. After all, the number of women who survive the illness is increasing, largely as a result of the good progress that has been made in treatment over the past two decades. Moreover, breast cancer screening has helped to ensure that women are diagnosed earlier, which means that treatment can be given earlier and less aggressive treatments used. Another piece of good news is that nine out of 10 women diagnosed with stage 1 breast cancer now survive beyond five years. That said, we need to recognise that Scotland’s cancer survival rates continue to lag behind those in other European countries. Given that and our ageing population, we expect the incidence of cancer to increase. Clearly we have to do more in this area. We know that breast cancer is common, with one in nine Scottish women being diagnosed with it in their lifetime, but by detecting it earlier we can treat people while they are in better health and with, as I said, less aggressive treatments. However, if we are to continue to turn the tables in our fight against cancer, we have to get better at detecting it even earlier, and that is exactly the aim of the detect cancer early programme to which a number of members have referred. It is all about changing people’s mindset about cancer and its signs and ensuring that not only individuals but our clinicians and other healthcare support staff are more vigilant. Part of the programme is a social marketing strategy that seeks to ensure that health professionals have more of an understanding. We have also started a new programme of work with Healthcare Improvement Scotland to review the Scottish referral guidelines for breast, colorectal and lung cancer and find out whether they can be improved. We are also examining the capacity issues that are likely to arise in screening and diagnostic services as a result of the changing demographic situation in Scotland. As far as breast cancer is concerned, we have launched the breast cancer social marketing campaign. Of course, each year many MSPs get involved in some form of social marketing themselves when they don pink hats, pink rosettes or whatever pink thing they choose to put on, but it is all part of the social marketing campaign that we carry out with third sector organisations in order to raise awareness. Jackie Baillie made the important point that some of the research shows that women are not necessarily as aware of the common signs of breast cancer as they should be, nor are they aware of the changing survival rates or of a variety of changes that can take place within a breast. That is why we produced the breast cancer campaign. It would be fair to say that it has generated a considerable amount of interest and discussion, which is good, because that is exactly what it was meant to do. It was meant to encourage people to talk about such matters much more openly. As Audrey Birt says, people will just have to get over it and start to discuss these things much more openly, because that is the healthy way in which to address this challenge. Several members referred to the screening programme. We are putting further investment into that programme over the next three years to upgrade the system to a digital one, which is much more effective. I am conscious that we need to make more progress, particularly for women from more deprived communities who might not take up the opportunity of screening. Mary Fee made a point about the health inequalities that exist for individuals who have learning disabilities. There are clearly grounds for us to consider more closely how to cover that. I give members my commitment that, where we can take further measures to encourage more women from deprived communities to take up the opportunity of screening, we will do so in a way that recognises that some of them may require support. If they have learning disabilities, we will make the system as accessible to them as possible and ensure that we encourage them to make use of screening in Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:56.

There is a well-established association between obesity and mental health problems that is supported by a body of research. Although the Scottish Government has not added directly to that work, we have acknowledged the importance of the link, most recently in the new mental health strategy, which was published in August. In the strategy we gave a commitment to work with national health service boards and other partners to support a range of measures to help people with severe and enduring mental illness to improve their physical ability levels.

Yes, I agree with George Adam. Engaging in the arts, whether through participation or appreciation, is a positive way of helping to support someone’s recovery from mental illness. The Scottish Government provides funding to the Mental Health Foundation to help to support the Scottish mental health arts and film festival, which is one of Scotland’s most diverse cultural events and covers everything from music, film and the visual arts to theatre, dance and literature. The annual festival is about to start in October and will take place at venues throughout the country. I encourage members to consider participating in and attending some of the events.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that people with neurological conditions such as epilepsy can access safe, effective and person-centred care. We are therefore working with national health service boards, the third sector and patients to make sure that clinical standards for neurological conditions are implemented. We have already helped NHS boards to improve local neurological services by providing £1.2 million of funding over the past two years. NHS boards have demonstrated a real desire and commitment to continue with local service improvement. We want to see NHS boards continue that work and work in partnership with the voluntary sector to build on the progress already made. We have therefore provided the Neurological Alliance of Scotland with funding of £40,000 to establish a national advisory group, which will oversee and support NHS boards to take forward the improvements that they have planned.

That sounds like a worthwhile initiative and I will be more than happy to meet Bob Doris, Epilepsy Scotland and any other parties who would like to explore that particular project. Further, I believe it is important that we ensure that various strands of Government policy work in a co-ordinated fashion across health, justice and education, and the initiative strikes me as an example of how we can take that forward. I would be more than happy to explore what further work can be done to try to encourage the roll-out of such initiatives in other parts of the country.

The Scottish Government has established the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target to deliver faster access to mental health services by delivering 18 weeks referral to treatment for psychological therapies from December 2014. We have already made improvements in service performance across Scotland since the HEAT target was set. We have published “The Matrix: a Guide to Delivering Evidence-based Psychological Therapies in Scotland”; it covers which treatments are effective for which conditions. The matrix emphasises that services must provide adequate supervision for staff who deliver psychological interventions, to ensure patient safety and the delivery of evidence-based care. Through NHS Education Scotland, we are working to assess and develop workforce capacity to ensure that a range of staff are equipped to deliver those therapies.

In order to improve access to psychological therapies, the HEAT target is there to drive all boards—including NHS Highland—to ensure that they have processes, systems and data collection mechanisms in place to meet that HEAT standard. It is for local boards to respond with regard to how they can best effect that within their local areas. I recognise that some of the boards that cover larger rural areas have particular circumstances around which they have to develop services in order to meet that target. I expect NHS Highland to consider those circumstances in its planning and in the implementation of its policy to ensure that it is making progress to achieve the target by December 2014.

Progress with our preparations for the 2014 games continues to be excellent. The great success of Scottish athletes in the Olympics and Paralympics has enthused our nation and raised the profile of the games. It is now just 665 days until the Glasgow games get under way. In recent weeks we have seen the introduction to the world of Clyde, the games mascot—although a thistle called Clyde may receive an interesting reception among the Firhill faithful; the announcement of three high-profile games ambassadors; and new sponsors announcing their support for the games. Construction work on the athletes village is on schedule and we will shortly see the opening of one of the major new venues that will be used for the games—the Commonwealth arena and Sir Chis Hoy velodrome. I am very confident that Glasgow and Scotland will be ready for the Commonwealth games in 2014. The next partner progress report will be published next month.

I am aware of the concerns that many members have about Atos; indeed, as a constituency member, I have also raised concerns about its work assessment programme. It is important that we recognise that, to a large extent, such matters are for the organising committee in Glasgow. I have no doubt that members will seek to make representations to that committee on areas about which they have concerns, but we should not distract ourselves from the fact that we are making very good progress in ensuring that the arrangements for the 2014 games are in place. More than anything, I think that the games will be remembered for the friendly welcome that they are assured from the people of Glasgow and the people of Scotland.

It is my understanding that the Commonwealth Games Federation does not permit the staging of exhibit sports as part of the Commonwealth games. However, we have a long highland games tradition and given that 2014 is also the year of homecoming, I have no doubt that various organisations will wish to look at the possibility of hosting a major highland games event in that year. I encourage Dave Thompson and parties that are interested in taking that initiative forward to work with all the agencies that can offer support and assistance in making that a success in 2014.

Drug misuse is a complex issue that requires the close collaboration of health, education and justice policy. Since 2007, we have implemented a number of measures to tackle drug misuse. We have turned waiting times for drug treatment from as long as one year for an appointment to a maximum three-week wait to access treatment, and we are on target to deliver that by March 2013. We have increased funding to front-line drug treatment and recovery services by 20 per cent, to a total of £162 million. We have also developed a prevention and education programme that has resulted in the lowest level of reported drug use among young people in a decade.

It is important to recognise that any drug-related death is a tragedy. We must take a range of measures to tackle effectively the scourge of drug misuse in our society, and it is important that all Government portfolios that have a role to play in the area work together constructively to ensure that that happens. The Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs has been considering a number of measures that could be taken to ensure that the methadone programme is robust and is being used appropriately. I am sure that John Scott and other members recognise that there is no single solution to the issue and that clinicians and others who work with people who have a misuse problem must have a range of options available to use in tackling a person’s drugs habit. No doubt we will continue to consider what measures must be taken to address the issue.

It is often the case that facts do not feature heavily in Labour Party contributions in its health debates. No one should be in any doubt about the Government’s commitment to our NHS. It is worth keeping it in mind that the NHS belongs to no Government or political party; it belongs to the people of Scotland, and we as its custodians must ensure that we do the right thing to ensure that we have an NHS that serves the best interests of the people of Scotland. I have no doubt that all members recognise the significant challenges that our public services in Scotland face as a result of the cuts that the UK Government is introducing, which have a direct impact on services such as our NHS in Scotland. The mark of a Government is how it responds to that type of challenge. Alistair Darling told us that the cuts would be tougher and deeper than Margaret Thatcher’s, and they have proven to be that. How did we—an SNP Government—respond to them? We decided to protect the NHS budget. In making that decision, we decided on a record £11.6 billion of resources for health in Scotland in 2014-15. That is £826 million more than the 2011-12 budget. Despite the difficult economic circumstances and the challenge that they place on capital spend, over three years there will be £1.5 billion of capital investment into our NHS, securing the delivery of major projects such as a new south Glasgow hospital, the Edinburgh Royal Victoria hospital building and the Aberdeen emergency care centre. What was the Labour Party response to those unprecedented United Kingdom cuts—the cuts that are tougher and deeper than those of Margaret Thatcher, which started under the London Labour Government? I will quote the leader of the Labour Party before the previous election, Iain Gray, on the matter. When Jackie Baillie was Labour’s health spokesperson, championing the cause of the NHS in Scotland, Iain Gray said in response to those unprecedented cuts: “We wouldn’t ring fence the health budget.” So, despite the huffing, the puffing, the crocodile tears and the demands for more money here and more money there—the Labour money tree—what do we get? A party that is not prepared to stand up and protect the NHS budget in Scotland.

Unfortunately, Jackie Baillie’s problem is that her leader overruled her at the time that we are talking about. On “Newsnight Scotland”, Iain Gray said: “We wouldn’t ring fence the health budget.” We will take no lectures from a party that was not committed to protecting the NHS budget when we were prepared to do so. There is no hypocrisy on the SNP side of the chamber, but it is certainly present on the Labour side of the chamber. I have no doubt that members across the chamber hear concerns about the NHS from their constituents. As a constituency MSP, I hear those concerns. I recognise that the NHS does not always get it right, but the Government is committed to ensuring that we further improve our NHS in Scotland. I heard Jackie Baillie talking about patient complaints and patient satisfaction. Let us look at some of the facts that are so often missing from Labour health debates. In 2011, 88 per cent of people said that they were very satisfied or fairly satisfied with their local health service, which was up from the level of 81 per cent that we inherited from the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration. Jackie Baillie also talked about the issues that have been highlighted by the inspection regime in our NHS. Who introduced the inspection regime in order to drive forward the improvements that we need in our NHS and ensure that we start to get the improvements that are necessary in various areas? That is the type of positive progress that we have been making. We are taking forward policies to ensure that we drive forward further improvements.

I can tell Margo MacDonald that, as I said, by 2014-15, we will have a record £11.6 billion going into our NHS, which is the highest amount that the NHS has ever received and is £826 million more than was devoted to the NHS in the 2011-12 budget. I will tackle the issue of waiting times that is often raised by Labour. In June, 92.4 per cent of patients were seen and treated within 18 weeks of initial referral, against an expected standard of 90 per cent. Members might be interested to know that Labour-controlled Wales has a 26-week target and that, in June, only 81.9 per cent of patients were treated within that timescale. I turn to the ambulance service. I have heard the concerns that have been raised by Jackie Baillie and the trade unions. She is correct. The Government is very clear that we want the elimination of single-rostered emergency ambulance provision. We have pursued that with the Scottish Ambulance Service. In June 2012, the percentage of single-rostered crew members in Scotland was 0.7 per cent. That is a small number, but it is a number that we are determined to eliminate except in exceptional circumstances. I do not think that such issues are helped by people like Jackie Baillie coming along and trying to give people the impression that the NHS is in some way on its knees. The NHS is not on its knees; it is facing up to the challenges that it must face and it has a Government behind it that is prepared to support it in meeting those challenges. I move amendment S4M-04161.1, to leave out from “believes” to end and insert: “shares the Scottish Government’s commitment to the NHS; recognises the benefits of the health budget being protected; commends NHS staff for their dedication and hard work, which has provided patients and families with high quality care, including the lowest waiting times on record, lowest infection rates and substantial improvements in patient safety; further recognises that the NHS workforce in Scotland has grown since 2006, including an increase in emergency services staff; notes the value of the inspection system brought in by the Scottish Government that both highlights high quality patient care and identifies where there are problems to be addressed, and welcomes the new Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing’s continued fundamental support for the efforts of NHS staff, including nurses, doctors and allied health professionals, and the Scottish Government’s clear and unbroken commitment to safe, sustainable and person-centred patient care.”

I am delighted to open the debate on the general principles of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) Scotland Bill. I thank a number of people. I thank Duncan McNeil, his colleagues on the Health and Sport Committee and the committee’s clerking team for the careful and robust way in which they have scrutinised our proposals and for the considered conclusions in the committee’s stage 1 report. I also thank the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for the part that they have played in scrutinising the bill and the many witnesses who have provided evidence to the committees. I offer my thanks to the organisations and individuals who have helped to shape our policy on self-directed support over a number of years. Their input has helped to ensure that the bill will make a difference to the lives of people who access care and support and to the lives of their carers. At some point in our lives, each one of us in the chamber will need to draw on care and support services for ourselves or for someone in our family. We must ensure that we plan, design and provide services in a way that best meets people’s needs now and in the future. People have told us that greater choice and control are key to better outcomes and we therefore need to empower people to play a full and active part, working in partnership with professionals, in designing their own solutions to their support needs. That is not only a more sustainable approach to delivering and planning public services, but it is better for people, carers, families and communities as a whole. It is the kind of approach that was called for by the Christie commission. Indeed, the commission recognised the role that self-directed support can play in reshaping social care. However, it also noted the current low uptake of self-directed support and called for more action to build the capacity for and awareness of self-directed support to encourage broader participation. I am strongly committed to self-directed support, not only as a concept that embodies the ideas of equality, human rights and independent living, but as a mechanism that across Scotland delivers practical, tangible benefits to many people, their families and their carers. It is a privilege to hear directly from people in communities across the country who receive social care services and their carers about the positive difference that self-directed support makes to their lives. I was particularly pleased that the Health and Sport Committee had a chance at its final evidence session to hear from a variety of individuals, including Omar Haq and Margaret Cassidy, about what self-directed support means to them personally. It is clear from their experience that giving people more choice, more control and a greater say in their support—whatever they choose to do with it—leads to improved outcomes and a better overall experience for them. Such stories strengthen my resolve to ensure that the ambitions of self-directed support are realised for the benefit of all people who are eligible for social care. I am therefore pleased that there has been significant support for the bill during the earlier consultation phases and in its parliamentary passage to date.

I recognise the work that Orkney Islands Council has done. A number of local authorities have a good track record in promoting self-directed support. Rurality and the provision of some services in small communities create challenges, but I know that Orkney Islands Council always works hard to try to deliver the best range of services that it can, within the limitations that it experiences because of the challenges. Self-directed support provides an opportunity to look at other options that might not traditionally have been considered in designing care for individuals that they can develop to meet their care needs. I hope that Health and Sport Committee members have seen my written response to their stage 1 report, but it is worth while summarising some of the main points, as I have no doubt that they will be touched on in the debate. First, I welcome the widespread support for the principles that we have placed at the forefront of the bill—informed choice, control and participation. I am always open to potential improvements, so my officials are exploring the committee’s recommendation that the bill should also refer directly to the principle of independent living. On the allocation of budgets by local authorities, I share the committee’s view that “self-directed support must not be, or be seen to be, a cover for cuts.” Under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, local authorities have a responsibility to meet a person’s assessed eligible needs, no matter which option that person chooses in self-directed support. We will ensure that that is made very clear in the framework of statutory and best practice guidance that will accompany the bill.

The key issue is that, as I said, irrespective of someone’s choice under self-directed support, their local authority remains under a legal obligation to meet their assessed eligible needs. That stands for any local authority—Glasgow City Council and others. When individuals feel that a local authority’s system is not meeting their needs sufficiently, they should use that authority’s processes to pursue the matter further. I agree with the Health and Sport Committee that it is important to identify and share best practice in relation to complaints and the appeals process. Following a consultation this year on how social work complaints procedures might be updated, a working group is being set up. Among other things, the group will look at whether disputes need to be separated from the complaints process. My officials will ensure that the committee’s views on that issue are passed on to that group for further consideration. The committee asked whether the provision in the bill for support for adult carers should be a power or a duty. I am acutely aware of the contribution that unpaid carers make and I share the view that supporting their health and wellbeing is hugely important. The vital point is that we should create the right legislative and policy framework to support carers appropriately. Having a power rather than a duty will give us the necessary flexibility to meet our ambition to provide early preventative support to carers. Through investment from the change fund, the carers information strategy and the short breaks fund and through work on other issues such as dementia, autism and mental health, we are already working hard to help to support carers in Scotland. The bill provides a further important tool to enable local authorities to continue to support carers in the most flexible and appropriate way. Self-directed support applies to children and their families as well as to adults, and I am pleased to note that the committee supports that position. It is in line with the principles of getting it right for every child, and I believe that it can be of real benefit to children and young people and their families. However, I also note concerns about the specifics of the policy’s application to children, particularly around issues relating to transition. I assure all members that we will ensure that the guidance that is developed around the bill has specific information on support for children and on transition planning. We will draw practitioners’ and providers’ attention to that guidance through a variety of means. Although direct payments for children’s support are well established as an option, there is considerable scope for extending their availability to many more children. I am confident that, along with the work that we are pursuing at present, we can further develop that area in a positive way. One of the great strengths of self-directed support is the flexibility that it affords individuals, and a key factor in that flexibility is the workforce. However, I appreciate that there are concerns about personal assistants, who provide some of the most flexible support. There are risks inherent in employing or being employed as a PA, but I believe that those risks are manageable and that the current safeguards are proportionate. Therefore, we have no plans to require the compulsory registration of PAs with the Scottish Social Services Council or with any other body. Nevertheless, I share the committee’s view that we need to enhance the status and value of personal assistants. In my written response, I discussed the wide range of actions that are being developed or which are already under way to support PAs and their employers. I believe that the emphasis should be on enhancing the capacity of professionals, individuals and their carers to make the right choice to best meet their needs. Closely related to the question of personal assistants is the issue of the employment of family members. I believe that our approach should be one of flexibility and proportionality. I welcome the committee’s agreement that the current definition of exceptional circumstances is no longer appropriate. If the bill is enacted, I will launch a consultation on regulations that will include definitions of appropriate and inappropriate circumstances for the employment of a close relative. The aim is to move towards a culture that seeks to identify appropriate circumstances rather than one that focuses on exceptional circumstances. Safeguards will be important and I expect that to be fully explored during the consultation exercise. I will say a brief word on costs. The financial resources accompanying the bill have been a source of concern for some. However, I am confident that the transformational funding that has been allocated to local authorities, providers and advice and support organisations will be sufficient to support a significant improvement in the provision of self-directed support options throughout Scotland. My officials have held several meetings with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Directors of Social Work, and we will continue to meet them in the run-up to the implementation phase of the legislation. In addition, my officials have started a programme of visits to local authorities, which is aimed at gathering useful information about transformational processes across Scotland. The bill raises a number of important and complex issues, and I am sure that we will hear much more about those during the debate. I remind members that, although the detail of the bill is of crucial importance, and although it is right and proper that it is thoroughly scrutinised and discussed, the overall purpose of the legislation is to make a difference to the lives of those in our society who need to access social care and support. We owe it to them to deliver real change. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This has been a very good debate, involving a range of contributions from members across the chamber. In his remarks, Jackson Carlaw referred to the way in which the personal experience of a number of members helped to shape their views on the personalisation of care and self-directed support agenda. When Duncan McNeil set out the case of Omar Haq, who gave evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, he spoke about direct payments giving him flexibility and raising his ambitions. I know from meeting people across the country who have benefited from self-directed support that those are consistent traits. The flexibility that self-directed support provides addresses the difficulty that Jackie Baillie highlighted to do with choice for people who receive a tuck-in service. Should the tuck-in service come in at 6 o’clock, 7 o’clock or 8 o’clock? We know that Jackson Carlaw goes to bed early, but I am assured that he also rises early. That illustrates some of the small issues that have a real impact on the quality of someone’s life—but which can often be forgotten—that self-directed support can assist us in addressing. As Pam Duncan said to the committee, we need to ensure that we focus on empowerment and how it can enable someone to lead an independent life. Nanette Milne referred to the low uptake of direct payments and the variation across local authorities. Direct payments have been in place for several decades. On average, about 3 or 4 per cent of people will make use of a direct payment. In recent years, there has been an increase in uptake, but it has not been sustained to the level that one would expect. Why is that the case? I know that some local authorities actively dissuade people from looking into direct payments by saying that they do not provide them, although the neighbouring local authority happens to do so. People can also be anxious about the implications of and responsibility involved in employing directly a member of staff to meet their care needs. That is why the four options—to which Malcolm Chisholm referred—that are set out in the bill are drafted in such a way as to maximise the opportunity for individuals to have much greater control over their personal care. It will be their choice whether they want to make a direct payment, direct the way that the resource is used by the local authority, have the local authority provide everything, or have a mix of those three options. I say to Helen Eadie—and I may disappoint her—that the bill clearly sets out that the local authority must offer those four options. It will not be a case of just offering option 1 or option 2. Helen Eadie obviously thinks that option 1 is a Conservative type of privatisation agenda, but I disagree. A person’s ability to choose when someone comes in to meet their care needs is about their personal needs and independent living, rather than about any political ideology.

I will let Helen Eadie in shortly. What is important is allowing people to have choice on these issues and putting in safeguards that empower people and allow them to fall back on the safety net of the local authority when they do not have the confidence to take forward their care arrangements on their own.

The bill is about empowering people to be able to make a decision that best suits their needs. It is not about laying down that people must choose option 2, option 3, option 4 or option 1—it is about giving people choice. Individuals in the independent living movement have been calling for that for years. My understanding was that it had broad support in all political parties in Scotland and the UK. I do not want to overly intervene in the Twitter conversation that Malcolm Chisholm was having with Roseanna Cunningham over the weekend. I have never understood why someone would have conversations over Twitter rather than phone someone for a discussion. However, the conversation illustrates the point that the debate about national and local will go on and we should continue to have it. Christina McKelvie illustrated in her speech why we need to have statutory underpinning of people’s rights and choices around how their care is managed. Her case illustrated the types of hurdles that can often dissuade people from moving forward and arranging care in their own way. I want to try—in the limited time available—to touch upon a number of points that members raised. Several members raised the issue of charging by local authority. Jackie Baillie asked me to tell the chamber when the working group will report. The review is a COSLA review. The last time I looked, COSLA had a Labour leadership, so perhaps Jackie Baillie can help by telling us when the working group intends to get to the point of finalising its report. I assure her that we are contributing to that process to assist the working group in taking forward that piece of work. The sooner it is completed, the sooner we can consider how we move forward on the issue.

I will let Jackie Baillie back in later. I say to Helen Eadie that I cannot comment on the charges that housing associations apply. I noted her point about the change of Administration on Fife Council. I can tell her that in the Falkirk Council area some homecare services were completely free until Labour and the Conservative Party took over the Administration and introduced a wave of charges that the previous SNP Administration had never applied.

It is a COSLA review group, and we are helping it by providing information—

Maybe Jackie Baillie will use her political influence, if she has any, to tell the Labour leadership to get on with it and give us a report, so that we can move forward. Members asked whether advocacy services will be provided. I think that there is a misunderstanding and that some members think that there is no provision for advocacy in the bill. Section 8 will confer on local authorities a duty to direct people to a source of impartial advice and support, to assist them as they consider the issues. I am more than happy to consider whether we can enhance the provision. It is about independent advice, rather than local authority advice, and I refer members to what the bill says in that regard. Dennis Robertson talked well about the need to be much more focused on the outcomes that we intend to achieve through the bill. The bill has the potential fundamentally to change how social care services are delivered in this country, in a way that reflects the needs of individuals and gives people greater choice and an opportunity to lead an independent life. I am delighted that the bill appears to have cross-party support at stage 1. I have no doubt that the people who have been calling for such legislation for many years will welcome the way in which the Parliament is uniting behind the bill. If we are successful in taking the bill through Parliament and it receives royal assent, I am determined to do everything in my power to ensure that it starts to transform lives in Scotland in a way that has never happened before in social care provision in Scotland.

I congratulate all our Scottish Olympians and Paralympians on their performances in the London Olympics and the Paralympics, which are still taking place, including our two canoe Olympic medallists, Tim Baillie and David Florence. Investment in facilities and increasing participation have been key planks of our sports policy since we came into Government, and we are now seeing the results. Sportscotland is working closely with the Scottish Canoe Association to support the continuing development of paddle sports in Scotland. Since 2007, over £2.3 million has been invested in the Scottish Canoe Association through sportscotland.

I am aware of the proposed development at Pinkston, in Glasgow. I understand that an application has been received by sportscotland from Glasgow Watersports. I am a little disappointed that the member has asked for the sports minister to attend rather than me. However, I am more than happy to give a commitment on behalf of my colleague, Shona Robison, that she will be happy to meet the member and other relevant parties to discuss the proposal and, if possible, to visit the site.

I am not aware of the proposal for Leith although I am aware of the proposal for Pinkston, in Glasgow. As I said, an application has been made to sportscotland for assistance with funding for that project. If the sports minister can help to facilitate discussions between Bob Doris and the other relevant interested parties, I have no doubt that Shona Robison will do all that she can to assist that dialogue and that she will visit the site where the facility could be based.

As part of the work of the steering group that was established in 2006 to consider single-room provision, a number of consultations were undertaken, including a public attitude survey and a nursing staff report based on a survey of senior nurses and midwives from all national health service boards. A further opportunity was provided to all nurse directors to comment and contribute to the process in 2007. The outcome of the consultations was confirmed by the chief medical officer for Scotland in 2010 and it was stated that there would be a presumption in favour of 100 per cent single-room in-patient provision in new-build hospital accommodation unless there was a clinical reason not to have that. However, any exceptions would require to be approved by the Scottish Government as part of the normal business case approval process.

As I said in my previous answer, a considerable level of consideration was given to patients’ views, including those who had experienced treatment in a single-bedded unit. It is worth noting, though, that single-bed provision also assists in addressing issues such as infection control and reducing length of stay and the occurrence of medical errors. In addition, patient satisfaction levels are greater among those who have experienced care in a single-bedded unit. However, the business case for the redevelopment of Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary has still to be submitted to the Scottish Government and it is for Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board to make the case for how it sees the provision of beds in the refurbished establishment.

The present arrangements allow for flexibility where the clinical case can be made.

The provision of IVF treatment was raised in the 2011 annual reviews of national health service boards with waiting times of 18 months or more, and will be followed up during the forthcoming 2012 annual reviews. The provision of IVF treatment was discussed with NHS board chief executives in April 2012, in light of the Government’s 12-month waiting time commitment. We will be writing to NHS boards shortly to ask for clear plans on how they will meet the Government’s 12-month waiting time commitment for IVF, which is to be in place by March 2015, and we will request regular updates to ensure that the plans meet those timescales.

I recognise the anxiety that couples can have over changes in arrangements around IVF treatment. I also recognise that there are some inconsistencies in how different NHS boards in Scotland provide IVF services. It is important that we address those issues so that couples have certainty on the way in which services will be provided locally. We have established the national infertility group, which is an expert group comprising a range of stakeholders, to look at the approaches of Scottish NHS boards, how we can improve the provision of IVF services and the most up-to-date evidence on the provision of IVF treatment. We expect to receive that group’s report early next year, which will inform how we move forward with the NHS in Scotland on the provision of IVF treatment. The group will also look at the issue of age range, based on the most up-to-date evidence that we have. I have no doubt that the expert group will make its recommendations to ministers, who will then consider how to progress them with the NHS in Scotland.

No formal discussions have taken place between the Scottish Government and the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists in Scotland about the giving voice campaign. However, the campaign’s aims are subject to an on-going parliamentary petition, which was submitted to the Parliament’s Public Petitions Committee. The national delivery plan for allied health professionals was published this week and was welcomed by the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists. The delivery plan emphasises the need for AHPs to ensure that the communication needs of people who use services are effectively met. It also makes clear the need to consider how to support children with communication difficulties to access the curriculum and achieve their full potential.

As I said, the national delivery plan includes actions and AHP directors in each health board should be working in partnership with colleagues in research and analysis to grow the health economics base for AHPs in Scotland, so that we can gain a clear understanding of the economic benefits that can be gained from AHPs’ intervention across the health and social care setting. As part of the mainstreaming of the delivery plan, NHS boards have been asked to prepare local plans that detail how the actions in the national plan will be delivered locally and how that will be evidenced. The chief health professions officer will work with NHS boards and local authorities to support implementation and to ensure that activity is effectively monitored, so that we can assess progress in each board.

The information is not held centrally. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline on the management of perinatal mood disorders refers to a range of evidence that shows a post-natal depression prevalence rate of around 10 to 15 per cent. The figures encompass people who experience mild, moderate and severe post-natal depression.

The new SIGN guidelines were published only in March, after careful consideration. The decision about the approach that should be taken with a patient who is experiencing post-natal depression is primarily a clinical one and involves a multidisciplinary team in considering the most appropriate treatment programme for the patient. I am aware of the concerns that have been expressed on behalf of the organisation in the Borders to which Jim Hume referred, which supports individuals who are experiencing post-natal depression. However, the member will acknowledge that it is the responsibility of local health boards and local authorities to decide how to provide services locally and which organisations will deliver services. The decision on funding the organisation is therefore a matter for the local health board and local authority. I will be happy to discuss the matter in more detail if the member wants me to do so, but I am sure that the member recognises that the primary responsibility for the matter lies with the local health board and local authority.

The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation has recommended that people aged 70 to 79 should be vaccinated against shingles if the vaccine can be purchased at a cost-effective price. The United Kingdom Department of Health, which procures vaccines on behalf of the four UK health departments, has started work on the vaccine procurement process, which will establish whether a cost-effective shingles vaccination programme can be introduced.

I am aware that the chicken pox vaccine is available in a number of countries. We are guided on such matters by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, whose current advice is that the universal varicella vaccine for chicken pox is not recommended. I assure the member that those recommendations are kept under review in light of any data that may emerge. If further recommendations come from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation that we should act upon as a Government, we will take the appropriate action at that particular time.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that people who are living with long-term conditions such as coeliac disease receive the care and support that they need. A range of gluten-free food products is available on prescription to patients who are diagnosed with coeliac disease.

The member is correct that there is a process through which the United Kingdom Advisory Committee on Borderline Substances is responsible for deciding on which products could be considered as appropriate for the prescribed list of gluten-free products. It is important to recognise that the current guidelines focus on prescriptions for staple food products. That is the arrangement that has been put in place across the NHS, which I believe is consistent with Coeliac UK’s prescribing guidelines. We are about to undertake a review of the processes in Scotland, which we will do in consultation with a range of stakeholders to see how we can continue to improve the range of services and products that are available to patients who require access to gluten-free products.

The Scottish Government has had no discussions with the UK Government specifically on the advertising of follow-on milk. The Food Standards Agency in Scotland has policy responsibility for the legislation that covers the advertising of follow-on formula, and it provides advice to the Scottish Government on those matters.

The legislation governing infant and follow-on formula is currently being reviewed by the European Union. The Food Standards Agency is in regular contact with the relevant departments at a UK level to reflect Scottish interests in the on-going discussions. We will consider anything that may emerge from that review process that we need to address here in Scotland. The member requested a meeting to discuss the matter in more detail. I would be more than happy to arrange for such a meeting to take place, but some of the work that is being done at an EU level may assist in informing any discussion that takes place in due course.

The member will be aware that we have a range of provisions in place at health board level to encourage mothers to breastfeed. There is a range of programmes to support them in doing so. I note the point that the member makes about advertising and the impact that it can have on people’s attitude to breastfeeding, which is why I think that the review that is taking place at an EU level will assist us in looking at whether there are further measures that we can take in Scotland to address some of the issues. Given that the member’s long-standing interest in the matter resulted in the passing in this place of legislation to support breastfeeding, it is extremely important that we do everything that we can to encourage mothers to breastfeed, when they wish to. As a Government, we are prepared to do that, in partnership with our local health boards, and to look at what the EU review comes up with, to see what further measures can be taken to address the issue.

I welcome the opportunity to have the debate. I also welcome those from the Scottish campaign group who have joined us for the debate. They have been at the forefront in calling for a variety of actions to be taken following this incident. The Scottish Government takes the issue very seriously. We fully recognise the concerns that have been expressed by people who have had PIP silicone breast implants. Members may be aware that the Deputy First Minister has met representatives of the PIP implant Scotland campaign on two separate occasions; the most recent meeting took place just last week. At the outset, it should be stressed that the alleged fraudulent activity of a company that produced breast implants is at the very heart of the issue, and it is extremely difficult and challenging for any regulatory regime to deal with such fraudulent behaviour. Members will be aware that the regulation of medical devices is reserved to the Westminster Government, and the competent authority for that within the UK is the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, which has lead responsibility for considering products that are to be used as medical devices. It may be helpful if I outline some of the actions that have been taken since the issue came to light. As a Government, we have worked closely with the MHRA, the Department of Health and the other devolved Administrations in addressing the concerns that have arisen, and three reviews have been established. The first of those—to which Jackie Baillie referred—reviewed the actions that the MHRA took, and the report was published on 14 May this year. That report found that the MHRA had acted appropriately based on information that was made available to it and that it had been proactive in seeking further information on PIP. The report, which was by Earl Howe, sets out a number of recommendations for the MHRA to take forward; that work is on-going. A further review was commissioned to look specifically at data around rupture rates and toxicology issues relating to the particular implants. That expert review is currently taking place, and we expect its findings to be published later this month. The third, longer-term review, also led by Sir Bruce Keogh, will look at the regulation of cosmetic surgery across the UK. In addition, it will review a number of the issues that were highlighted in the Howe report to see whether further action is required. The intention of the three reviews is to ensure that a similar situation does not occur again. We should allow the review process to take place so that we can ensure that we have the right system in place to prevent such an incident from being repeated.

The review is dealing specifically with the issues that arise from the PIP implant matter, and we should give the review group the opportunity to consider that matter in detail. As a result of that review, other areas of cosmetic surgery and other aspects of healthcare may be identified that have to be addressed, but we must allow the review to take place so that we can see what its findings are and consider whether any further action is required. I have set out the context of regulation in the UK, in which we operate. I also want to consider NHS Scotland’s response and address the request for a Scottish public inquiry. Although the initial indications were that NHS Scotland had not used PIP silicone implants, NHS Lothian subsequently identified one patient who had been given PIP implants. That patient was offered and received from the board an appropriate clinical care package to address her concerns. As a Government, we have been very clear that we expect private healthcare providers to offer their patients clinically appropriate packages of care, and we believe that they have an ethical responsibility to do so. NHS Scotland is committed to supporting all women whose private healthcare provider is unable or unwilling to provide appropriate care or who places unreasonable conditions on women in providing care. The approach that NHS Scotland has taken is appropriate and is in line with the longstanding mechanism in our NHS on the provision of cosmetic surgery. Members will be aware that NHS Scotland does not provide cosmetic surgery on a routine basis. That is well established in the NHS’s published criteria. When the Deputy First Minister met the PIP implant Scotland campaign last week, she made clear her view that, on the basis of the information that was available to her at that point, she was not convinced that a case has been made for a Scottish public inquiry. She made clear that other options are open that would help to reassure women in Scotland. That includes continuing to work with the campaign group here in Scotland. I hope that members are assured that the Scottish Government takes the matter seriously and is working with the appropriate bodies to ensure that provisions are in place to prevent this type of thing from happening again. We continue to be committed to working with the PIP implant Scotland campaign and to addressing concerns and issues that the group raises, which we will pursue with the Department of Health and MHRA, as appropriate. We are also committed to ensuring that we consider the recommendations that come from the two further reviews and their implications for the NHS here in Scotland. We will consider where it is appropriate to take action in Scotland to address the concerns that are raised. I move amendment S4M-03294.1, to leave out from first “further notes” to end and insert: “notes that the Scottish Government is working with the UK Government on the three UK-wide reviews; welcomes the findings of the report, Poly Implant Prothèse (PIP) silicone breast implants: Review of the actions of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and Department of Health, which found that the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Authority took appropriate action based on the information made available to it; looks forward to the outcome of the expert group looking at the rupture rate data and toxicology testing led by Sir Bruce Keogh, which is due to report later this month, and the review looking at the regulation of the cosmetic industry also being led by Sir Bruce Keogh, which will report by March 2013, and commends NHSScotland for the action taken by it to ensure that it responded appropriately by making information and advice available to women and ensuring that, where the private healthcare sector was unable or unwilling to provide a clinically appropriate package of care, NHSScotland provided appropriate care.”

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It has been a useful debate. I think that, on reflection, most members would recognise that this is an issue that goes beyond party politics and is about trying to ensure that we do the right thing in addressing the concerns that have been raised. Unfortunately, Mary Fee’s suggestion that there has been inaction by the Scottish Government in that regard is not only not reflective of the facts, but is simply wrong. It is important that, in contributing to a debate on an issue of such importance around women’s health, members reflect on what action is being taken. The experience of one of Malcolm Chisholm’s constituents demonstrates the type of response that we have asked NHS Scotland to make. I recognise that members may have different views on what that response should be, but it is simply wrong to suggest that no action has been taken. It is right, when a matter such as this arises and when the regulatory regime that we have in place has not protected individuals from the alleged fraudulent activity of the company that produced the breast implants, that we look at whether there are ways in which we can ensure that the regulatory system is more effective in addressing the concerns. Nanette Milne is correct to say that it is not possible to get a 100 per cent fail-safe regulatory system, but we clearly have to ensure that we learn lessons in order to ensure that the system is sufficiently robust, which is what the Earl Howe review was intended to do. I acknowledge Malcolm Chisholm’s view about the content of that review, but it is important to recognise that the review will be supplemented by the wider review by Sir Bruce Keogh that is being undertaken at present and which will report next year on whether further measures need to be taken beyond the recommendations of the Earl Howe review. I recognise that despite the review, people—including members of the PIP implants Scotland campaign—continue to have concerns about the regulatory regime. However, it is important that we ensure that the reviews that are taking place address those concerns and the concerns that the PIP implants Scotland campaign believes the MHRA, the Department of Health and others have to address. As a Government, we are open to considering the matters and to making the necessary representations where that is appropriate. Concerns have been expressed about the content of PIP breast implants—Malcolm Chisholm made a specific point on that in relation to his constituent. I understand that the MHRA has carried out further tests on PIP implants and that, as part of Sir Bruce Keogh’s work, the data and the toxicology findings are being looked at. I am informed that there are difficulties in carrying out toxicology tests on breast implants that have ruptured, which leads to difficulties in offering certainty on what may be in those particular breast implants. That is the scientific expert advice that has been provided, but I understand that further tests have been taken as part of the Sir Bruce Keogh review. Maureen Watt raised the issue of how breast implants are chosen by different clinicians. NHS Scotland does not routinely provide cosmetic surgery, and the number of breast implants is limited. The guidelines and criteria on their use are clear—they are largely for breast augmentation for women who have undergone a mastectomy. The choice of breast implant is largely decided by clinicians, who work with patients to establish what is most appropriate to that individual. That is why we allow boards to procure breast implants that their clinicians believe are best suited to their individual patients, rather than controlling procurement nationally. I am sure that Maureen Watt will recognise the benefit that is gained from that approach.

I am very short of time and I want to cover as many points as I can. A number of members mentioned the introduction of a register. Some members may be aware that we had a UK register that ceased because of the number of women who chose not go on it—only a small number were prepared to do it. That, too, is being looked at through regulation and the Sir Bruce Keogh review, which will report next year. If there is a clear recommendation about the need to consider establishing a register we will, as I have said, reflect on the reviews and the implications for Scotland and see what action we can take to address that. Jackie Baillie expressed concern about a difficultly that has been experienced by an individual from the PIP Scotland group from whom she has received representation. That experience contrasts markedly with the experience of Malcolm Chisholm’s constituent. I assure all members that we will ensure that all cases of concern about how NHS Scotland has responded will be looked into. Members whose constituents have such experiences should feel free to make representations to the cabinet secretary or me to ensure that the matters are appropriately considered. The chief medical officer has written on two occasions in the past six months to GPs and surgeons to set out the Scottish Government’s position on assisting women with PIP implants through our NHS. I acknowledge the concerns of members of the PIP campaign. As the cabinet secretary set out last week, she does not believe that—based on the present information—the case for a public inquiry has been made. We need to continue to work with the PIP campaign in Scotland to address its concerns. When necessary, the Government will take appropriate action in areas in which we have responsibility, and will make representations to the UK bodies that are responsible for addressing the issue. We will continue to work with all those bodies in order to provide certainty and to address concerns as and when they arise. On that basis, the most appropriate course that we can take at present is to allow the review process to be completed. Once that is done, we will look at its implications for Scotland and address any issues that arise for us when appropriate.

A number of Helen Eadie’s comments do not refer to the emergency order that the Parliament has considered and on which members will have an opportunity to vote tonight. It is clear that the contamination has come about as a result of the actions of the Ministry of Defence. There is no fault on the part of this Government, which has been pursuing the MOD to take up its responsibility to clean up the contamination that it has caused at Dalgety Bay. On several occasions, cabinet ministers have written to the MOD to ask it to face up to its responsibility. We are making an emergency order to protect public health as a result of the contamination that has been caused by the MOD. In the coming months, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency will work with the MOD to identify the full extent of the contamination that has been caused by the MOD. I hope that Helen Eadie and her colleagues will support us in future in ensuring that, once we recognise the full extent of the contamination that has been caused by the MOD, the MOD owns up to that and pays for the clean-up of Dalgety Bay.

Like others, I thank Kenny Gibson for bringing forward the debate. I congratulate him on securing time to allow this important topic to be debated. In his comments, Kenny Gibson made a clear case for how progress has been made with genetic testing and, in particular, the benefits that testing can have for infants. Testing has also changed the way in which clinicians, particularly neurologists, manage conditions such as epilepsy. Early diagnosis can often save young children from undergoing invasive and complex tests. That is why genetic testing can have such benefits. As several members have mentioned, the epilepsy genetics service that is on offer at the Royal hospital for sick children in Glasgow is leading the United Kingdom in the provision of DNA testing for various types of epilepsy. The service’s success is based on the efforts of those who are involved, the wider epilepsy community and on a number of years of investment. It would probably be fair to say that Scotland is now in the enviable position of being able to continue to improve our understanding of epilepsy as a condition; to ensure that children receive earlier diagnosis, which will ensure that they receive the most appropriate therapy at the earliest opportunity—Richard Simpson referred to that; to ensure that people’s treatment is tailored in the way that is most appropriate to them, which will reduce the potential for serious complications; and, in general, to get a better understanding of the treatment that can be provided to those who have epilepsy. Kenny Gibson also referred to the Muir Maxwell Trust, and it is fair to say that the service has benefited greatly over the years from support through that trust. I offer the Muir Maxwell Trust my sincere thanks for the way in which it has assisted in supporting the funding of new equipment and for its wider contribution to epilepsy research. That is extremely appreciated by the Government and—I have no doubt—by those who have benefited from the work of the service. In Scotland, we now have four regional centres that can ensure that, once someone is diagnosed, genetic counselling can be provided to both the individual concerned and their family. As Kenny Gibson rightly highlighted, that is extremely important for the families, as it allows them to make informed decisions about treatment and care in the future. It is important to recognise that the laboratory services that are provided at the centres are funded by NHS Scotland’s National Services Division, which is responsible for commissioning the molecular genetics and cytogenetics laboratories in Scotland as well as for the Scottish paediatric epilepsy network. The approach of using NHS Scotland’s National Services Division is unique in not only the UK, but the world, because it is the only service of its type that does not operate on a commercial basis. In that sense, it exemplifies the way in which things can be done collectively for the wider benefit. A number of other organisations support the work that is taking place in Glasgow. There are plans to invest further in the PCR equipment, which will allow an increase in the number of genetic tests and in the range of tests that will be available. That will allow us to continue to improve the rate of early diagnosis and it will help the service to retain its status as a leading one in Europe, to which a number of members have referred. Nanette Milne referred to the neurological standards. It is fair to say that the genetics service often complements our work to improve neurological standards. In the past two years, we have provided £1.2 million to NHS boards for the implementation of the neurological standards. A key part of that process is about ensuring that services are safe, effective and person centred in the way in which they provide care for those with a neurological condition. Nanette Milne referred to the recent peer reviews that have taken place among the boards, which highlighted a number of gaps in the way in which boards are performing against the standards. That was the very reason for the peer reviews: to flush out the gaps so that we have a clearer understanding of where we need to make progress, which is what we now intend to do. We have provided additional funding to the Neurological Alliance to establish a national advisory group, which will work on the neurological standards and advise and work with boards to ensure that we continue to improve in the area. Kenny Gibson, Nanette Milne and others referred to the role of epilepsy nurses. In recent years, the number of specialist nurses in the NHS has increased considerably, and we now have around 2,250. I often hear concerns from those who are involved in other long-term conditions that some specialist nurses engage in clinical work that is outwith their specialism. I am sure that all members will recognise that, in the current period of financial constraint, it is appropriate for boards to consider the skills and talents of their nursing staff and ensure that they are utilised to best effect. However, the neurological standards set out clearly the important role that specialist nurses have as core members of the multidisciplinary team. We see the specialist nurses as having a clear and important role in implementing the standards. I recognise members’ anxieties, some of which reflect the difficult financial climate in which boards are operating. Notwithstanding that, we see the specialist nurses as having an important role. Richard Simpson referred to ensuring that employers have a better understanding of epilepsy. In recent years, we have funded Epilepsy Scotland to provide literature to assist employers and to ensure that they are aware of and have greater understanding of the condition. We have also funded Epilepsy Scotland’s employer of the year awards, which aim to raise awareness of the condition and the role of employers. We recognise the invaluable role of the genetics service in Glasgow and we will continue to work with and support it in undertaking that role. I congratulate all those who have been involved in delivering the service and who have supported it financially and in other ways to become a world-leading service of which we in Scotland can rightly be proud. Meeting closed at 17:39.

As others have done, I congratulate Jenny Marra on securing the debate and on lodging her motion, which illustrates a number of important points about the value of deaf awareness week. One of the important points that she made is that it gives us an opportunity to recognise and to celebrate the work that is undertaken by a range of organisations that represent and improve the lives of people in Scotland who have hearing loss or deafness. An important part of that work is their raising of awareness of hearing loss, which is a growing issue and one that I think we can do more to tackle. I was grateful that Action on Hearing Loss offered me the opportunity to have my hearing tested last year at the Scottish National Party national conference. I was delighted when I was given a clean bill of health and informed that the results showed that my hearing is fine. However, when I shared the results with my wife, she was not persuaded. It is important that we take every opportunity to encourage people to have their hearing tested as and when appropriate. The motion correctly highlights the challenges that we face—in particular, the demographic challenges. As the motion sets out, it is estimated that in the region of 850,000 people in Scotland are affected by hearing loss; by 2031 the figure could be more than 1.2 million people. We have to plan and deliver services in a way that recognises that with the demographic shift to an ageing population profile there are likely to be more people with hearing loss, visual impairment or dual sensory loss, so we need to ensure that we plan services in a way that can most appropriately meet their needs. However, we must also recognise that we have to face up to that challenge while budgets are squeezed as a result of reductions in the Scottish Government’s budget. Although that is a challenge, it also provides us with real opportunities to look at how we are doing things and to see whether there are different ways of doing things that would be much more effective in helping to support people with hearing loss or deafness. The motion mentions barriers; a number of speakers have spoken about tackling the barriers that individuals with hearing loss may experience. Essential to any approach to tackling those barriers must be the founding principle of ensuring that people with hearing loss or deafness are afforded the opportunity to live as independently as possible: to live an independent life in which they can make the right choices for themselves, have control over how things are done, be treated with dignity and be given the freedom to make decisions. We must keep that in mind when we move forward on tackling the barriers.

Willie Coffey has made a valid point. I am aware of the difficulties that people who support people with hearing loss or deafness can have in approaching the corporate world to make representations on their behalf. That is similar to how some carers find themselves in difficulty in trying to address the needs of a cared-for person. There is more that we can do. For example, we are considering a carers authorisation card that would give carers permission to access information on behalf of that cared-for person. There may be parallels that we can draw from the experience that is being piloted in a couple of health board areas in Scotland. That could also be used with the corporate world by those who have hearing loss. Several members mentioned British Sign Language—an issue that Parliament has recognised for some years. The first British Sign Language debate was led by Winnie Ewing and we had a signer in that evening. I remember attending that debate and recognising the value of BSL. As a Government, we recognised BSL as a language in March 2011. We are trying to address some of the British Sign Language-related issues. We are working with a number of organisations, including the Scottish Council on Deafness, the British Deaf Association, and the Scottish Association of Sign Language Interpreters to develop and to support an infrastructure to train and register BSL teachers, to make available an increased number of sign language classes, and to increase the number of qualified sign language interpreters. Mark Griffin made the valid point that clearly there is more for us to do, and, as a Government, we will consider what further action can be taken with our partners in addressing the issues. We will also give consideration to Mark Griffin’s member’s bill when he introduces it. Some members referred to issues relating to the paediatric audiology service. In 2009, we brought in new standards to improve the quality of paediatric and adult audiology services. We are now into the third year of the process. Each health board undertakes an annual assessment to evaluate and track the extent and nature of progress. So far, the indication is that improvements are taking place, but I accept that there is still space for improvement. The Government is determined to continue to make progress. That is why we have made a commitment to bringing forward a new sensory impairment strategy. We want to allow the various stakeholders to help to form how we will develop policy in the coming years to ensure that we meet the demographic challenge that we face, that we continue to build on the improvements that we have made in recent years, and that progress continues.

We are going to consult on the strategy, so those who wish to make representations on that issue will be able to feed them in. I do not want to say what will and will not be in the strategy. I mentioned the challenge that we face, but as I said, there are opportunities as well. We will continue to work with our partners to try to ensure that we realise those opportunities and that we continue to improve services for people in Scotland who have a hearing loss or suffer from deafness. Meeting closed at 17:51.

Some of these Opposition-led health debates create more noise than light in terms of detail and substance, and today’s was no exception. In the desperation of some to throw around as much mud as possible in relation to this issue, there is a danger that we lose sight of the significant progress that has been made by the NHS in Scotland. Unlike some, I wish to say thank you to the staff for their tremendous efforts in ensuring that they have achieved so many targets and have improved the NHS beyond recognition in recent years. I am not using them as a human shield; I am giving them genuine recognition for their hard work and achievement. It is worth recognising that, before 1999, there were no waiting time targets in the NHS in Scotland. Look at what has happened. Over the past 12 years, this Administration and other Administrations have seen the waiting times target being met, a substantial reduction in healthcare-associated infections and an improvement in the way in which we deliver healthcare, with more people receiving day care treatment and having shorter stays in hospital. All of those things illustrate the significant progress that has been made. We must recognise that that progress has brought benefits to patients. Of key importance to the NHS is the quality of care and treatment that it provides to patients. In the in-patient experience survey in 2011, 85 per cent of patients said that their experience of treatment was good or excellent. Again, that underscores the commitment and the dedication of our NHS staff, which I am more than happy to congratulate them on and thank them for. We should also recognise that the NHS in Scotland is performing well compared with other parts of the NHS in the United Kingdom. That is because we are not complacent; we have been driving reform in our NHS to ensure that it performs well. Scotland’s performance in relation to seven of the 11 major procedures is the best of any region in the UK. Further, our NHS’s move from being a body that largely focused on ill health to one that does more to prevent ill health has caused mortality rates to drop and life expectancy to increase. We have a proud record of delivering healthcare improvements in Scotland, and we need to recognise that.

I am just about to turn to those points. First, I should say that a lot of the allegations and innuendo that we have heard today have been about wider aspects of our NHS, not just NHS Lothian. The Government has implemented the new ways guidance and has ensured that boards are taking it forward effectively. I have heard members talk about social unavailability and suggest that, in some way, a patient loses their waiting time guarantee, but they do not and it is factually incorrect to suggest otherwise. That is part of the mud slinging and does not help us to address the issue. Jackson Carlaw, in his measured contribution, hit the nail on the head when he talked about how we can move forward from the findings in the NHS Lothian report and address the fundamental failings that it highlighted. Sarah Boyack and Jim Eadie also highlighted that, and drew attention to the serious failings in how the board handled the matter. Crucially, the report highlighted not one or two incidents of bullying and intimidation here or there, but a culture of bullying and intimidation, which the cabinet secretary has clearly said is unacceptable. That is why all 34 of the recommendations are being taken forward and the chair of NHS Lothian has been given the task of bringing forward a single integrated action plan that will address reporting, governance and culture to ensure that we can root out the unhealthy culture that has been allowed to develop in NHS Lothian. We must also recognise that, although this report is damning in relation to the problems that were allowed to develop in NHS Lothian, the issues are confined to a small number of the 20,000 staff who work in NHS Lothian, many of whom, on a day-to-day basis, show tremendous professionalism and dedication to their work. The report must be placed in the context of the limited number of staff who were perpetuating the culture of bullying and intimidation. However, we must ensure that the issue is addressed. As a Government, we are prepared to take the necessary action to ensure that the message is clear that bullying and intimidation will not be tolerated in any part of the NHS in Scotland.

We have—[Interruption.]

We have legislation that has, at its heart, fundamental principles to ensure equal access to healthcare for all, including carers. Carers have a legal right to an assessment of their own healthcare needs, and services and support should be put in place to meet those needs. The new mental health strategy, which is to be published in the summer, will set out our future direction for mental health services and health improvement, including how we can better understand and support the role of families and carers. Together with the significant resources invested in delivery through “Caring Together: The Carers Strategy” and increased funding for short breaks, we are ensuring that carers are supported to manage their responsibilities with confidence and in good health.

The member raises an important point, and I am aware of the report to which she refers. It is important to recognise the invaluable role that carers play in our society, in supporting cared-for individuals. The Government is doing what it can, through our strategy, to try and assist and support carers in that caring role. I understand the challenge that many carers face in accessing services, and that is why, over the past three years, we have provided £14 million to health boards through the carers information strategy to make sure that information is provided and available to carers on how they can access support and assistance through the health service. As I mentioned in my earlier response, we intend to publish our mental health strategy in the summer. In that, we will set out ways in which we intend to try to assist carers and their families in addressing the issues around mental health.

As at 30 September 2011, 55.6 per cent of adults in Orkney were registered with a dentist under NHS general dental services, whereas the figure for Scotland as a whole was 73 per cent. Responsibility for the overall provision of NHS general dental services in the area rests with NHS Orkney. It is taking measures that are aimed at improving access. The Scottish Government has provided significant financial incentives, grants and allowances that are aimed at encouraging dentists to join NHS boards’ dental lists and to continue to provide NHS treatment.

The member is correct to say that we have been in correspondence on the issue. Although it is disappointing that the registration level in Orkney is below the national average, since 2007 there has been a 21.4 per cent increase in the number of adults in Orkney who are registered with an NHS dentist. Significant progress has been made, but it is clear that there is more to be done. I know that NHS Orkney is looking at extending the amount of chair time that is available through NHS dental services and that it is considering the recruitment of additional staff to provide that increased capacity. I understand that it is in dialogue with a practice in Orkney to establish whether it would consider applying for some grant funding to allow it to extend the service that it provides, thereby increasing capacity in the islands. The chief dental officer will contact NHS Orkney in October, when it expects to be able to highlight the progress that it has made in increasing the levels of registration. At that point, we will consider whether there are further measures that it requires assistance in taking forward.

Like others, I congratulate Alex Fergusson on securing the debate, notwithstanding his slight disappointment that it is a health minister who is responding to it. However, I will do my very best to—

Of course.

I am very grateful for that, and I will try my best to respond to the points that have been raised. I agree with Alex Fergusson that the Scottish Parliament’s community partnerships project has proved to be highly successful. In this case, the Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum has proved to be an excellent example of the benefits that can be gained from that type of collaborative working between voluntary organisations and public bodies. It is something of a regret that, for financial reasons, it is unable to continue. It was very much a bottom-up approach to trying to engage with those who may not engage with the political process. “A Road to Health” highlights a number of issues that are recognised not only in Dumfries and Galloway but throughout the country. As Jackie Baillie said, such issues are not exclusive to remote and rural areas. The underlying issues are challenging and are not unique to healthcare—they cover a number of areas of public service provision. Many of the relevant bodies need to recognise that challenge. I am sure that members understand that it can be very challenging for planners and service providers to configure services, and the transport needs around those services, to ensure that they address the needs of communities effectively, particularly in remote and rural areas. I do not underestimate the huge challenge that some of them face in that respect. Importantly, providers need to ensure not only that they are innovative in their provision of transport services but that they try to identify unique arrangements to ensure that they address the needs of local residents. The Wigtownshire pilot is a good example of such thinking outside the box and of a more effective utilisation of existing resources. The issues surrounding transport to healthcare services are well recognised, and a significant amount of work has been done over recent years to try to address them. It may be helpful if I highlight to members some of the actions that have taken place over the past couple of years in that respect. In 2009, a healthcare transport framework was issued, providing guidance to all NHS boards in Scotland, which were responsible for preparing local plans on improving access to major healthcare facilities and for developing capacity to respond to the need for and deliver the necessary improvements to transportation. A recent update highlighted a variety of approaches that have been adopted by health boards, often reflecting their individual local circumstances. A good example of that is at Forth Valley royal hospital in my constituency, which has configured the bus transportation service to help staff and patients to access that newly built facility. More recently, the regional transport partnerships asked the Scottish Government to review the delivery of effective patient transport to healthcare services. As a result of that request, last year we established a short-life working group on transport for health. I can advise members that the group’s report is being finalised and will be brought before ministers shortly. Although I cannot pre-empt its findings and recommendations, I assure members that we will consider those findings and recommendations very carefully. However, I know that one of the aims was to examine how stakeholders might work together more effectively. That echoes some of the recommendations and findings in “A Road to Health.” I emphasise that if we are to realise the integration that we wish to see in relation to transport, it is absolutely vital that all the relevant bodies are prepared to work together collectively to achieve that improvement. “A Road to Health” includes a range of negative experiences that people have found in using patient transport services. I know of the variety of experiences of the service from my constituents’ representations. I confirm that the Scottish Ambulance Service acknowledges the difficulties, which is why it is running an improvement programme that aims to make the service more reliable and responsive. There are already some signs of improvement gains as a result of the approach taken by the Scottish Ambulance Service. Members may be aware that, in the north of Scotland, patients who are eligible to use the patient transport service can utilise a new direct booking and management system that started up just last month. The system allows individuals to book ambulance transport directly through a dedicated call centre in Inverness, and they can talk to a trained member of staff when requesting patient transport. That can be done up to 28 days before transport is required. Some of the findings so far indicate positive responses from patients who are using the system. The contact centre also looks at the other forms of transportation that may be available in the area, which patients can be advised of if they wish to make use of that transport for non-clinical purposes. Members will be aware of the 2011 Audit Scotland report, which highlighted a number of areas that require further improvement. The Scottish Ambulance Service is considering what further progress it can make to ensure that some of the concerns are addressed. For example, it is considering using technology in vehicles to maximise punctuality and plan routes more efficiently so that patients do not find themselves going round the block time and again when they are being transported to hospital. I recognise that the area is one where, for a variety of different reasons, there are considerable complexities in different parts of the country. From the health point of view, the Scottish Ambulance Service recognises the challenges. We, as a Government, recognise that there are benefits in establishing more partnership working across the health sector, and across local authority and other service providers, to make sure that we utilise the available transport resources more efficiently and effectively to ensure that, collectively, we improve peoples’ health and wellbeing. Meeting closed at 17:32.

The Scottish Government sexual health and blood borne virus framework identifies prevention as a priority. Under the framework, NHS Tayside receives more than £2 million per annum for activities relating to HIV, sexual health and viral hepatitis and more than £600,000 per annum is spent directly on HIV prevention activities in the board area. That relates to activities at a whole population level as well as to interventions targeted at individuals who may be particularly at risk.

NHS Tayside has recently completed a needs-based assessment of its services around blood borne viruses and HIV in the Tayside area. That work has highlighted a number of actions that those services will need to take. I have no doubt that NHS Tayside will look at how it can progress those actions to ensure that it has effective services in place.

I, too, congratulate George Adam on securing time for this important debate. There is no doubt from the speeches that have been made that a significant number of members who are participating in the debate have direct experience of the impact that MS can have on an individual’s life. I know that the Presiding Officer organised one of the most effective lobbyings of Parliament a number of years ago—I will not mention how many years ago—in highlighting to MSPs the issue of MS. I offer my thanks to the many organisations—the MS Society and others—that provide a tremendous amount of support and assistance to individuals who have the condition. John Finnie and Margaret Burgess referred in particular to facilities and organisations that they are aware of, which offer assistance and support to individuals who have the condition. I should, of course, mention in particular the Paisley branch of the MS Society, representatives of which I had the pleasure of meeting earlier this evening. The branch does a tremendous amount of work in the Paisley area, and a number of its young volunteers have been awarded the Government’s saltire award for their outstanding work. I hope that it can continue that important support. In the past few weeks, I also met the MS Society, at the invitation of Margaret Burgess, to discuss a number of issues about the progress that is being made and where the Government’s priorities are on continuing to improve services for individuals who suffer from neurological conditions, including conditions such as MS. We share the MS Society’s view that everyone with MS should be able to access the care and support that they need. Given the prevalence of MS in Scotland, it is extremely important that we achieve that. A key priority that we have taken forward to improve services for individuals who have a neurological condition has been to ensure more effective implementation of clinical neurological standards. Their implementation has been taken forward over the past 18 months in order to ensure that the care that individuals with MS receive is safe, effective and person centred. Of course, it will take time to ensure that that is effectively delivered across the country. I have been struck by the commitment that health boards have shown in their willingness to ensure that the neurological standards are effectively implemented. Nanette Milne clearly set out the progress that boards are making to achieve that. We have provided the neurological alliance of Scotland with £40,000 to establish a national advisory group, which will oversee and support boards in that work in the months and years to come. That will ensure that we establish the right standards—as we have done so far—and that they are properly maintained. One of the important elements in driving forward that agenda is the peer review process that Healthcare Improvement Scotland has been undertaking with health boards. The boards are able to compare with one another the actions and work that they are doing to see whether they can make further improvements. On Paul Wheelhouse’s point in that regard, we expect the peer review work to be completed and published by the summer. That will allow us to see exactly how NHS Borders compares with NHS Grampian, for example, and what progress the boards have made. We will be able to see where there are continuing gaps, and boards will be left in no doubt about the work that must be undertaken to address those issues. Several members have mentioned vitamin D, which has clearly attracted a considerable amount of media attention. I will address some of the issues. I recognise the particular interest that MS organisations have in that regard, and it is fair to say that a significant amount of research is being done internationally to examine a variety of ways in which we can more effectively prevent or treat MS. Mary Scanlon made a point about the need to review the literature and the research that exists. In 2010, the Institute of Medicine in the United States published a 1,000-page document that reviewed all the world literature and research that has been produced to date. It broadly concluded that vitamin D supplements have a value in dealing with pain conditions, which they can effectively assist in treating. However, the research around MS was at that point inconclusive, and it was not clear that some form of supplementation would do what many people are under the impression that it would with regard to preventing MS and being effective in treating it. The Chief Medical Officer for Scotland has asked the scientific advisory committee on nutrition to undertake a full review of vitamin D supplementation, and to include links to MS and other conditions. That process is under way, and it will take a considerable amount of time to examine all the peer-reviewed evidence. We expect to have the committee’s draft report and finalised recommendations in 2014. At that point, we will be happy to inform Parliament of those recommendations and the actions that we will take as a Government. I am sure that members will recognise that, in order to deal effectively with the issue of vitamin D, we must ensure that we are clear about the clinical consequences of going down that particular route. We must have clear clinical evidence in order to justify any changes in the present arrangements. I have a few points to make on the issue of welfare reform, which many members have raised, and which is regularly raised with me by a variety of organisations that represent the needs of disabled people. I welcome some of Mary Scanlon’s points on the flexibility that the UK Government is seeking to introduce into the system. However, we continue to have concerns about the way in which the personal independence payment system will work. Part of the difficulty in assessing any possible impact is the lack of information around the scheme, which I know causes considerable uncertainty for individuals. It is extremely important that the UK Government provides as much information on that system as possible to try to allay some of those concerns. It is also important that any assessment process that is undertaken as part of the personal independence payment scheme recognises fluctuating conditions such as MS and the way in which people can experience a rapid change in their condition in a very short period of time. Self-directed support is another issue. George Adam mentioned the need for greater control over individual care arrangements, and some of the difficulties and challenges that individuals may face with regard to the use of direct payments. The purpose of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill is to begin to remove the inconsistencies, so that no local authority can turn round and say, “No—you do not get direct payments for that.” People will have a legal entitlement to the options, which will include a form of direct payment, so that there is greater consistency across local authorities. The way in which care will be provided under that system depends on the option that the person chooses. People will be able to have full control of their care package if they choose to do so, they will be able to have partial control of it, or they will be able to allow the local authority to continue to manage it in the way in which care packages have traditionally been provided. The bill will give people much more direct control of their care than they are presently afforded, and it will remove some of the anxieties that people may have about direct payments and some of the inconsistency in the way in which care is provided by local authorities. We are taking forward the integration of health and social care precisely to address such inconsistency between local authorities. Too often, the services that are provided are organised for the purposes of the system rather than to meet the needs of the individual who requires the care. We will ensure that the system provides much greater consistency across the country. I hope that I have reassured members that, as a Government, we want to continue to see improvements in clinical standards for people with neurological conditions. In areas in which there is further research to be done, we have committed to doing that. We look forward to the publication of the advisory committee’s report and, in particular, its recommendations on vitamin D. I will continue to engage regularly with individual members on particular issues that they may have locally as part of the continued efforts to improve services for people with multiple sclerosis. Meeting closed at 17:56.

The child poverty strategy for Scotland sets out our approach to tackling child poverty. Our first annual report on the child poverty strategy, which we published on 22 March 2012, sets out a range of measures that we are taking across Scotland to tackle child poverty and includes updates on actions we have taken to drive change through local partners. In addition, we intend to establish a ministerial advisory group on child poverty, to help us to reflect on the first annual report, to identify priorities and actions that we can take on board for future reports, and to formulate strategies as the cycle moves towards publication of the next report in March 2014.

The obligation to report on an annual basis is one for the Scottish Government, which is why we laid the report a few weeks ago. It updates members on the progress that we are making. The Government is clear about its commitment to ensuring that we tackle child poverty, but the reality is that child poverty is very sensitive to financial changes and changes in the benefits and taxation systems. Until this country has control over those powers, we will continue to struggle to tackle child poverty successfully.

The debate has been very interesting. It is not every day that we get the opportunity in Parliament to discuss robotic surgery. A number of members rightly expressed their interest in the area and the important issues that we face in that regard, particularly some of the challenges around prostate cancer among men in Scotland. I thank UCAN for the work that it has undertaken. Richard Baker set out clearly the work that UCAN is doing on robotic surgery, but he also highlighted the extent of its wider work. UCAN has secured a considerable amount of public money in a very short period of time, during which there has also been considerable financial restraint. Kevin Stewart referred to one way in which UCAN is raising money, but I do not wish to dwell on that. However, it illustrates the innovative ways in which UCAN is trying to raise funds. UCAN has developed a strong reputation in the north of Scotland for its broader work and its commitment to raising awareness of neurological cancers and helping to ensure that people who have symptoms get early diagnosis. That fits very well with the Government’s approach in the detect cancer early programme. We know that the earlier the diagnosis of such cancers, the more likely we are to succeed in effective treatment. That is the hard edge of that area of work, but UCAN also plays an important role in helping to support families and individuals in dealing with some of the difficulties that can arise from ill health. That work is greatly appreciated and UCAN should be congratulated on its extent. Members across the chamber will recognise that our vision for the Scottish health service is that, through our quality strategy, Scotland will be a world leader in healthcare quality with a health service that is person centred, safe and effective. All three of those dimensions play very well with the subject that we are debating. Quite rightly, we all want to see the most modern, leading-edge treatment that is effective for patients with a variety of conditions. We should recognise that such work is often led by clinicians on the ground, who see the progress that can be made by the introduction of new means of treating patients. The clinicians are often the catalysts and drivers of such reforms in the health service. In deciding whether to introduce new treatments, whether they are drugs or technologies, to the NHS we need to ensure that the decision is based on sound evidence of safe use and clinical and cost effectiveness. I am sure that all members recognise the Scottish Medicines Consortium’s international reputation in this area. Health boards are often keen to look at developing services in which there are advances in technology; that includes partnerships with charities to introduce technologies that can assist patients within their own area. However, members will also be aware that, in Scotland, the evidence on clinical effectiveness is gathered, assessed and disseminated independently of the Scottish Government by Healthcare Improvement Scotland in guidelines, evidence reports and health technology assessments. That work is managed by a range of organisations, including public partners such as the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network and the Scottish health technologies group. In this instance, the Scottish health technologies group will provide advice to NHS Scotland on the results of a health technology assessment that is currently being undertaken by the University of Aberdeen, comparing robotic versus laparoscopic surgery for localised prostate cancer. We expect to have that report in September this year, at which point we will be able to evaluate how we move forward with such surgery in the NHS in Scotland. That review process includes an expert panel in the field. It also involves patient representatives, clinical users, managers of technology and clinicians who have recently been trained in the area of expertise. They must carefully consider how the approach is developed. That work at the health services research unit at the University of Aberdeen is supported by the chief scientist’s office at the Scottish Government. In the meantime, I reassure members that the absence of a specific service, treatment or technology in Scotland does not mean that it is not available to people who live here. It is quite the contrary, as a patient—whether a man or a woman—who needs robotic surgery continues to be able to access it through an individual patient treatment request if their clinician identifies it as appropriate. That process enables a clinician to set out the clinical case for a particular treatment or treatments, which is then considered locally by an individual review panel. Members will appreciate that the Government is not directly involved in the process. However, I emphasise that, when it is clinically assessed as being required, there is always the option for such an individual patient treatment request to be made. I thank all members for their speeches. I assure them that, when we receive the report in September, we will consider it in detail and consider what further progress we can make on robotic surgery within the NHS in Scotland. I again congratulate UCAN on its outstanding work and the way in which it has been able to improve the overall treatment for patients in the north-east of Scotland. I wish it well with its continued fundraising work. Meeting closed at 17:37.

The UK Government’s welfare reform measures will impact on carers and those to whom they provide care in a number of different ways. Those include the personal independence payment as a gateway to receipt of the carers allowance, the earnings disregard and the cap on benefits. Some of the details will not be in the public domain until draft regulations are available. We have made our views known to the UK Government about welfare reform and the specific impacts on carers, and we are working with Carers Scotland and others to assess the impact of the reforms.

My predecessor, Shona Robison, made representations to the UK Government on several occasions regarding the level of the carers allowance. At that time, the UK Government’s response was that the matter would be considered in the context of welfare reform. Additionally, the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy has made representations to the UK Government on a number of occasions regarding our concerns about welfare reform. I know that carers say that the carers allowance should be paid at a higher level and that the cost of caring can be extremely challenging. That is why, in the areas within our control, we have provided resource to health boards to focus, through the carers information strategy, on providing support around income maximisation. The UK Government intends to consider provisions around the carers allowance and will take that work forward as part of its programme for the universal credit. We are asking for further details from the UK Government on the exact nature of the changes that it intends to make.

We have had positive discussions with COSLA about its concerns in relation to council tax. We are taking forward work to ensure that we put in place the right provisions for a successor, following the changes, when the matter is handed over to the Scottish Government. The member will be aware that the UK Government has said that it will transfer the money that is available for council tax benefit, minus 10 per cent. That does not demonstrate much in the way of the respect agenda that we were promised from the UK Government. We as a Government will look at what we can do. Our discussions with COSLA recognise the serious financial challenges that have been created by the UK Government’s decision to cut 10 per cent from the fund when it is transferred.

Last Thursday, we laid in the Parliament our first annual report for the child poverty strategy for Scotland. It highlights a range of measures that we have taken since the publication of the strategy, such as the inception of a £270 million early years change fund. The actions that are highlighted in the report are extremely important, and it is crucial that we continue our efforts to tackle poverty in Scotland. However, the reality is that, without the Parliament having control of the tax and benefits systems, our ability to make real progress on the headline figures is severely restricted.

The Government is very much committed to the social wage for Scots in order to protect their incomes, especially in the face of the welfare spending cuts that are being imposed by the United Kingdom Government. The implementation of the social wage has involved a range of different matters to ensure that we protect Scottish families, particularly those who are most vulnerable and who have young children. We have met a number of our commitments in implementing the social wage, from free concessionary travel through to abolishing prescription charges, and we are implementing the living wage in the areas of public sector responsibility that we have direct control over. We recognise that to assist us in continuing to make significant progress in tackling issues around child poverty, we need to deal with two of the most fundamental factors—taxation and welfare. Until we are in a position to have control over those areas, we will have to continue to try to mitigate the actions that are taken by UK Governments.

All the detail is provided in the annual report. It is the first annual report and we are listening to different stakeholders on how they might wish future reports to be formulated. The most recent statistics on child poverty—which have been published independently—are from the Institute for Fiscal Studies. It carried out an analysis of the impact that the UK Government’s taxation and benefit changes will have on the UK as a whole. It indicated that, by 2021, there will be increase of almost 700,000 young children in the UK who will find themselves in poverty as a result of that policy. As a Government, we will do what we can to try to mitigate some of the measures, but the two key factors that continue to drive child poverty in this country are taxation and benefits. We can talk as loudly as we want in demanding that the UK Government does different things on this agenda, but until we have the powers to deal with those factors ourselves, we will continue to struggle to tackle the scourge of child poverty in Scotland.

All NHS boards adhere to “Drug misuse and dependence: UK guidelines on clinical management”, which is also known as the orange book. The guidelines were jointly drafted and agreed by all four United Kingdom Administrations. They are based on current evidence and professional consensus on how to provide drug treatment, and they describe how and when to safely introduce methadone as a treatment and how and when to detoxify from it when it is safe to do so. With an investment of more than £162 million over the past five years in front-line drug services, almost 40,000 new clients have been referred to care and treatment services for specialist assessment in relation to their drug use. More than 80 per cent of those individuals were seen within three weeks. We also know from the most recent data, from October 2011 to December 2011, that substitute prescribing—such as methadone prescribing—accounted for around 20 per cent of treatments offered.

In “The Road to Recovery”, we set out clearly the range of measures that are necessary when an individual’s drug problem is being addressed as effectively as possible. There are certain individuals for whom methadone is clearly the appropriate route to take. As I suggested, around 20 per cent of NHS treatments in this area involve methadone. It is extremely important that we recognise that the increasing number of people on methadone also require support to allow them to exit, and recover from, the use of methadone. The Government is committed to continuing to make progress on this issue. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has stated that he feels that too many people are on methadone; we are considering what further measures we can take to address that. Annabel Goldie should be in no doubt that the Government is committed to continuing to tackle Scotland’s drug problem, and “The Road To Recovery” gives us a good framework for doing so effectively. Clearly, we have more to do. We will continue to do what can be done to continue to make improvements in this area.

We are fully committed to arranging public services for veterans in Scotland in a way that meets their particular needs and aspirations. We have made considerable progress in that regard, which has been warmly welcomed and recognised by veterans’ organisations and the wider veterans’ community. The list of achievements is long, but I will mention a few. We have created a Scottish veterans fund with resources of around £320,000; given priority national health service treatment to veterans who have a service-related condition; launched the veterans first point service with NHS Lothian; and provided Combat Stress with £1.7 million for the provision of specialist mental health services. We are continuing to make progress in improving services for veterans overall, in light of the United Kingdom Government’s armed forces covenant. In that regard, we will publish a new strategy for further action later this spring.

The member might be aware that veterans who find themselves homeless or threatened with homelessness or who have a high level of housing need receive priority within the social housing sector in Scotland. We have highlighted to the UK Government our concerns around its welfare reform agenda and in particular some of the issues around housing benefit. We will continue to make representations in that regard. However, I would prefer not to be in a position in which we can only make representations; I would prefer to take action to deal with the issue. Until this Government and this Parliament have the necessary powers, we will continue to be at the mercy of UK Governments on such issues. Veterans will continue to receive priority by virtue of being in one of the reasonable preference groups in relation to social housing. We will continue to do what we can to help to support those veterans who might find themselves in difficulty as a result of policy decisions that have been made in other places.

In addition to our substantial funding commitment, national guidance was issued to every national health service board in February setting out our ambition to dramatically increase pump provision for children and adults across Scotland. By the end of March 2013, insulin pump therapy will be made available to 25 per cent of children and teens with type 1 diabetes within NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. In addition, we expect to see a dramatic increase in the number of pumps for adults with type 1 diabetes over the next three years.

We expect all boards, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, to take immediate action to start to increase the number of insulin pumps that are available to all age groups, including adults, but children and young people in particular. We have asked each health board, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, to provide us with a detailed action plan for how it intends to achieve that increase. We expect those plans to be submitted by all health boards shortly. We will continue to scrutinise those plans once they have been submitted to monitor the progress that has been made by individual boards towards achieving the increase that we want in the provision of insulin pumps. The member can be reassured that, given the clear commitment that the cabinet secretary has given on this matter, we will scrutinise closely the progress that boards are making on this matter. We expect immediate improvements to start to be made by boards in the coming year to ensure that what we see as the right level of availability of insulin pumps to young people in Scotland is achieved.

All four United Kingdom chief medical officers recently wrote to health professionals to reiterate the current advice on vitamin D supplementation for at-risk groups. That followed a Scottish awareness-raising leaflet that was aimed at the general public and which was distributed widely in 2011. In recent years, a wide variety of reports have linked vitamin D to various different conditions. The Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition is considering all the relevant evidence in its current review of recommended supplementation levels.

I recognise the widespread interest in vitamin D. As I said, the Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition is currently reviewing the recommendations on vitamin D supplementation. Some of the evidence that links vitamin D with MS to which the member referred is conflicting and some of it is disputed, which is why the advisory committee process is vigorous. It will allow us to consider the evidence in detail before we consider any change to the current arrangements. The committee’s report is expected to be completed by 2014, at which time, in accordance with the committee’s findings, we will reconsider the current recommendations on vitamin D. Given that the research and surveillance data show that inadequate awareness and intake in at-risk groups is a key issue, our primary focus at this stage is to ensure that we encourage compliance with the current guidelines.

The debate has been interesting. Murdo Fraser was correct to say that it is about reserved responsibilities, but members’ concerns about the future of the Remploy factories in Scotland deserve to be heard in our national Parliament. The debate has afforded us an opportunity to do that. A number of members have taken the opportunity to express their views and concerns forthrightly. Last year, I had the good fortune to visit the Remploy factory in Edinburgh at the invitation of the staff there. Although Liz Sayce’s report says that at times the factories do not have enough to do, I was struck by the amount of work that was being undertaken, from packaging through to electronics. Under the modernisation project, the factory had recently invested significantly in securing electronic document scanning and storage equipment. As a result, it had secured a contract from a local authority’s archive department to scan and store its documents. One challenge for the factory in pursuing that contract was the uncertainty about the future of Remploy factories in Scotland and other parts of the UK. Ken Macintosh mentioned the fear and anxiety that staff have experienced in recent years, which goes back to 2007, when the modernisation process caused Remploy staff considerable fear and anxiety. I know from those to whom I spoke at the Edinburgh factory that the situation has continued to cause them concern and anxiety. I agree with Ken Macintosh that the debate is not about two alternative models of employment. Supported employment has a role to play when it is suitable for individuals, and open employment has a part to play for disabled people who choose to go down that route. It is important that we get the balance correct. What struck me most about the Remploy factory was that it is more than just a place of employment; it is a community setting in which many of the staff have worked together for many years. Several members have mentioned the difficulty that disabled people can experience in getting into employment, because of the challenges that they face as a result of their disability. I, for one, accept that there is certainly more to be done. I suspect that all Governments of whatever shade could always do more to ensure that disabled people are treated with equality and respect in our labour market. There are ways in which the Government can assist with that. We are pursuing that through our new equality fund, which contains £3 million per annum for the next three years. A key element of that will be support for activities to decrease the disadvantage and inequality that disabled people face in the employment setting. A good thing is that a number of the applications to that fund for the coming year focus on assisting people with disabilities in gaining employment. We hope to make announcements on that in April. A number of members mentioned public procurement and the difficulties that supported employment organisations can have in securing contracts. The general tone of the debate has been one of recognition that progress has been made in the area. Some might feel that not enough progress has been made and that what progress there has been has not been at the speed that they would have liked. However, one of the key elements of the work that we have been taking forward as a Government over recent years is an attempt to ensure that our public sector bodies have a better understanding of what can be provided by supported employment organisations. In order to reinforce that process, we have ensured that the public procurement contract website, www.publiccontractsscotland.gov.uk, automatically alerts public bodies who use the site when an item of equipment or a service can be provided by a supported employment business, which means that they will consider it as an option. The latest data confirm that we are making progress: they show that Scottish public bodies have spent in the region of £24 million on contracts with supported employment businesses in Scotland, although I accept that more could be done. Fergus Ewing highlighted that at the start of the debate. We are determined to do more where we can.

I have conversations with my colleague, Roseanna Cunningham, almost every day, and I am more than happy to explore that issue with her. It is important to recognise that the use of article 19 is not new; it is already used for many public contracts. Jenny Marra asked specifically about the uniforms of the new fire and police services. She will accept that it is wrong to give the impression that, through one contract, we can secure the future of Remploy. This must be about ensuring that the Remploy businesses are sustainable. It is also important to acknowledge that the bodies that will let the contract will be the new police and the fire services; the Government does not purchase those uniforms. I have no doubt that those bodies will, in making decisions on uniforms, consider whether use of a supported employment organisation is the best option. I regret how the UK Government has gone about making the announcement on Remploy. Several members referred to that during the debate and John Pentland talked about the limited notice that the Scottish Government had received. My understanding is that Fergus Ewing was given less than two hours’ notice of the announcement. That is regrettable and it undermines the so-called respect agenda. From an early stage, we said to the UK Government that we wanted to be involved as early as possible, because we wanted to explore whether there were alternative models that could be developed before a final decision was made on the future of the Remploy factories. I regret that our willingness to work in partnership and co-operation with the UK Government on this matter was not reciprocated. As a result, we have found ourselves in a situation in which we now have to address the problems following the decision that has been made by the UK Government.

My colleague, Fergus Ewing, said quite clearly that the Government has to work urgently on the matter, as Helen Eadie, whose commitment to this issue I respect, has asked us to do. We will do everything that we can, in working with the various partner organisations, to see whether an alternative sustainable model can be found in order that we can retain the Remploy factories in Scotland. We will ensure that that work is driven at a ministerial level. Fergus Ewing has given a clear commitment to ensure that that happens. I sympathise with the spirit of the Labour amendment, but my principal concern about it is that it links itself to a specific model. At this juncture, we should keep all options open to try to find a way to secure the long-term viability of the Remploy factories. The Government is committed to doing that. Moreover, I hope that we will send a very clear signal to the Remploy employees who are here today that we, as a Parliament, are united in working to address their concerns and, if possible, to find a model that can work.

The committee has published a useful report and we have had a useful debate that shows our shared concern to ensure that the regulation of care services in Scotland is proportionate and right to meet the needs of the individuals who use them. In his opening speech, Duncan McNeil helpfully set out the catalyst for the committee’s decision to undertake the inquiry—the incident at the Elsie Inglis care home and the financial collapse of Southern Cross. From the way in which the matter played out in the media, it was clear that there was public concern about the operation of care establishments in Scotland—if not, to some extent, throughout the UK. It is essential that there is public confidence in the regulatory regime for Scotland’s care services. That is why the Government has been prepared to consider where changes can be made to ensure that the regime is sufficiently robust and proportionate. We are open to making such changes and, to a large extent, the committee’s report recognises that. Mary Scanlon helpfully pointed out the overall scale of social care provision in Scotland, the number of people who receive such services and the number of people who work in them. We should not underestimate the scale of that business or the need to ensure that the system is correctly balanced. We have accepted the majority of the recommendations that the committee made. I note that some people think that we have not moved as fast as we could have on particular matters. However, when we have been able to take early action—such as on the regulations on the inspection regime—we have done so at the committee’s request. It should be noted that the national care standards have been in place for almost 10 years. They have stood the test of time but there is no doubt that, given the changes in demographics and some of the challenges in social care, we must review them in order to get them right. However, it is not a simple case of refreshing the existing care standards; it is also about ensuring that they work in tandem with the standards on dementia care and the review of the social care contract that COSLA is undertaking. We need to ensure that that collection of standards works in partnership. It is better to take appropriate time to get that right to ensure that, if the standards are in place for another 10 years, they stand the test of time. Duncan McNeil also mentioned whistleblowing, as did Richard Simpson and several other members. We and the care inspectorate recognise that it can be a valuable way of highlighting concerns about care standards. The care inspectorate and the Scottish Social Services Council have been working in partnership on a campaign with care providers in the health and social care sectors to ensure that they get the message out about having codes of practice for whistleblowing. We are more than happy to consider further whether there are ways in which we can continue to build on what is already happening in the workplace to assure people that the whistleblowing mechanism is robust and will activate the appropriate mechanisms should concerns be raised. Mary Fee and Richard Simpson raised issues to do with the complaints process. They may be aware that the care inspectorate has already held a consultation on that process, which ended at the end of last year. We expect the findings of the review of the complaints process to be published this month. As a Government, we are open to looking at whether, when it comes to lodging a complaint, there should be a single point of call, so that there are no questions about where someone should go if they want to make a complaint. We should allow the care inspectorate to analyse the results of the consultation that it has undertaken. The timeframe for training and qualifications has been mentioned. We are looking at that area to see whether we can address some of the issues, but we should not underestimate the scale of what is required, given that 95,000 members of staff might have to receive some form of training provision. We need to ensure that the staffing and training arrangements that are put in place are robust enough to allow that to happen in an effective way, while sustaining services. Mary Scanlon mentioned the concerns that the committee raised about the use of psychoactive medication. We do not believe that the chronic medication service is the appropriate way of addressing the issue, because that service has been designed to improve the concordance of patients with a long-term condition with their medication, which is self-administered, often in the setting of their own home. Even the pharmacists’ professional body recognises that the chronic medication service is not the appropriate mechanism for dealing with the issue, which is being looked at as part of the review of the pharmaceutical care of patients in the community. It will consider what is the most effective way of ensuring that there is sufficient pharmaceutical care provision in our care homes. Once we have the findings from that review, in the autumn, we will be in a position to look at how to proceed. The debate has been extremely useful. There is no doubt that the committee’s report will assist us in continuing to improve the care regime for care services in Scotland.

I congratulate the Public Petitions Committee on securing its first debate—but not its last, I am sure—in this parliamentary session. I have no doubt that it will bring other important topics to the chamber, including matters that relate to my portfolio. David Stewart was right to say that the Government takes pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency seriously. I am committed to ensuring that people are treated with care and compassion and that they are given the support that they need in order to be able to lead more independent and fulfilling lives. Estimates of the number of people who have pernicious anaemia vary considerably. David Stewart mentioned parliamentary questions to which I have responded. It is clear, however, that pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency affect a great many people and that we need healthcare services that can meet all their needs. We have clearly set out our aim to be recognised as being world-leading in respect of the quality of healthcare services that we provide: the healthcare quality strategy is an important part of our commitment to making Scotland healthier and it is about putting people at the heart of our NHS. We have set ourselves three bold and ambitious shared ambitions for our healthcare services: to deliver care that is truly person centred, safe and effective. The ambitions are based on what people have told us they want from their NHS. Therefore, we want to be able to detect and diagnose pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency as early as possible and to ensure that people who have the condition get the right treatment, when they need it. We aim to offer clinicians and people with the condition the tools, guidance and support to make that happen. I am sure that many members acknowledge that primary care is often the first point of contact for people who are living with pernicious anaemia or vitamin B12 deficiency. General practitioners enjoy a high level of trust and confidence among their patients. Scotland’s population is getting older, and there is a projected rise in that proportion of the population from some 19.7 per cent to 24 per cent by 2033. The number of people who live with long-term conditions, such as pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency, is also set to increase. Through our healthcare quality strategy, we aim to build a healthcare system that recognises and responds flexibly to each person as a unique individual, by building trust and empathy and engaging people in decisions that affect their healthcare and wellbeing. Implementation of the strategy means that there are already on-going improvements in services for people who have a variety of long-term conditions. In her evidence to the Public Petitions Committee, Andrea MacArthur spoke of her hope that we could “start a process that leads to the treatment of the condition being overhauled and tailored to the individual patient’s need, rather than the one-size-fits-all policy”.—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 15 November 2011; c 228.] The “Delivering Quality in Primary Care National Action Plan” aims to do precisely that. In it, we set out the strategic direction for primary care. We say that we want care that is “increasingly integrated, provided in a joined up way to meet the needs of the whole person”, and that people should have more power over how decisions are made about the treatment that they receive in the health service. We go on to say that care should be clinically effective and delivered to the individual in the most appropriate way. However, the scale of the challenges that we face and require to address in general practice is stark, given the demographic shift. An important initiative, which is being taken forward with support from the Scottish Government, is the access to local information to support self-management project—ALISS, as it is commonly known. The project is beginning to draw together valuable information from a variety of local sources, GP practices and voluntary organisations, and to make the information easily accessible, in order to support people who are self-managing their condition. The Pernicious Anaemia Society will undoubtedly have a valuable role in sharing its knowledge and expertise, and I encourage it to work with Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, to ensure that the ALISS project properly supports people who suffer from conditions such as pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency. Presiding Officer, I will finish on that point, to assist with the rest of the debate, but in my closing speech I will try to address specific points that members raise during the debate.

This has been a useful debate and I welcome the contributions that members have made. As I mentioned in my opening speech, we are committed to ensuring that people with pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency are detected as quickly as possible to ensure that any risk of complications is minimised. However, the evidence that the Public Petitions Committee gathered suggests that there is still uncertainty about the optimal means of detecting and diagnosing pernicious anaemia. That issue was also raised by Richard Simpson. As Jackie Baillie said, we expect general practitioners to be able to identify pernicious anaemia. It is not for me to defend what is on the Royal College of General Practitioners website but, as Richard Simpson highlighted, the royal college has noted that B12 deficiency could cause a wide range of symptoms, which can make diagnosis challenging for a GP. I reassure members that we are committed to ensuring that NHS Scotland provides the latest and most effective diagnostic tools and treatment once their clinical effectiveness has been demonstrated. However, perfect diagnostic tools are not always available in medicine. Kenny Gibson highlighted some of the progress on new tests that are being developed. Our chief scientist office would be pleased to consider innovative research proposals that are of a sufficiently high standard on investigating further diagnostics and treatments for vitamin B12 deficiency and pernicious anaemia. As for further research, I understand that the Pernicious Anaemia Society is leading research at Cranfield University to identify the ideal dosage and frequency of vitamin B12 therapy. Once a diagnosis has been confirmed, the care arrangements—which will in many cases involve input from the person’s GP, possibly a specialist and other healthcare professionals—will usually be agreed with input from the patient. We would expect the patient to be at the centre of that process. The vast majority of people who are diagnosed with pernicious anaemia are getting the treatment that they require, but I understand that some members of the Pernicious Anaemia Society have expressed concern about the frequency of their treatment regimes and report on-going symptoms prior to their next injection. In such circumstances, we would expect patients to be referred to a specialist. I am sure that all members recognise that clinical decisions about an individual’s treatment are a matter for clinicians to decide, in partnership with their patients. However, I was concerned to hear that some members of the Pernicious Anaemia Society were resorting to B12 treatment outwith the NHS in order to obtain additional injections. I am sure that all members of the Parliament agree that that should not happen. A treatment regime should be determined by the patient in close consultation with their clinician. If patients find themselves in the situation that has been described, clear processes are in place in the NHS to revisit and reconsider matters, and I encourage patients to use those processes. Several members referred to guidance. I understand that the British committee for standards in haematology will publish a guideline on the diagnosis of B12 and folate deficiency later this summer. That comprehensive document will look at optimal diagnosis, management and frequency of treatment of pernicious anaemia. Comments from the Royal College of General Practitioners in Scotland indicate that it would welcome access to such updated guidance. I am happy to undertake to draw the new guidance to the attention of relevant clinicians in the NHS in Scotland, which will—importantly—include our general practitioners. Following the publication of the guidance, I will be more than happy to ask Healthcare Improvement Scotland to look at further measures whereby it can assist in taking forward programmes to help staff to understand more about the issues that relate to the condition. We believe that the vast majority of people who are diagnosed with pernicious anaemia receive the care that they require, but we are committed to supporting on-going improvements. Therefore, in addition to highlighting the latest guidance, we will continue to engage with general practitioners on accessing education and information on the symptoms and management of pernicious anaemia. I invite the Pernicious Anaemia Society to work with NHS inform to help it to ensure that the information on its website for patients with the condition is as up to date and appropriate as possible. Several members have referred to SIGN guidelines. It is my understanding that SIGN has no plans in its present work programme to consider guidelines in this area. I say respectfully to Jackie Baillie that it is not for ministers to tell SIGN which guidelines it should issue. I have no doubt that Jackie Baillie is aware of that. However, I am more than happy to ensure that the content of this debate is brought to the attention of SIGN so that it can reflect on the views that members across the chamber have expressed. I am grateful to the Public Petitions Committee for bringing forward the debate, and I hope that I have given some reassurance that the Scottish Government is committed to continue trying to improve services for patients with pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency.

Yes, I can confirm that we will allocate £5 million to national health service boards in 2012-13 to work with partners to continue to support carers and young carers through the carer information strategies. That money is on top of the £13.9 million for CIS that has been provided over the four years to March 2012. I advise the member that NHS boards should continue to plan on the basis of CIS funding being available in 2013-14 and 2014-15.

The member correctly points out that CIS funding has assisted considerably in helping to support organisations that work with carers and young carers. As a Government, we are continuing that work with our NHS boards and other partners to ensure that we provide the range of support that is necessary to assist carers, who carry out an invaluable job in society. It is for individual boards to decide how they wish to allocate the funding and it is possible for boards to award funding on a three-year basis, although any funding for future years would continue to be subject to parliamentary approval. Boards can allocate funding on a three-year basis if they choose to do so.

Prior to the launch of Scotland’s national naloxone programme in June 2011, the numbers of naloxone kits that had been issued and lives saved as a result were not collected. As a Government, we have commissioned the national health service Information Services Division to collect data on all the kits issued as a result of Scotland’s take-home naloxone programme. There are plans to publish the information in June, and it will cover the period from April 2011 to March 2012. All individuals who are offered training and a naloxone kit are asked whether the kit is their first and, if it is not, they are asked how their previous kit was used. However, not all individuals are prepared to provide that information. The impact of the programme will be measured using a baseline, and the reach of the programme will be measured by asking services to complete a data sheet each time naloxone is supplied. That will give us information on how many naloxone kits, on average, are being supplied to individuals.

The intention is that the programme reach as widely and appropriately as possible, to both specialist and non-specialist health staff. Naloxone training and awareness sessions have already been delivered to prison staff, homelessness services, carers organisations, family and community groups, and staff in Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland. We have also had awareness sessions delivered through police forces and at the Scottish Police College at Tulliallan. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency is a member of the Scottish naloxone advisory group and of the national forum for drug-related deaths, and we continue to have dialogue on what further measures we can take to ensure that the police are aware of the role that naloxone can play.

I thank the member for his question. I was delighted to participate in his members’ business debate yesterday, which assisted us in placing greater focus on some of the issues of concern in eating disorders awareness week. I also had the pleasure on Tuesday of attending, at the City Art Centre in Edinburgh, the launch of a photographic exhibition demonstrating some of the experiences that young people have had while recovering from eating disorders. The “Re-capture” exhibition will be moved to a variety of locations in Scotland to try to ensure that the issue is as widely recognised as possible, and it will be here in Parliament next week. We are also considering whether we can assist in making the exhibition part of Scotland’s mental health arts and film festival later this year.

That was touched on in yesterday’s members’ business debate. We have NHS Scotland’s eating disorders education and training initiative, but I am more than happy to consider whether we can take further action to encourage medical and associated healthcare professionals to participate in it. Such education and training would increase their awareness and understanding of eating disorders, and ensure that when someone made their first point of contact with the services the disorder was identified as early as possible and they were referred to the care setting that would be most appropriate for the support and assistance that they require. I am more than happy to keep the member informed of our progress on that.

I am aware of the report to which Nanette Milne refers. Her former colleague David Davidson was instrumental in consideration of the matter in a previous session of Parliament. Given the nature of the recommendations in the report, if it would be helpful I would be more than happy to write to the member detailing what progress has been made on each of the areas that are the responsibility of the Scottish Government.

The Scottish Government works with a number of organisations to raise awareness of issues that affect the deaf community, to ensure that the views of deaf people are heard, to reduce barriers to inclusion for deaf people and to bring about an improvement in service planning and delivery. On 5 March 2011, the Scottish Government formally recognised British Sign Language as a language and since 2004 has provided funding and other support for BSL work throughout Scotland.

I recognise the issue. It is extremely important that, within the national health service in Scotland overall, we look at how we can continue to enable the public to contact the NHS in ways that are most appropriate to them and which reduce potential barriers that they may face because of disabilities. We are in the process of developing a national strategy covering a range of electronic contacts with individuals in the NHS, which would address the very issue that the member has raised. As part of that national strategy, we are looking at the various modes and methods that people could use to access the NHS in Scotland. Contact has already been made with BSL group users and an official will be inviting the Borders deaf and hard of hearing network to provide its views as we develop the strategy.

I would be more than happy to meet Jim Eadie and the organisation to which he referred. Jim Eadie may be aware that the Scottish Government has recently created a working group to look at lip-reading provision and the availability of lip-reading tutors. We have also been considering re-establishing the lip-reading tutor training course in Scotland and we have provided some £100,000 in the current financial year to take forward that work. Members of that group include Action on Hearing Loss, the Scottish Council on Deafness, and Hearing Link. We recognise that there are concerns. I am aware of the member’s motion and would be more than happy to meet him and the organisation that he mentioned to consider what further measures could be taken forward to address their concerns.

Trends and scientific evidence suggest that lifestyle factors such as smoking, poor diet, low physical activity, obesity and excess alcohol consumption can all increase a person’s risk of getting cancer. To tackle those issues, we have implemented a framework for action on changing Scotland’s relationship with alcohol, together with a comprehensive package of measures to prevent smoking uptake and to help smokers to quit, as well as taking action on healthy eating and increased physical activity. In considering environmental factors that can increase the risk of cancer, we have implemented air-quality standards and have highlighted the importance of avoiding overexposure to the sun. In addition, we work with other bodies to ensure that food and chemical regulations are appropriately implemented and that toxins and carcinogens are monitored.

I assure the member that we consider all the necessary appropriate scientific data in relation to risk factors in development of cancers. We believe that the balance that we have struck appropriately addresses the scientific evidence to date. The Government is advised by organisations such as Health Protection Scotland, the Health Protection Agency and the Health and Safety Executive. If we should be taking particular measures on any environmental factors that they bring to our attention and that have a good scientific basis for policy, we will give those measures careful consideration.

We report progress on tackling poverty in the national performance framework and in the annual “Poverty and income inequality in Scotland” publication. The most recent figures, for 2009-10, show that the overall poverty level is unchanged at 17 per cent, although that figure is too high. We are doing everything that we can with the powers that we have, but a number of important levers, such as tax and benefits arrangements, are reserved to the United Kingdom Government. Independent analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies suggests that the UK Government’s policies will increase the number of people in poverty in the next three years. I am sure that it will come as no surprise that a majority of us in the chamber believe that this Parliament should have control of all the levers that could assist us in tackling poverty more effectively in Scotland.

We intend to publish in the next few weeks our first annual report on the child poverty element of our overall strategy on tackling poverty in Scotland. We have given a commitment to consider, following that report’s publication, the further measures that we must put in place to continue to address poverty. I assure the member that there is a strong will on our part to ensure that we do everything possible to tackle poverty as effectively as we can. I am sure that it is not lost on Drew Smith that one of the most effective ways in which we can tackle poverty is to have control of all the economic powers that are necessary to do so effectively. That will be much more effective than any working group in tackling the problem.

It is not necessarily for me to comment on the “shambles” in which Glasgow City Council seems to find itself not only in relation to money advice services and information advice services, but in its own chambers. However, I am happy to confirm that, as a Government, we continue to provide support to organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland and Money Advice Scotland so that they can carry out their important work in helping to minimise people’s risk of falling into poverty, maximise benefits and provide people with debt information. I encourage all those in Glasgow City Council to focus on what the objective should be, which is to ensure that people receive the advice and information that is most appropriate for them. I hope that their focus is on that, rather than on unnecessarily going through a tendering exercise that could create uncertainty and could reduce the overall standard of service that people receive.

I thank Dennis Robertson for securing the debate and for his immensely powerful and courageous speech, which gave us an insight into the impact on his family of the eating disorder that tragically resulted in the loss of his daughter Caroline. I am grateful to Dennis Robertson for the way in which he and his family have engaged with service providers in Aberdeen, in assisting them in considering how they can continue to improve the services that are provided at the Eden unit. I am also grateful for his willingness to support eating disorder organisations in raising awareness of the issue. The motion rightly recognises the important work that Beat undertakes throughout the UK to support people and families who are affected by eating disorders. The Government very much welcomes the work that is undertaken to raise awareness. This debate affords us an opportunity to focus on the matter. As part of eating disorders awareness week, I was pleased to attend the launch yesterday of a national photographic exhibition at the City Art Centre in Edinburgh, just up the road, opposite Waverley station. The event has been organised by the re-capture photography project, which involves young people who have suffered from an eating disorder. It was immensely humbling to see the images that the young people had captured to reflect their experience on their path to recovery. I encourage members to take the opportunity to see the exhibition; if they do not have a chance to do that this week I can tell them that some of the exhibits will come to the Parliament next week. The project has been tremendously empowering for the young people who have been involved, including my constituent Laura Caven, who was instrumental in bringing the project together. As members know, the majority of the care and support that is provided to sufferers of eating disorders is delivered in the community setting. We also have specialist in-patient facilities, as members said, at the Royal Cornhill hospital’s Eden unit and the new unit at St John’s hospital, which I had the pleasure of formally opening recently. When I opened the new unit at St John’s, I spoke to a young woman, Nicole Blackie, who had experienced an eating disorder over several years, and I was reminded of the human cost and challenging nature of living with such a condition, for her and for her family. It is clear that although eating disorders can be severe and can be complex to address, people can and do recover and go on to live satisfying and fulfilling lives. A key part of the Government’s approach is to continue to improve mental health and wellbeing. There is a range of ways in which we take forward programmes to improve outcomes in how treatment is delivered for patients, including those who are suffering from an eating disorder. Members might be aware that we recently consulted on a new mental health strategy. The consultation closed at the end of January with more than 330 responses and we intend to publish in the summer a new strategy, elements of which will have an impact on the delivery of services for people with an eating disorder. Although the plan will focus on 14 high-level outcomes, rather than on specific conditions, many of those outcomes will have a positive impact on improving our response to those who might be suffering from an eating disorder. Certain outcomes will resonate with members, particularly given some of the comments that have been made. For a start, we want to make further progress on mental health prevention and promotion. We want to prevent mental ill health in the first place—for example, we want to prevent people from developing eating disorders—but we also want to be positive about promoting healthy lifestyles and actions that can improve someone’s mental wellbeing. A number of members mentioned contacting services at an early stage. We certainly want to improve first contact with services, whether that be through a GP or a crisis intervention service, and to ensure that the quality of such contact is as good as it can be and that people are signposted or referred on to the most appropriate service at the earliest possible stage. As Kenny Gibson pointed out, we must provide information to families at the right time to assist their understanding of the condition. We also want care and treatment that are based on good evidence to ensure that they have a direct impact on the individual concerned. That said, we must recognise that the way in which a person with an eating disorder or, indeed, another mental illness will present will be individual to them and services must be tailored and flexible enough to ensure that, as Malcolm Chisholm and Richard Simpson suggested, they focus on the whole person and their individual circumstances. I also want to ensure a better understanding of the extremely important role that families and carers can play in helping someone to overcome a mental illness or health problem, including eating disorders. Indeed, that was made very clear at the photographic exhibition that I attended yesterday. Although those are some of the areas where I want to make further improvement, I also want to mention certain measures that I believe are having a positive impact and which will continue to improve the delivery of services for people with an eating disorder. First, we have been improving access to evidence-based psychological therapies and are delivering the new health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—or HEAT—target to take that forward. We have been improving pathways and care standards across the whole range of mental health services and are improving responses to self-harm issues. Moreover, we have been putting significant investment into improving the overall provision of the child and adolescent mental health services with which young people who present for the first time with an eating disorder might come into contact. Since 2008, there has been a 33 per cent increase in the overall CAMHS workforce.

I am well aware of that particular recommendation, given that I was a member of the committee when the report was published. We certainly want the transition from child and adolescent to adult mental health services to be improved. Members will also be aware of the see me Scotland campaign, to which Richard Simpson referred. Although we fund the campaign, it is to a certain degree independent, but I am more than happy to see whether anything further can be done to raise awareness of eating disorders. Earlier, I mentioned that we have been focusing on ensuring that there is a greater understanding that people can and do recover from mental ill health. We have been working with the Scottish recovery network on how we can identify areas in which better practice will improve recovery day services within mental health services in Scotland overall. Dennis Robertson referred to NHS Scotland’s eating disorder education and training initiative and I am more than happy to look at whether we can take measures to encourage more medical and health care professionals to engage in that initiative and raise their awareness and understanding of eating disorders. Christine Grahame and Dennis Robertson also talked about capacity and, given the legal complexities around that and the limited time that we have in the debate, I am more than happy to write to both members on that matter and set out the Government’s position in more detail. In drawing my remarks to a close, I thank Dennis Robertson for bringing the debate to the chamber. I hope that I have been able to reassure members that we have made progress in this area and that, as a Government, we are committed to continuing to make such progress and improving overall services for people who suffer from an eating disorder.

In our consultation on a new mental health strategy for Scotland, we continue to highlight the importance of action in the early years and childhood, and the role in that of child and adolescent mental health services, through which many children with ADHD will be treated. We also identify services for adults with developmental disorders, which include ADHD, as a priority for service development. We will publish the mental health strategy later in the spring. In addition, NHS Healthcare Improvement Scotland is supporting service providers through an exercise to follow up on areas for improvement and development that it identified during the scoping of the ADHD Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline.

As Malcolm Chisholm knows, we have given priority to the matter and we highlighted it in the consultation document. I hope that, in the next few weeks, we will be in a position to publish some of the detail that we have received from the more than 300 submissions to the consultation exercise. This is an area in which we want continuing progress. I mentioned the work that Health Improvement Scotland is undertaking. Part of that work is to identify exactly where each individual health board needs to make more progress on improving and developing services around ADHD. Health Improvement Scotland will then undertake a number of regional events with individual boards in order to consider how we can improve services yet further. This is an area in which I wish further progress to be made. I intend to see something within the forthcoming mental health strategy to assist in doing that.

I expect to meet representatives from the insulin pump awareness group Scotland and my colleague Humza Yousaf on 2 February.

We recognise the clinical benefits that patients can receive from the provision of insulin pumps. In the past four years, progress has been made to increase the number of insulin pumps that are available. However, I acknowledge the concern that Hugh Henry raises about the inequity of distribution across health boards. I will correct Hugh Henry: the cabinet secretary announced that by 2013—not 2014—we want to increase to 25 per cent the proportion of young sufferers who have access to insulin pumps, alongside an overall increase in insulin pump provision for people in other age groups. We are working on how we can ensure that boards make good progress in taking forward pump provision. In the next couple of weeks, I hope to announce how that will be progressed locally in health board areas.

As I said in response to Hugh Henry, we are taking forward a range of work to put in place measures to allow the more equitable provision of insulin pumps across health boards. One aspect of the work that we intend to pursue will be to look at where boards are and at what further progress needs to be made in the next two years to achieve the target that the cabinet secretary has set. In the next couple of weeks, I hope to provide members with further details on how we expect health boards to take forward provision.

With partners, we are taking a number of important steps to maintain momentum on identifying and supporting young carers. They include the Eryc and Trayc mascots and the associated toolkit for primary schools, a planned toolkit for secondary schools, work with colleges and universities, a resource for general practitioners throughout Scotland, inclusion of a question on young carers in the school census, and identification through six young carer authorisation card pilot areas. The Scottish Government also provides funding to the Scottish young carers services alliance and health boards to identify and support young carers, and we encourage local authorities and others to identify young carers and commit funding to meet their needs.

The member raises an important issue, which has been raised with me directly by a number of young carers. It is vital that young carers can continue to participate in the education system in a way that allows them to fulfil their potential. That is why we committed some £100,000 to taking forward the Eryc and Trayc initiative through the website and toolkit that were on display in the Parliament last week. A key part of that is to ensure not only that young carers are identified in our education system but that young people in our schools understand the role that young carers have, and that teachers are educated about the difficulties that some young carers face. Whether they are late in arriving at school because of their caring responsibilities or late with an assessment, teachers should recognise and understand those difficulties. We are also taking forward through the health service’s information service for carers a range of initiatives that will identify young carers, and we continue to work with local authorities to encourage them to do everything that they can do locally to ensure that young carers receive the support and assistance that they require.

Much of the respite that is provided to cared-for people is organised through local authorities, but we have provided £2 million for the short break fund in order to provide short breaks across Scotland, and some £290,000 of that has been provided specifically for respite facilities and short breaks for young carers. It is important that local authorities, in looking at how they support cared-for people, recognise the role that young carers play and provide them with the resources and support that they require in order to continue their caring role.

The Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Act 2007, backed by the health promotion guidance for local authorities and schools, outlines the Government’s expectations of individuals, schools and local authorities in promoting the health and wellbeing of children and young people. In addition, the Government has a number of initiatives to promote a healthy and balanced diet to young people.

Yes, I agree. Indeed, I would go further and say that our approach to trying to improve the diet of people across Scotland is part of our overall preventative approach to healthcare. To support that, we are providing some £7.5 million over the next three years to promote a healthy diet across our population and in particular among young people. In addition, we have three new change funds worth some £500 million over the next three years, and we intend that they will ensure decisive action in delivering more in the way of preventative approaches.

Current policy and professional practice is that any individual who approaches or is referred to a local authority is entitled to a generic assessment of their needs. There is no presumption about a particular service requirement until a holistic review of a person’s needs and circumstances has been undertaken. Any unpaid carer involved is also entitled to a carers assessment. A great deal of professional guidance and good practice material is available to local authority practitioners from improvement bodies such as the joint improvement team. There are continual improvements in professional practice as it develops in line with our policy objectives of focusing on outcomes rather than services and ensuring greater personalisation and choice for those who require care and support.

I agree with the member. Our whole approach to self-directed support in the strategy that we launched last year is about trying to ensure that people get greater ownership of how their care arrangements are taken forward. In the next month, I intend to publish the self-directed support bill, which will underpin the way in which we intend to take the agenda forward. It is right to recognise that there are occasions when, after someone goes through the self-directed support process and starts to receive a direct payment, the overall cost of their care is lower than it was for their previous care package. However, that will not always be the case, and local authorities must be sure that the resources that they allocate are sufficient to meet the needs of the person following the assessment that is carried out.

It is difficult to comment on whether what was done was correct until I know the details of the case. If the member writes to me with the details, I will be more than happy to look into the matter.

It is important that local authorities take the most appropriate course to deliver the range of services that people in their communities require. I recognise that local authority budgets are under pressure as a result of the cuts that have come from the Tory-Liberal Democrat Government in Westminster, but I encourage local authorities to ensure that they provide a range of services to meet the needs of their local population and to help to support people to remain in their own homes in an independent way that is most appropriate to their needs.

In March 2010, the Government issued the report of the dermatology task and finish group, which included dermatology referral and management pathways to support work to improve and streamline the patient journey. In October 2010, the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network published guideline 121 on the diagnosis and management of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis in adults. There are no plans at this stage to issue any additional national guidance.

I am more than happy to engage with the member and the cross-party group to consider how we can further improve the way in which those services are delivered overall. As I am sure that the member would recognise, boards have made considerable progress in improving the way in which services are delivered for people who live with a skin condition. Those efforts have been largely reinforced by the report that was produced by the dermatology task and finish group, which has helped us to consider how we can improve the referral process and the managed pathway for patients in the national health service. We also expect NHS boards and general practitioners to implement SIGN guideline 121 in order to continue to improve the way in which services are delivered to patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. As I said, I would be happy to engage with the member and the cross-party group to find ways in which we can continue to build on the improvements that have been made in recent years and to improve the overall level of care that is provided to those with a skin condition.

Our top priority for people with MS is to ensure that the neurological standards that were published by Healthcare Improvement Scotland are implemented. They offer the best mechanism for achieving safe, effective and person-centred care. The standards will help to ensure that people get the earliest and most appropriate treatment locally, with access to specialist services when needed. That is why we have provided boards with £1.2 million to develop improvement groups as the main vehicles to take the standards forward. Through its two-year improvement programme, Healthcare Improvement Scotland has been instrumental in ensuring that that happens effectively.

Some of that work is going on right now. This month and next month, all health boards will carry out an assessment to evaluate what progress they have made over the past 18 months to two years. That will be followed by a peer review by Healthcare Improvement Scotland, which will look at and compare the progress that different boards have made. We expect the findings of that peer review to be published by the summer of this year. Those findings will inform boards in taking forward local improvement plans to make further progress in the implementation of the standards.

The Scottish Government launched “A Refreshed Framework for Maternity Care in Scotland” in January 2011. The refreshed framework contains a set of principles for NHS boards to apply in implementing local planning and delivery of a person-centred, safe and effective maternity service for women, wherever they live.

I am aware of the review of services that NHS Grampian is undertaking, to which the member refers. I can inform him that NHS Grampian’s maternity service proposals have been designated as a major service change, so they will, ultimately, be subject to ministerial approval. It is important that we do not pre-empt the board’s consideration. I encourage everyone who has an interest in those services to engage in the consultation process. I understand that, throughout January and February, the board will conduct a number of public meetings in a number of locations, including Aboyne. I have no doubt that those who have such an interest will wish to express their views during those public meetings. The Scottish Government has always made it clear that any case for change must be evidence based and must be assessed by NHS boards against the key areas of patient safety and quality of care. All relevant factors, including the public consultation element, will be taken into consideration in the event that NHS Grampian reaches a final decision and submits it to ministers for consideration.

It is extremely important that, during the consultation exercise in which the board is engaging, it listens to all the views and concerns that are expressed about any changes that it proposes to make, including those on the potential knock-on effect on other services in the area and particularly the potential impact on transport provision. We expect the board to undertake that engagement and to look at the different factors before it reaches a final decision on the matter and submits proposals to ministers. As has always been the case when the cabinet secretary has been presented with such proposals, they will be thoroughly considered to ensure that the process has been in line with what the guidelines state health boards should do in undertaking such consultation exercises. We will ensure at that point that all factors have been considered.

The Scottish Government supports a number of measures, both local and national, to tackle air pollution successfully. Those include the establishment of a statutory framework and clear strategic aims for both air quality and transport; supporting the development of renewable energy; providing grant funding for local authority actions; and providing advice and information through the Scottish air quality website and Scotland’s environment web.

The member referred to the areas in the central belt that continue to exceed the limit levels. She should be aware that the Scottish Government, in partnership with Transport Scotland, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, local authorities and the United Kingdom Government, is working on a range of measures to ensure full compliance as soon as possible. Based on a combination of current and planned measures, the whole of Scotland is expected to comply with the limit values by 2015, with the exception of one road system—largely that involving the M8—and we expect to meet the limit values once the extension has been completed. The Government recognises the progress that is being made and we continue to implement measures now and plan measures for the future to ensure that we comply with the limit values.

The Scottish Government will continue to raise awareness of the risks associated with high blood pressure through its work to prevent ill health and to improve the health of the population. The quality and outcomes framework of the general medical services contract encourages general practitioners to assess the cardiovascular risk of all newly diagnosed patients with high blood pressure, as well as to ensure that people with certain diseases have their blood pressure checked on an annual basis. Checking blood pressure is also a core component of the keep well programme of inequalities-targeted health checks.

I am aware of that scheme, and I encourage the Stroke Association Scotland to continue with its know your blood pressure campaign because of the particular benefits that can be gained from it, to which the member referred. Strokes remain a clinical priority for the Government and NHS Scotland. Between 1995 and 2010 the number of premature deaths from strokes was cut by some 59 per cent, which was a significant achievement over the period. However, we can clearly do more in that area, and much of it is around lifestyle. Eating better, being more active, stopping smoking and drinking more sensibly can all play a part in reducing someone’s risk of developing high blood pressure. We want to encourage people to look at their lifestyles in order to address their potential risk factors for developing high blood pressure. The Government is taking forward the mainstreaming of the keep well programme that will see some £11 million invested over the next three years in a way that targets people in the most vulnerable groups in deprived communities, who may be at greatest risk of the conditions that are associated with high blood pressure.

As other members have done, I congratulate Siobhan McMahon on securing the debate, which comes soon after another members’ business debate that she secured—she clearly has the knack. She has taken a particular interest in the issue since she joined the Parliament and is now a deputy convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on disability. I should say that I set up that group back in 2000 and that the first minister to address it was one Jackie Baillie, who at that time was the Minister for Social Justice. I have no doubt that the group continues to do valuable work in engaging with a range of stakeholders from across Scotland who have an interest in disability issues. I welcome the opportunity to debate the second disability history month, which helps to raise the profile of disabled people’s rights and advocacy for disability equality. Given that equality is a key theme in this year’s disability history month, it is worth reminding members of the United Nations universal declaration of human rights, which was signed 63 years ago, on 10 December 1948, in the aftermath of the horrors of the second world war. Article 1 states: “All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights”. Article 2 states: “Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind”. Those are powerful words. Our task, these many years on, is to ensure that they are not just words and that measures are taken that turn into actions across our society—actions that we take as a nation as we go into 2012. The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which followed in 2007, builds on article 1 of the declaration to which I referred. On 24 November this year, the UK Government submitted the first UK report to the UN, setting out the Government’s position and progress on the issues. The Scottish Government contributed to the report with regard to Scottish activity. Given that it is disability history month and that equality is a key theme running through the programme, I will highlight one area that demonstrates the historical changes for disabled people in Scotland. Back in 1980, 6,500 people with a learning disability in Scotland were in long-stay hospital care. The figure reduced to 2,450 by 1998 and under “The same as you? A review of services for people with learning disabilities”, no one with a learning disability was in a long-stay hospital by the midpoint of 2006. That is significant progress for people with a learning disability and is to be celebrated. However, the example also illustrates the struggle that many people with a disability such as a learning disability faced in being able to live their lives normally and on an equal basis in the community. The pathway and journey for people with a disability continue. A large amount of the money that we put into community care for adult services goes towards supporting people with a disability to live in the community. Although more people with a disability are living independently in our communities with additional support, the journey continues and there is a growing demand for people with a disability not to be supported by services that are provided by others but to have greater control over their lives and to be able to decide how they are supported and how to manage their situation in their own home and community. That is one of the key policies that we intend to take forward through the self-directed support bill, which we intend to bring to Parliament in this session. We will give people greater control over their own personal situation and the responsibility to take forward arrangements in a way that best suits them. Since the 1980s, when some 6,500 people with a learning disability were in long-stay hospital settings, we have therefore moved to the point now when I have constituents with a learning disability who are keen to use self-directed support to manage their care in a way that best suits their needs. I turn to some of the concerns that have been raised about the welfare reforms that the UK Government is taking forward. We are concerned about the speed and scale of the cuts that it intends to make to the welfare provision programme. People who are the most vulnerable and have the poorest outcomes are often the least able to cope with such significant change. That includes lone parents, people living in deprived areas, pensioners and disabled people. I suspect that history will show that some of the reforms that the UK Government intends to take forward will result in a significant change for people with a disability in Scotland and across the rest of the UK. The only point of difference that I have with Siobhan McMahon’s motion is that I do not think that the reform will have any more of an impact on the people of Central Scotland than it will on people in the north of Scotland, Liverpool or Manchester. I think that the impact will be the same—and it will be significant. As a Government, we will continue to engage with the UK Government to express our concerns about how it is taking forward the welfare reforms, the lack of detail regarding certain elements, the anxieties that people with a disability are expressing and the impact that the reforms could have on their equality and their right to live their lives in a meaningful way. We debated the issue in this Parliament on 5 October and, as Jackie Baillie, said we will have a further debate on the legislative consent motion, which will come before the Parliament tomorrow. There has been a significant journey in ensuring that people with a disability have equality in their lives and in how they are treated. As we draw to the end of 2011, we have an opportunity to consider what we have to do in the years to come to ensure that people with a disability continue to get the equality that they deserve. As a Government, we are committed to continuing that pathway. Meeting closed at 17:28.

The debate has been very positive. There are occasions on which the Parliament comes together to develop a consensus on an issue, and this has been one such debate. It is clear that greater integration of health and social care is supported by members from each of the different political parties. I have no doubt that the dialogue will continue as the consultation takes place and we move towards progressing legislation to enact some of the changes that we wish to introduce. As a Government, we will be open to dialogue with representatives of the different political parties in the chamber and with other stakeholders. Hugh Henry, in his contribution, hit the nail on the head. He made an important point about past attempts to bring about greater integration of health and social care. I acknowledge the previous Administration’s actions to try to bring about greater integration, but I say to Hugh Henry that the issue goes back further than 10 years. It goes back—as I have said in the chamber on a number of occasions—to the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990. That legislation was intended to bring about greater joint working and integration of services, but over the years that has failed to happen consistently and effectively.

Our consultation will involve looking at how we can ensure that health and community care partnerships are working effectively at a local level, and at how local engagement operates within that. I have no doubt that Hugh Henry will wish to express his view during that process. We are open to considering how we can ensure that there is effective engagement with local officers, healthcare professionals, the third sector and those in the various statutory organisations. It is important to recognise that there have been attempts in the past to bring about greater integration of services. There have been successes and examples of integration working well in parts of the country, but often in a limited way or in the provision of a specific service. Malcolm Chisholm made the good point that some errors of the past involving not being direct enough about how pooled budgets should be used might have contributed to the lack of further integration. Some integration has taken place, but aligning services has at times been a mistake for integration. Some local authorities and health boards have tried to align services more closely but have not integrated them effectively so that they are joined up for the individuals who receive them. It is clear that the change that the Government proposes can address that fundamentally. We as a Government do not underestimate the challenge in taking forward integration. Part of the challenge is to move beyond the organisational and professional interests that can often act as barriers to creating the necessary integration. Nanette Milne, Bob Doris and Mary Scanlon referred to the need for attitudinal and cultural reform in how some of our community health services and social work services are provided in communities. Dr Simpson rose— I give way to Dr Simpson. [Interruption.]

The professional bodies, along with higher education institutions, have a good opportunity to look at how they arrange their training and how they can embed more joint training. When I trained as an occupational therapist, I had no joint lectures with physiotherapists or speech therapists, although they were in the department next to me and were often in the lecture room next to me for lectures on anatomy or whatever they were learning about. We need to look at how we can embed greater joint working in training where possible. Professional bodies and higher education institutions could give that further thought. I have no doubt that NES will want to discuss that with higher education institutions. Attitudinal and cultural reform will present one of the most significant challenges in taking integration forward. We as a Government are keen to ensure that that reform occurs. A number of members highlighted the demographic challenge. I will not point the finger at any particular person in the chamber who might be contributing more to that than anyone else, but I will say that the cabinet secretary and I do not consider ourselves to be part of that challenge yet. This is not change for change’s sake; it is change because we as a nation face a demographic challenge. The number of over-65s will rise by 62 per cent by 2031 and, to add another item to the growing list of demographic changes that we have been presented with in recent months, the registrar general for Scotland projects that the number of people who are aged over 75 will grow by about 10,000 every year in the next decade. A big part of the agenda is ensuring that services are sustainable and shifting the balance of care more from the acute end to the community setting. It is fortunate that people are living longer, but many will have a long-term condition. Part of the challenge is in supporting people to self-manage their condition in the community. Shifting the balance of care will assist us in achieving that objective. From the speeches this morning, it is fair to say that our approach to CHP reform and the national framework strikes the right balance. That is about setting a course nationally and accommodating local flexibility to allow health boards and local authorities to determine how they translate the national approach into local action on the ground. On the points that Nanette Milne and Mary Scanlon made about the lead commissioning approach that Highland is taking, which I support, it is important to have flexibility, because the approach in Highland would not necessarily be suitable for greater Glasgow, given the rurality and the way that services are delivered in Highland. We as a Government are trying to ensure that we get a level of consistency in the outcomes from services that people will receive, as well as allowing flexibility for services to be delivered and planned in a way that recognises local needs. Nanette Milne raised concerns around delayed discharges. A number of members referred to cost shunting, which can contribute to that, and local authorities either taking responsibility or leaving it with the health board. The only point of correction that I would make is to tell Nanette Milne that delayed discharges are down; they are not rising at the moment and we as a Government are keen to continue to make progress on that. Our approach, with integrated budgets, allows us to get away from the cost shunting to which a number of members referred, so that there is no debate around where the budget should come from for arranging care for someone who is ready to be discharged from hospital into the community. It is not about where the money comes from; it is about where it is used.

Mary Scanlon refers to the use of independent care home beds. An important aspect of this is enabling services to support people to live as independent a life as possible. We should not get drawn into the narrow view that if someone gets discharged from hospital, the next port of call for them is to go into a care home.

Yes. It is extremely important that we look at how we can plan enabling and rehabilitation services to help to support people within the community as effectively as possible. As we take this agenda forward, we will have a good opportunity to plan services in that way. A number of members referred to self-directed support. The approach that we are taking will help self-directed support. The bill that we are planning to introduce next year will embed the existing strategy in legislation. Jackie Baillie said that part of the difficulty is that those with complex care packages can at times be funded by the NHS board and might not be able to access individual payments under the present arrangements. One of the benefits of the integrated budgets approach is that we no longer have to worry about whether the money is coming from the health board or the local authority; it is a single budget, so it is not about where the money is coming from but about what it does. The approach that we intend to take, with integrated budgets, will allow us to take away the type of difficulty that some people with a complex care package might experience at present. A number of members referred to the important role that carers play. We had a debate on carers recently and this Government recognises the very valuable role that carers play in Scottish society in supporting people within their own home.

We have made very clear our commitment on that. As of next year, for the following three years, 20 per cent—not up to 20 per cent—of the change fund will be for the purposes of carers services. We must look at how we can take that forward. The guidance that has been issued to local authorities and health boards makes it very clear that the money should be used to help to support the development of carers services and to work with other services in supporting carers’ needs. In recognising the role of carers, Richard Simpson made a point about emergency admissions. It is fair to say that emergency admissions are down at present, but support to carers can play an important role in helping to avoid such admissions. Some of the work that we are taking forward—with funding—with Enable will allow us to look at how we can make more of emergency planning for carers, to avoid unnecessary emergency admissions within the NHS. That in itself will help to embed that practice across local authorities. There is further work to take forward in that area. It is clear that the message from this chamber and this Government is that change is going to happen in how we deliver health and social care in the community. Notwithstanding some members’ concerns about the ADSW’s views on the issue, it has been helpful to the Government in our dialogue in recent months and weeks and I have no doubt that it will play a constructive part in the future. The debate is not about whose proposal is better or whether Labour proposed a national care agency or not; it is about getting this right and making sure that we focus more on outcomes. It is about delivering services that are in people’s best interests. On that basis, I ask members to support the motion and the amendment and to recognise Parliament’s commitment to the proposal.

In 2005, the Scottish Government launched the national strategy for survivors of childhood sexual abuse. As part of the strategy, we have funded awareness raising and training for staff in statutory and voluntary organisations to help them to support adults who access those services to disclose their abuse. Since 2008, a national programme of work on improving the healthcare identification and management of gender-based violence has taken place throughout NHS Scotland. To date, approximately 2,800 staff from mental health, substance misuse and maternity services have been trained in routine inquiry.

The member referred to the Open Secret physical health service, which has been funded for the past two years by the Scottish Government because we recognise the importance of that area of work. The member will be aware that the Government recognises the need to increase awareness among professionals of the physical effects of childhood sexual abuse. That is why physical health and complex trauma continue to be a priority for the national strategy and in our funding of that strategy. We will continue to work with Open Secret to consider further measures that we could take to ensure that there is greater awareness among other healthcare professionals and that they are sensitive to the needs of survivors of childhood sexual abuse.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy met with Iain Duncan Smith on 15 September 2011 to discuss the Welfare Reform Bill and related welfare reform matters, including the Scottish Government’s interests in relation to the proposed devolution of housing benefit, to kinship carers, to the impact of the reforms on devolved social care policy and to a requirement that the consent of Scottish ministers be sought before regulations are made, where they are material to Scottish interests. The Scottish Government is continuing to progress discussions with the UK Government around the need to ensure that the Scottish Parliament is properly advised of all the likely impacts of welfare reform changes.

I acknowledge the concerns that the member has referred to about the impact on disabled people. I am conscious that the Health and Sport Committee has today published its report on the proposed changes to welfare legislation. It is extremely important that we take time to consider the issues that are highlighted in the report and to recognise the serious concerns about the potential impact that the changes could have on some of the most disadvantaged people in our community. I am sure that everyone would recognise that there is always benefit in simplifying the welfare benefits system. However, it is not acceptable to do so in a way that would disadvantage some of the most vulnerable members of our society. In the discussions that we have been having with UK ministers and at official level we have been highlighting those concerns.

Clearly, we will have to consider the way in which the Welfare Reform Bill is implemented and the impact that that will have on passported-benefits provision through Scottish Government policies. That is an area that we will have to review once we have the detail. Part of the problem in addressing issues is the lack of detail around the Welfare Reform Bill. On the concessionary travel scheme that we operate as a Government, there are no plans for that to change.

We issue no such guidance. NHS boards are responsible for planning the provision of healthcare services to meet the assessed needs of their resident populations.

Earlier this year, NHS Lanarkshire announced its proposals to make changes in how it delivers radiology services. Although the proposals do not constitute a major service change, we have made it clear to NHS Lanarkshire that we expect it to liaise closely with the Scottish Health Council to ensure that it has continued and appropriate engagement with local stakeholders to address concerns that they may have around transportation issues, in particular, and to ensure that their concerns are addressed effectively as the board develops its services.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to open this debate on behalf of the Government. Violence against women is never acceptable and has no place in modern Scotland. I have no doubt that the whole chamber can agree on that. There is long-standing cross-party support in Parliament for tackling violence against women, which is reflected in the work that has been undertaken over the years by the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children. The group has reconvened in this session. In previous sessions, the group provided an important forum for MSPs of all parties to hear more about the work that is being done to address violence against women in Scotland, to identify areas of concern and to seek parliamentary support to address them. The group’s new convener, Malcolm Chisholm, has a long and distinguished record of addressing these issues and I am sure that the group will be safe in his hands. The issue of violence against women cuts right across the Scottish Government. Ministers with portfolio responsibilities for finance, employment and sustainable growth, for health, wellbeing and cities strategy and for children and young people have all recently attended a variety of events on the issue, such as the premiere of a film made by a group of young experts who have provided the Government with advice on domestic abuse, and the launch of a scheme that is aimed at supporting employers to tackle violence against women. We are also very aware of the value of the work that has been done to end violence against women and to support victims. Although the Government’s budget is under considerable pressure at present, I am pleased to tell members that we will continue our commitment to support this area of work at the current levels over the next three years. That is because we recognise that, although we have invested some £55 million in the area over the past four years, a great deal of work still needs to be done. In order to achieve the ultimate aim of making violence against women a thing of the past, we need to increase our focus on prevention and early intervention. Prevention is about stopping violence from occurring in the first place and early intervention can assist in decreasing the likelihood of violence recurring. A positive example of that is the work of the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust, which includes the role of co-ordinating the national violence against women prevention network. It connects organisations and individuals who are engaged in such work and enables them to share information and resources, to promote good practice and to develop stronger links. In addition, the implementation in NHS Scotland of the proactive routine inquiry approach means that people who present to maternity, mental health, substance misuse, accident and emergency, sexual health and community nursing services are now asked direct questions about abuse. That form of early intervention aims to identify at as early a stage as possible those who may be at risk of violence or who have been the subject of it. In recognition of our greater emphasis on prevention and early intervention, we have a separate strand of prevention-focused funding to drive forward positive change at a national level. Although we aim to banish violence against women to the history books through prevention and early intervention, we recognise that we must support those who are experiencing and dealing with the consequences of violence in the here and now. Therefore, I assure the chamber that we do not intend to neglect front-line services. We will work to ensure that the work that is necessary to protect women and children continues to be taken forward. Before I continue, I would like to congratulate Scottish Women’s Aid on its 35th anniversary and to thank it for ensuring that effective responses to domestic abuse have not been allowed to fall off the agenda of the Government or service providers. So much has changed for the better in how we address domestic abuse and all forms of violence against women over the past 35 years, and Scottish Women’s Aid has played an extremely important role in driving that change. I have pledged my support for its together we can stop it campaign, and I look forward to it continuing to further improve Scotland’s response over the next period. In a time of spending constraint, we need to focus on the outcomes that we wish to achieve to an even greater extent than we have in the past. The work that Scottish Women’s Aid, in collaboration with the national violence against women network, initiated to develop the Scotland’s violence against women outcomes framework will assist us greatly in focusing on those outcomes. That framework will help the link to be made between local activities and long-term, high-level outcomes. It will also enable funding to be more strategically linked to long-term outcomes. The Scottish Government has adopted the framework, and I am pleased that we will support the development of its indicators in the new year. The document “Safer Lives: Changed Lives”, which we produced in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in 2009, provides a shared understanding and approach that guides the work of all partners in tackling violence against women in Scotland. Much progress has been made since “Safer Lives” was published. To acknowledge that and to recognise our increased emphasis on prevention, we will produce a refresh of that document, which we anticipate will be available in spring 2012. The new document will help to drive forward further progress at both national and local levels.

The domestic abuse court in Glasgow has proved to be highly effective over recent years. Work is being done to establish a similar court in the Lothians and a tool has been developed, whose use is to be rolled out across all the sheriffdoms in Scotland, to make sheriffs more aware of the role that they can play by being more sensitive to the needs of people who have suffered domestic violence. It is important to recognise that the Glasgow model cannot necessarily be applied effectively to other sheriffdoms, particularly those in rural areas. We must recognise that sheriffs have an important role to play in how the courts operate by being more sensitive to the issue. However, I hope that, at some point early next year, we will be in a position to see the opening of a domestic violence court in Edinburgh. This year, two acts came into force that will increase the protection that is offered to victims of violence against women—the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2011 and the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011. Both will serve as powerful forms of early intervention. With regard to forced marriage and, more recently, stalking, I am pleased that the United Kingdom Government seems to be following our lead. One of our main priorities is to improve the life chances of children and young people who are at risk as a consequence of domestic abuse. The national domestic abuse delivery plan for children and young people was successfully completed in June. The £10.5 million that we invested between June 2008 and June 2011 was intended to make swift progress by targeting resources in key areas. The plan’s legacy is well under way and we will ensure that progress continues to be made in the area. Support and leadership from the Scottish Government are essential in addressing violence against women, but we cannot address the issue on our own. Our key external partners need to play their part, and I am pleased to say that they have repeatedly demonstrated their willingness to do so. With their help and that of colleagues throughout the Parliament, we will make positive inroads to creating a future in which women and children in Scotland do not have to live with violence and fear. I move, That the Parliament reaffirms its continuing commitment to eradicating all forms of violence against women; notes the Scottish Government’s increased emphasis on prevention and early intervention to tackle this issue; celebrates Scottish Women’s Aid’s tireless campaigning for effective responses to domestic abuse and congratulates the organisation on its 35th anniversary; welcomes the Forced Marriage etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011 and the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2011 and the increased protection that these pieces of legislation provide for victims, and acknowledges the dedication, effort and creativity demonstrated by all the agencies working to address violence against women in Scotland.

The debate has demonstrated yet again the cross-party support for the issue of tackling violence against women in Scotland. There were a number of excellent contributions to the debate. It would be fair to say that the Parliament has made a significant journey in the past 12 years in dealing with the issue. I can recall from my early days back in 1999 on the Justice and Home Affairs Committee that when we started to look at some of the issues around domestic violence one of the most significant problems that we identified was the lack of recording of domestic violence incidents by the police. The way in which our police forces in Scotland address the issue has significantly changed as a result. Earlier, Jackie Baillie set out the scale of the problem and David McLetchie echoed that in terms of the overall numbers. The scale of the challenge is significant, as members will recognise. The number of incidents of domestic violence recorded in 2010-11 was 55,423. That in itself demonstrates the scale and nature of domestic violence. Alongside that, the statistics show that a woman is six times more likely to be killed by her partner or ex-partner. That underlines why we as a Government have seen it as a priority to focus on the need to support women who may be subject to violence. The Parliament has risen to the challenge. I recall, from those early discussions in the first session, Maureen Macmillan’s contribution to the legislation that we took forward. The first committee bill in the Parliament, I think, was on protecting women who were subject to domestic violence. Action by the current and previous Administrations shows that there is a continued commitment to put in place, where appropriate, legislation to assist in protecting people. Jackie Baillie was correct to say that we should now focus much more on prevention and early intervention. The challenge is to have an effective multi-agency approach so that we do those things properly and there is a need to continue the zero tolerance approach. Jackie Baillie raised concerns about provision for schools and being able to get access to resources. In that regard, the domestic abuse resource and training system—DARTS—is available online for schools to use. We also have a couple of pilots taking place. A mentoring and violence prevention pilot is taking place at Portobello and Inverclyde schools that focuses on training S4 pupils to do some peer-group work in order to promote an ethos of non-violence in schools and to challenge attitudes and behaviour. Up in Dundee, an interesting pilot is taking place to look at how we can ensure that kids have more awareness of domestic violence and how we can embed that in the curriculum for excellence programme at pre-school, primary and secondary levels. Work continues to be done on such integration, and respect resource packs that schools can make use of are available from the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust. David McLetchie made an extremely good point when he said that if we want to change people’s behaviour, we must tackle their attitude. A key part of addressing the issue in the future is to ensure that we do that more effectively. I recognise some of the concerns that he raised around sentencing policy and the approaches that courts may be taking, which there would be value in monitoring, but it is also important that we ensure that the interventions that courts use are effective. A short time in prison for an offender may give someone a period of respite, but it will not necessarily address the offender’s behaviour effectively. We must look at other mechanisms that can be used to do that. The Caledonian system, which has been rolled out in four of our community justice authority areas, is one such mechanism. It focuses on addressing the behaviour of those who have been convicted of a domestic violence offence with a view to preventing them from committing such an offence again. That said, it is equally important that we send out a strong message that the courts will take these issues extremely seriously. David McLetchie also raised the issue of domestic violence against males, and I confess that I thought that he did so in a much more constructive way than some members have done in the past. It is interesting that, since 2000-01, the level of reporting of incidents involving male victims of domestic violence has almost doubled. We have commissioned a piece of research so that we can get a much better understanding of why that has happened. Part of the difficulty in addressing some of these issues is a lack of understanding of what is causing such violence. There is further work for us to do in taking that forward. I know that there is interest in domestic abuse courts. Annabel Goldie’s point was well made, and we might consider her suggestion to see whether there is another model that we can adopt. As regards my remarks to Johann Lamont, I would like to clarify that the domestic abuse pilot in Lothian and Borders will start next month, and we will look at how it progresses.

I recognise that the ASSIST project in Glasgow has been particularly helpful, but we must ensure that we take forward the programme in a way that delivers what is necessary in individual areas. We must recognise that a model that works in one area will not necessarily always work in another. Malcolm Chisholm made an extremely good speech. I apologise to Christina McKelvie for not acknowledging that she and Malcolm Chisholm are co-conveners of the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children. I was confident that the cross-party group would be in good hands when I thought that Malcolm Chisholm was its convener; now that I know that he shares that role with Christina McKelvie, I am all the more confident that it is in good hands. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned the health programme that has been run. The routine inquiry approach that I mentioned earlier has been embedded in the normal practice of health boards across Scotland, and we expect that to continue. In addition, we have retained the post of gender-based violence team manager to ensure that that embedding of practice continues to take place in health boards throughout the country. Malcolm Chisholm recognised that, as a Government, we have decided to focus on women who are affected by domestic violence. We have done so because the issue of violence against women is a social construct, which is about the balance between the genders in our society. Women tend to be the victims of the greatest amount of domestic violence that takes place, so it is only right that we continue to have a policy that recognises that. Christina McKelvie mentioned the Council of Europe’s convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence. That is an issue for the UK Government, on which we have been in touch with the Home Office. It is looking to take a position on the matter early in the new year, and we will continue to monitor that. Marco Biagi made a first-class speech on the importance of males’ questioning the whole issue of violence against women. I have no doubt that members throughout the chamber recognise the role that they have. I say to Jim Hume that we have made a commitment to continue the current funding levels in this area of work for the next three years because we continue to recognise its value. In concluding my remarks, I am delighted to accept the Labour Party’s amendment and continue the cross-party support that has always existed for addressing violence against women in Scotland.

I thank Rhoda Grant for bringing this subject to the chamber for debate, and I welcome the terms of her motion. Like Mary Scanlon, I think that your role in bringing the issue of MS to this Parliament must be recognised, Presiding Officer. One of the most effective MSP lobbying events that I ever participated in was one that you organised many years ago in the Tun. It gave individuals with MS an opportunity to come along and meet their MSPs. It is an event that has stuck in my mind as being extremely effective and groundbreaking. Neurological conditions are an important issue, but MS merits particular attention because, as others have said, Scotland has a higher rate of MS than any other country in the world. As Rhoda Grant said, MS is often referred to as Scotland’s disease. That is not an enviable position to be in, and we share the MS Society’s position—we want to beat MS. Excellent work is being done at the MS research centre in Edinburgh, which has an important role in developing new treatments. I know that the work of the Medical Research Centre’s centre for regenerative medicine, especially on stem cell therapies, carries the hopes of many who suffer from MS. The Scottish Government is funding three research projects—at the University of Glasgow, the University of Aberdeen and the University of Stirling—and we are willing to consider other proposals for research in Scotland. We believe that a further way by which we can promote research is the MS register, which has been developed with investment from the Government and the MS Society. I hope that, in time, the MS register will encourage population and family-based research and potentially international studies in Scotland. Above all, I hope that it will help us to discover why the condition imposes more of a burden in Scotland than in other countries of the world. Our top priority for people with MS is to ensure that the neurological standards that other members have referred to are effectively implemented. They offer the best mechanism for achieving safe, effective and person-centred care and will help to ensure that people get the earliest and most appropriate treatment at the local level, but with access to the specialist services that they require. That is why we have provided boards with £1.2 million to develop improvement groups as the main vehicles to take forward those standards at the local level. Through its two-year improvement programme, Healthcare Improvement Scotland has been working to ensure that that happens at the local level with each board. To evaluate the progress that they have made, boards have completed an assessment of the generic standards. In January and February, they will conduct a peer review, which will allow us to evaluate the progress that has been made on the MS standards. That will give us a better understanding of the progress that boards have made—Mary Scanlon referred to that.

After the peer review has taken place early next year, the findings will be published in the summer, and each board will use those to inform local development plans and how they intend to move forward, improve services and implement the standards. I hope that that reassures members that work is continuing. I recognise that there are people who would like to see faster progress, but I hope that members recognise that there is a considerable task for some boards. It is important that we recognise that the standards apply to all neurological conditions and that there are many competing demands on boards, which must take such things within the overall workload. Healthcare Improvement Scotland has therefore adopted a phased approach by supporting boards to focus on agreed priorities. People who live with neurological conditions have been involved in the process to ensure that they have a say, and an event was held in March this year that focused specifically on the MS standards. I thank everyone who participated in that event, which provided an invaluable insight into those who live with MS and some of the challenges that NHS staff face in improving the overall quality of care. We have provided £75,000 for the neurological alliance of Scotland to develop its voices programme, which supports people to get involved in developing local services in their health board area. People with MS have taken part in Ayrshire, Forth valley and Tayside, and I know that a further roll-out is planned in other board areas next year. A voices group has been formed in Forth valley, which is my board area. That is a good example of the joint participation that we expect boards to take forward in the coming year. I am aware that there are concerns about what might happen to the improvement programme when it comes to an end, but I understand that boards are continuing to demonstrate willingness to continue that work. Healthcare Improvement Scotland has asked the local improvement groups to forge links with their planning services to ensure that we maintain momentum beyond March next year, and it is expected that boards will provide evidence on the links that they have achieved in progressing their improvement plans. As the minister responsible for long-term conditions, I encourage boards to ensure that the impetus is not lost, and I will take a keen interest in the outcomes of the review next year. Rhoda Grant also mentioned the integration of services to ensure that they operate in a more co-ordinated fashion. In the next few weeks, we should be in a position to set out how the Government intends to take forward greater integration of health and social care. Additionally, the introduction of a self-directed support bill will allow individuals who have long-term conditions such as MS to have a greater opportunity to manage their care in a way that is more appropriate to them. I recognise how much people value MS specialists, particularly MS nurses. Under the facing the future banner, we have committed more than £10 million to nursing initiatives over the past three years. I am also aware of concerns that those in specialist nurse posts have been drawn into other duties. Given the current financial climate, it is right that boards look at the way in which the services are used, but it is important that they also ensure that efficiencies do not compromise the quality of care. The neurological standards recognise that specialist nurses are core members of the multidisciplinary team. That sends a powerful signal about how important the role is. Boards should also bear in mind, and it is worth mentioning, that the number of specialist nurses in Scotland has increased in recent years to 2,250, including 15 MS nurses. I am particularly pleased that the Western Isles is soon to have an MS nurse. I acknowledge the efforts of the MS Society and Christine Stewart, whom Rhoda Grant mentioned, to secure that post. It is great that the NHS board will fund the post permanently once the society’s funding comes to an end. I was also pleased to hear that Western Isles NHS Board is pursuing the managed clinical network approach by supporting its improvement group to evolve into a permanent neurological managed clinical network. It is precisely that type of commitment that we are looking to see from boards across the country. We know that the standards are powerful drivers to improve services. I would like Healthcare Improvement Scotland, boards and the voluntary sector to build on the progress that has been made and to continue to work to develop services further. I hope that I have reassured members that the Government is committed to continuing to improve services overall for those who have a neurological condition. As the minister responsible for the area of policy, I will continue to monitor the progress that boards are making. Meeting closed at 17:47.

The action plan progress report that was provided to the Scottish diabetes group on 24 November shows that good progress has been made across a wide range of actions in the plan. For example, we have appointed a national diabetes education co-ordinator, funded a national symposium and taken forward measures to improve foot care provision for people with diabetes. However, a number of areas require further attention, including extending access to insulin pump therapy. That is why we also plan to increase insulin pump provision by making pumps available to 25 per cent of young people with type 1 diabetes by 2013.

Officials are carrying out the necessary work to ensure that our health boards are in a position to deliver on the commitment to increase the provision of insulin pumps. We recognise the value of insulin pumps to those with type 1 diabetes in helping them to manage their condition and also the preventive provision that can come from helping to reduce the chance that people will develop complications associated with their condition in later life. Within the next couple of weeks, we hope to be in a position to provide more detail on how we expect boards to take this forward at local level and we will be able to give members further information on exactly how health boards will translate the commitment into practice in their local areas.

As I mentioned in my earlier answer, we expect all boards to look at how they can make greater provision of insulin pumps available in their area, and that includes NHS Ayrshire and Arran. We plan to provide further information on how boards will take that forward at a local level. The guidelines that are used to identify the level of insulin pumps that should be provided are set out by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, which recently published information on the levels that we should try to achieve for those with type 1 diabetes. We are clear that we want to see further progress in the area with not only progress for young people with type 1 diabetes but an increase in provision for those who are older. We want to ensure that, where it is clinically appropriate for people to have access to an insulin pump, they are given that opportunity.

The Scottish Government does not issue guidance on such clinical issues. Professionals follow the guidelines on such procedures that are produced by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, which were updated in February 2011.

I am aware of the case to which Mr Biagi refers. The matter is currently being investigated by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, so I am limited in what I can say on it. I understand the concerns around the use of the forceps. NHS Lothian commissioned an independent review of their use, which has now reported, and some minor alterations have been made to the procedures according to which it operates use of the forceps. However, I would be more than happy to meet the member to discuss the matter further if that would be helpful, to explore whether we could consider further measures in the area.

I congratulate John Scott on securing time for the debate and on bringing an important issue before Parliament. No one should be in any doubt about the importance of the issue to the Government. After all, it was the first act of the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy, when she took up her post in May 2007, to reverse the previous Administration’s decision to close accident and emergency departments at both Ayr and Monklands hospitals. I will use the time that is available to me this afternoon to reinforce why that was and remains the right thing to do. I make it clear from the outset that neither NHS Ayrshire and Arran nor NHS Lanarkshire will make any changes to the core A and E services that are delivered at Ayr and Monklands hospitals, including the key support services for those emergency departments along with orthopaedic trauma services. The Government has been consistent in its view that the service reviews of both NHS Ayrshire and Arran and NHS Lanarkshire, which culminated, in 2006, in the recommendation to close the A and E departments at Ayr and Monklands hospitals, were flawed. They failed to address sufficiently the very real concerns of a significant portion of their local population about the centralisation of those services. As the cabinet secretary said at the time, many of those concerns were based not on emotional attachment to bricks and mortar, but on a level-headed analysis of particular local circumstances and the needs of local communities both at that time and into the future. Genuine concern was articulated at the time by many, including John Scott and Adam Ingram, that the health boards’ proposals would significantly inhibit access to A and E services and that, in particular, insufficient consideration had been given to the issues of geography, local transport and the ambulance infrastructure. There was also a recognition that the proposals would mean diminished emergency care provision in some of the most deprived areas of Scotland, where people need it most. Those concerns remained even after the consultation work had been carried out by the respective boards. Neither the boards nor—

With due respect, Presiding Officer, I am. The decision was made on both of those issues at the same time. I am trying to address both issues because they were dealt with in parallel. Neither the boards nor ministers were able to make any convincing case that the proposal to centralise A and E services would be of benefit to local communities. The overwhelming feeling in the affected areas was that the boards’ processes and their subsequent recommendations—as endorsed by ministers—paid scant regard to the clearly expressed views in their communities. The Government recognised the significant damage that the sequence of events had had on public confidence in the NHS change process. That is why we are absolutely determined not only to overturn those decisions, but to start the rebuilding of trust, which is critical to the development and delivery of a patient-centred health service. Alongside developing revised guidance to enhance meaningful public engagement and piloting direct elections to make the NHS more accountable to local people, we were determined to regain public confidence in the change process as a means of ensuring that health boards’ proposals are robust, evidence based, patient centred and consistent with clinical best practice and national policy. That is why when the cabinet secretary charged NHS Lanarkshire and NHS Ayrshire and Arran to bring forward new proposals to maintain A and E services at Ayr and Monklands hospitals, she also—

With all due respect, I am doing that, but it does not preclude us from mentioning NHS Lanarkshire.

I respect what you are saying, Deputy Presiding Officer, but I think that you are being overly sensitive to the mentioning of NHS Lanarkshire. The cabinet secretary said at the time that there would be independent scrutiny, which was undertaken by Dr Andrew Walker, who published his final report in January 2008. The independent scrutiny panel found that the board in Ayrshire and Arran had not made convincing cases for significant changes to emergency services. In other words, the report confirmed that this Government’s decision to reverse the closure of the A and E department at Ayr was the right one. The ISP recognised the very high quality of A and E provision at Ayr and it said that there was scope for further maintenance of the services and for further development in the future. Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board took full account of the ISP report in coming forward with proposals to build on the strengths of its existing services. That meant that there would be no cutback in the A and E service that is presently provided. I want to be clear that that was the case in 2008 and that it remains the case today. The Government will not countenance any proposal from either of the boards that seeks to undermine that commitment. What we have been doing is analysing exactly what the board was considering. It is right that the board is keeping its services under close review to ensure that it offers the highest quality of care for local communities and it is right that health boards keep services under review to ensure that they offer best value for the considerable taxpayer investment that goes into them. However, all boards know that any proposed service changes must be primarily based on enhancing the quality of patient care. This Government was re-elected on a commitment to keep NHS services local where it is appropriate and in the best interests of patients to do so. NHS Ayrshire and Arran has been clear throughout the recent review of services that it remains absolutely committed to maintaining the full A and E service at Ayr hospital. Members should be in no doubt, and neither is NHS Ayrshire and Arran, that that commitment includes the retention of key support services for an A and E department of that size, including critical care, anaesthetic cover and orthopaedic trauma services. In terms of future development at Ayr hospital, members will also be aware that this Government has sought to maintain a high level of capital investment through supplementing with revenue-to-capital transfers and a pipeline of revenue finance investment. In the face of an unprecedented level of cuts in capital funding from the Westminster Government, that decisive action by the Scottish Government will mean that progress can be made on a range of key local projects, including the development of front-door services at Ayr and Crosshouse hospitals—

—which will be made before the end of the spending review. I can confirm that officials are engaged with NHS Ayrshire and Arran to identify options for the development of those projects and for the phasing of expenditure over the next few years. With regard to the specific points raised by John Scott on the tracking system, I am more than happy to respond to the member in writing on that. I assure Adam Ingram that we are very clear with boards about having to target back-room functions in looking for efficiencies to ensure that resources are targeted more directly to front-line patient care. In drawing my remarks to a close, I hope that members are reassured that there is no equivocation in the firm commitment of this Government to maintaining A and E services at Ayr hospital and at Monklands general hospital. Some 40,000 people attended Ayr A and E department in the past year and 65,000 attended the department at Monklands, which demonstrates the level of need for those services within those individual areas. 13:04 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

We have introduced a waiting time target that means that by March 2013, no one will wait longer than 26 weeks from referral to treatment for specialist child and adolescent mental health services. The Information Services Division is collecting the data on a monthly basis using a live database. The data that is collected will be published when it is of sufficient quality to ensure accuracy, reliability and comparability.

That area has historically not been given the level of priority that it deserves, which is why we as a Government renewed our focus on it several years ago and made additional resource available. Up to 2009, we provided approximately £6.5 million to increase the number of psychologists who are working in that very specific field. In addition, we have invested approximately £2 million since 2009-10 to increase the capacity in tier 3 and tier 4 services, to ensure that we provide early intervention as early as possible so that people get the right clinical outcomes from their treatment. However, we recognise that there is a need to make further progress in that area, and we are working with boards throughout Scotland to make it clear that we expect them to achieve the target that we have set for them.

As part of the Scottish Government’s reshaping care for older people programme, the joint improvement team has supported local partnerships to review and redesign home care services and to develop re-enablement models in their areas. In April 2010, the joint improvement team published a step-by-step guide to home care re-enablement on its website. It held a series of regional two-day workshops throughout 2010 to provide practical support to partnerships that were considering or had started the redesign of home care services. The Scottish Government is working on an intermediate care framework, which is due to be published early next year. That will assist partnerships to design and develop rehabilitation and re-enablement services in their areas.

Clare Adamson refers to the toolkit, which I had the pleasure of launching in East Kilbride in the summer. A key part of that is promoting good physical activity among older people to help to keep them physically well and to reduce the chances of a fall. The toolkit also looks at problems that can arise because of a building’s design. We are working with agencies such as the fire service to ensure that, when fire services visit older people for fire prevention purposes, they consider situations that might cause concern and could result in a fall. We are looking to create stronger links between our national falls programme and our national telehealth programme to maximise the use of telehealth to deal with the issue. When the Scottish Ambulance Service responds to someone who presents with a fall but does not require to be hospitalised, it is working to arrange for that person to be referred to other services that might be able to intervene and provide assistance to address situations that are of concern and are resulting in falls. We are taking forward a range of measures. I have no doubt that the toolkit will be used well across the rest of the country in a variety of settings.

I understand from NHS Dumfries and Galloway that it is working with the Holywood Trust and other local charitable organisations on delivering the healing spaces project, which will be opened as soon as the new Midpark hospital in Dumfries is opened. Patients are due to move into the new hospital in early December as planned.

This is a very good example of the NHS working along with local organisations to ensure that it delivers a valuable project to patients in the area. I have no doubt that the arts project will have significant benefit for patients with mental illness who are able to participate in it. I have no doubt that arts have an important part to play in the therapeutic provision that can help to support the recovery of people with mental health problems. I am more than happy to endorse Joan McAlpine’s views on this issue.

We have no current plans to consult on extending Scotland’s smoke-free laws to private cars. Successful implementation of the smoking ban has undoubtedly already reduced exposure to second-hand smoke among children in Scotland. We remain totally committed to maintaining Scotland’s position as a world leader in tobacco control. In developing our proposed new tobacco control strategy for launch next year, we will explore what additional measures might be taken to further protect children from the impact of second-hand smoke.

As I said to the member, we are at an early stage with the new tobacco control strategy and we will look at a range of different measures that might be appropriate. We will engage with a range of stakeholders and get their views about what they want to see in the new tobacco control strategy. At this stage, we have no intention of consulting formally on the introduction of a ban on smoking in cars that are carrying children. We are committed to ensuring that our country continues to lead the world with the measures that it can take to reduce the potential risks of exposure to second-hand smoke and to reduce the overall level of smoking.

The Scottish Government’s action to reduce smoking rates, to reduce excessive alcohol consumption and to tackle obesity in communities will make an important contribution to reducing heart disease. In addition, the keep well programme of health checks will continue to target people who live in Scotland’s most deprived communities, who are at greatest risk of developing heart disease, and to support them to improve their health.

I am aware that Paisley is now a heart town and that, as such, it is part of the British Heart Foundation’s programme to target healthier living in areas where there is a high level of coronary heart disease and to get people to take action to improve their overall health. Such local initiatives are a valued addition to the Scottish Government’s overall approach. Back in June 2009, the cabinet secretary launched our better heart disease and stroke care action plan, which is about improving the overall quality of care for people who suffer a cardiac episode or a stroke and about ensuring that people take action on their lifestyle to reduce the risks that they may be leaving themselves open to as a result of a particular type of behaviour, the food that they eat or other activities that they may be involved in that could be detrimental to their health.

I open the debate by acknowledging the huge commitment and support that is provided by Scotland’s estimated 650,000 carers and up to 100,000 young carers. Unpaid carers provide tremendous support for their families, friends and neighbours, so I will use the debate to set out what the Government is doing, along with our partners, to support carers and young carers. We are now into the second year of implementation of the carers and young carers strategy, which we produced jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. The strategy provides clear direction and gives impetus to the progress that we want to see over the next five years. Our aim is to ensure that carers are identified early and supported in a timely way so that they can be sustained in their caring role. With that aim in mind, we have implemented a number of measures and continue to work on more within the strategy. Carers tell us that it is often the small things that can make a real difference—for example, a general practitioner giving a carer time and being sensitive to the impact that caring can have on them. In order to address that, we have been working with the Royal College of General Practitioners in Scotland and other partners to produce guidance for all GPs in Scotland on identifying and supporting carers and young carers. I was pleased to launch the guidance recently at a GP surgery in Dundee that has given very strong leadership in its commitment to identifying and working with carers. It was clear from the carers whom I spoke to on the day that that approach was an important part of supporting them in their caring role. We now intend to roll out the guidance across the country. We have also been working with health boards to provide carers and young carers with more support, and through the carers information strategies we have provided some £14 million up to 2012. The resources are giving real impetus to the undertaking of carers assessments and the provision of information and advice, carer training, workforce development and support for carers’ health and wellbeing. A significant part of health board carers information strategy funding is going to carers centres and young carers projects for essential work, amounting to about £2 million in the current financial year. Recently, I was pleased to hear at first hand from the staff and carers at the Princess Royal Trust for Carers greater Pollok carers centre about how the carer information strategy moneys allocated by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde will fund training and support for parents of children with autism. For the parents to whom I spoke on the day, that has made a very significant change in their caring situation. Health boards, along with partners, are also taking forward workforce development programmes, because we know that a well-informed, trained, and skilled health and social care workforce is essential to the improvement of the lives of carers and young carers, and we expect boards to continue that work. We recognise that carers are often concerned about having plans in place for an emergency that may arise, or for the future when they are no longer around. That is why we have funded Enable Scotland to work in partnership with other organisations on the issue of emergency planning to ensure that we make further progress in addressing that area. Enable has researched the provision of emergency planning that exists across Scotland and has held a national event to consider how emergency planning can be further embedded, particularly in carer assessments. We want to see further progress in this area once we have the final report from Enable. I also hear a lot from carers about the importance of access to regular, personalised, flexible short breaks. Such breaks continue to be one of the most important ways that we can support carers and the people they care for. Timely interventions maintain carers’ capacity, reduce the need for paid service delivery to the cared-for person and keep carers healthy, reducing their own need for support. Most funding for short breaks will be provided through local authorities, and all local authorities have an on-going role in supporting such breaks. In addition to local authority provision, we have provided further investment to the voluntary sector to provide short breaks. We provided £1 million last year and £1 million this year to Shared Care Scotland, which developed the short breaks fund with other national carers organisations. The fund has worked well: through it, 100 voluntary sector projects are supporting more than 6,000 carers, kinship carers and young carers to enjoy a break. I want to challenge misinformation around the overall increase in respite that has been supported by the Scottish Government. Figures that we published in October show that provision of respite weeks Scotland-wide increased by 10,600 weeks between 2007-08 and 2010-11, thus exceeding our target. The concordat commitment is at a national level and did not include any requirement for respite provision to increase in every single council area. That said, I am of course disappointed that nine councils should deliver fewer respite weeks in 2010-11 than in 2007-08. No doubt, members here today will wish to pursue that with the local authorities concerned, which may be in their constituencies. Our priority has been to present comparable figures for each council area over time. A couple of areas were in effect double-counting for some of but not all their respite provision. We went back to the councils concerned for revised calculations. The recalculated figures show that our target on respite weeks was still met. The respite figures provide the best estimate of the change in respite provision in Scotland over the past three years, but we aim to improve the consistency of data among councils and will work on that over the coming year. However, I recognise that we can do more to support short breaks. Members will be pleased to know that I will launch a £2 million short breaks fund for disabled children and their families next week to assist families in getting access to short, flexible breaks. We also recognise the need to identify and support black and minority ethnic carers in a culturally competent and sensitive way. The carers information strategy funding is helping to do just that. We have funded a minority ethnic carers organisation to produce a BME audit tool, which will be published shortly. It will assist the statutory and voluntary services in both planning and delivering support to BME carers. I have already mentioned young carers several times, as many of the developments support both carers and young carers, but I want to refer to some specific developments for young carers. With partners, we are working with the education sector, the national health service and social work services to support young carers. Young carers will be identified in the school census from next year, which should give us a clearer understanding of the number of young carers in our schools and allow teachers to be more aware of their particular needs. We have also funded the Scottish young carers services alliance to produce the Eric and Tracy website and characters to help identify primary-age young carers. I will shortly launch a toolkit for use in primary schools across Scotland in order to take that forward. In going forward, it is important that we continue to respond to issues highlighted by our young carers. Access to appropriate information from clinicians for the person whom they care for has been identified as a key issue that young carers would like to see addressed. As a result, we are funding six pilot areas for a young carers authorisation card. That is at an early stage and planning is still under way. However, NHS Dumfries and Galloway is likely to be the first area to launch the pilot early in the new year. We hope that the card will enable health professionals to better take account of young carers’ knowledge about the person whom they care for and to share appropriate medical information with them at given times. We have funded the young carers festival for the past four years—I know that some members in the chamber today have visited it. It would be fair to say that the festival was a bit muddy this year, but it remained a good, fun occasion, with a special appearance by McFly. The festival is a fantastic event that allows young carers to take a break and simply to be young people. I know from the many young carers whom I have met in recent months that they greatly value the young carers festival and that they wish to see it continue. I confirm to members today that, pending Parliament’s approval of our budget, we will fund the festival in the coming year. It is crucial that we do not address carers’ and young carers’ needs in isolation. The Government is pursuing a range of policies that carers and young carers can benefit from. Our policy on self-directed support, which will give individuals greater choice and control over their care, will benefit carers and the person for whom they are caring. Similarly, the Scottish strategy for autism, which I launched earlier this month with more than £13 million of new funding, is intended to improve the quality of life for individuals on the autistic spectrum and their families. Given the importance of maintaining older people’s independence at home or in a homely setting, we have made the commitment that at least 20 per cent of the change fund will be dedicated to supporting carers of older people to continue in their caring role. That amounts to more than £40 million over a three-year period. That is a significant level of investment that will have a real impact. I also want to provide some reassurance that this is an area in which we expect the additional resource not to replace the existing resource that is being provided by local authorities and health boards for carers services. The new guidance that has been issued on the matter makes that clear.

We have 32 local delivery change plans in place. They must be signed off by the health board, the local authority and the third sector. When a bid is made for the money from the change fund, if the third sector or any other party is not convinced that the plan will deliver what it is intended to deliver, they do not have to sign it off. Clearly, questions would be asked by Government about why that had occurred, and the funds would not be released. It is important that all the partners are involved in making decisions about how the change fund is used. Clearly, the involvement of the third sector will give carers organisations an opportunity to be directly engaged in the process. We have made progress in a number of areas in taking forward our carers and young carers strategy. We are doing that in partnership with a wide range of organisations. Carers are, of course, vital partners as we take forward implementation. I have no doubt that members will want to highlight the areas where they believe that progress has been made and those where they wish further progress to be made. The Government is committed to implementing the carers and young carers strategy in the coming years. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the commitment and support provided by Scotland’s estimated 650,000 carers and 100,000 young carers; recognises the benefits to families, local communities, Scottish society and the economy that the important caring role brings; agrees that sustaining carers in their caring role results in positive outcomes for carers, the cared-for person and that it helps to shift the balance of care from institutional settings to the home; welcomes the progress that is being made with implementation of the Carers and Young Carers Strategy for Scotland 2010 - 2015, Caring Together and Getting it Right for Young Carers, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to ensure that from 2012-13 onwards, at least 20% of the Change Fund spend for older people’s services will be dedicated to supporting carers to continue to care for older people.

This has been a constructive debate and I welcome the tone in which it has been conducted. There is general recognition that, in the first year of the strategy’s implementation, progress has been made. However, I am in no doubt whatsoever that being a carer is demanding. It is in no one’s interests to delude themselves that everything out there is fine and perfect for carers. That is not the case. The strategy seeks to put in place measures that will help to support carers in their difficult task. Some members have shared their experience of progress. Nanette Milne referred to the VSA project up in the north-east—and I believe that she mentioned the chill out zone—which is helping to support young carers in their difficult role. Progress has been made in recent years to help support the development of that kind of work—doing which is exactly why the strategy has been put in place. I do not want anyone to go away after listening to or reading this debate with the idea that the Government thinks that everything is perfect for carers. Progress has clearly been made, but there is certainly more for us to do. In his opening remarks, Richard Simpson said that some carers do not feel that they are equal partners. He is right. Too often, the carer’s role is not recognised in the way that it should be by the professionals who work with families. That is why, through the self-directed support strategy—and the self-directed support bill—we intend to give carers a much clearer role in the personalisation of care arrangements. We will address the issue raised by Fiona McLeod—that of exceptional circumstances in direct payments. In the bill, it is not intended to allow that kind of exceptional circumstances to continue. It will allow the cared-for person and the carer to have much clearer control over the way in which care arrangements are managed. That will ensure that the care arrangements are much more suited and tailored to their needs. Almost every member has mentioned the importance of short breaks for carers. I much prefer the term “short breaks and respite”, because I always think that short breaks give someone a period of respite. We need a definition that allows flexibility for periods of respite or short breaks, to take a person’s needs into account. Barnardo’s is keen to tighten the definition, but other carers organisations are not keen, because it might restrict the nature of a short break that might help in supporting an individual family. There is a balance to be struck in the definition, so that we do not exclude particular forms of short break that could benefit individuals.

I will put my old care manager hat back on. In that situation, you would try to have short breaks running in parallel for those individuals. That might involve someone going into a particular establishment, or it might involve other carers coming in to support an individual. There is no point in organising a short break for someone who is caring for two individuals if it does not allow anyone to get the benefit. That will be for a care manager to co-ordinate, and not for Government to direct. A bit like Mark McDonald, I was brought up in a house in which my mother was a carer for 12 years, while my grandfather stayed with us. I know from that and from my experience as a care manager that it has always been challenging to ensure that people who are carers get as many short breaks as they would like. There has never been a time when carers have always been able to get as many short breaks as they would like, and I recognise that it is important that we provide them with as much support as we can at the most appropriate times. Richard Simpson, Nanette Milne, Dennis Robertson and others mentioned the importance of the integration of health and social care. It is extremely important that the system operates in a joined-up fashion and that we do not have carers repeating themselves time and again to different professionals in order to access the services that they require. That is a key reason why we as a Government have attached such priority to taking forward the integration of health and social care. A great deal of work and thought have gone into that, and we hope to be in a position to make further announcements on the detail of how that integration will operate in the coming weeks and months. Several members raised issues around the change fund. Bill Kidd, James Dornan and Richard Simpson all welcomed the decision whereby 20 per cent of the change fund will be used to help support carers. I should say that that does not mean that 20 per cent of that fund will go to carers organisations; the money will be used to support services that will help to support carers, directly or indirectly. We need to look at things holistically so that we ensure that we provide as much support as we can for carers, particularly those who are elderly. The important thing here is to ensure that everyone who is involved in making care arrangements and all the partner organisations are signed up to the change fund plans for each of the local authority areas. That is why the local authority, the health board and the third sector all have to be signatories to the change plan before it is submitted to Government for us to consider whether it should be allocated funding. The new guidance that we have issued for the forthcoming financial year makes it clear that we expect the money that is used to help support carers and services that can assist them to be in addition to what health boards and local authorities presently provide. Some members mentioned issues to do with Glasgow City Council. I have offered to meet the council to discuss self-directed support, the concerns that exist about the way in which the change fund is operating and the difficulties that some third sector organisations are having in taking it forward. I hope that the council will take up that offer. Several members asked about our commitment to a carers’ rights charter. That work is at a highly advanced stage, and we hope to be able to make an announcement on it shortly. We are working to ensure that the charter is tailored to fit with the patient rights charter and the dementia charter and to work in a co-ordinated, joined-up way. Taking a little extra time to ensure that we get the detail of it correct will be time well used, but I hope to be in a position to make an announcement on it very soon. Points were made about emergency planning. Richard Simpson emphasised the situation of those who care for people with a learning disability. That is exactly why we asked Enable Scotland to undertake a piece of work for us. It has issued an interim report, on which it is building. Once we have its final report, we will look at what measures we must put in place to ensure that there are better emergency planning arrangements for carers. In addition, we are looking at the outcomes from “The same as you?” report to see how we can build on it. That might take the form of a same-as-you mark 2 process, which we could take forward next year. Finally, several members have raised the issue of young carers and education. George Adam mentioned the experience of one of his constituents. One reason why we have introduced the programme to help support teachers is to ensure that they have a greater awareness of the difficulties that some young carers can have. They might be late for class or not get their homework in on time because they are caring for someone. That programme will continue. It has been a welcome debate, and I am thankful for the many constructive speeches that have been made. The chamber can be left in no doubt that this Government is committed to working with carers organisations and carers to ensure that they receive the support and assistance that they need to perform the extremely valuable role that they play in our communities in Scotland.

Compliance with food safety legislation by food businesses is monitored and enforced by local authorities, the Food Standards Agency and the Scottish Government. The Food Standards Agency is also responsible for auditing food law enforcement activities for which it is the competent authority.

My colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment remains committed to protecting the interests of egg producers who have invested significant sums of capital to comply with the ban on conventional cages from January 2012. He and his officials are working closely with the UK Government, which is maintaining pressure on the European Commission and non-compliant member states to ensure that eggs from conventional cages are not freely traded in EU markets. It is in our interests to help the Commission to find a solution to the issue, particularly as the agreed approach is likely to set a precedent for the sow stall ban, which will come into force in January 2013. The Government recognises the need for a level playing field in the area and it will continue to work to achieve that.

I congratulate Siobhan McMahon on securing time for this important debate. It has been a very good debate. I also welcome those in the public gallery who have come along for the debate, particularly Charles Fawcett, whose interest in healthy living goes way beyond Lanarkshire. I share his interest in Malawi and we have a shared friend in Sister Anna Tomassi. This has been an opportunity to reflect on what more we can do to ensure that children and others in Scotland are better prepared to deal with sudden cardiac arrests. It should be recognised that there has been a 59 per cent reduction in the number of premature coronary heart disease deaths in Scotland since 1995, which is significant progress. Nevertheless, our action plan for heart disease makes it clear that we need to do more to ensure that people have access to the best possible care as quickly as possible. So far, we have invested £7.5 million in state-of-the-art defibrillators for all Scottish Ambulance Service ambulances. We have also recognised that delay in performing defibrillation can be a significant factor in attending to someone who is having a sudden cardiac arrest. That is why we have increased the provision of automated external defibrillators, which can help to support someone at a very early stage. As Richard Simpson said and Helen Eadie acknowledged, the defibrillators are extremely easy to use. I have been trained to use one in mountain rescue and know that they are literally idiot proof—they would have to be for some members of my team. They work extremely well and must not be used inappropriately if they are not necessary at the time. The importance of prompt action was highlighted again last week with the news that a defibrillator based in a Zurich football stadium was used to help former Scottish Football Association chief executive David Taylor after he suffered a heart attack in September. I have no doubt that colleagues will join me in wishing him well. Placing defibrillators in stadiums is consistent with international guidelines, which indicate that public access defibrillators should be placed in areas of high footfall. As part of its community resilience scheme, the Scottish Ambulance Service is currently improving access to PADs throughout remote, rural and urban communities in Scotland. The Ambulance Service is working with Scotmid—as Hugh Henry said—and the British Heart Foundation to map the locations of premises against response times to identify locations where PADs are likely to save more lives. It is also helping Scotmid to purchase and install in-store defibrillators in 40 shops, which involves training and supporting staff. In addition, the Ambulance Service is looking to record PAD locations so that, when a member of the public calls the service about a cardiac event, they can be directed to the closest PAD. Community resuscitation development officers are based throughout Scotland. They are helping to build community resilience by increasing the number of community first responders and providing training in basic life support across communities. I would like to highlight the importance of community support in all of this. Dave Thompson referred to the Lucky2BHere charity in Skye, which has been rolling out CPR classes across Skye and is now looking to take those further afield. That has worked extremely successfully. The curriculum for excellence was introduced in all schools in Scotland in August 2010. Its purpose is encapsulated in the four capacities: to enable children and young people to become successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors. The Scottish Government has also set the following national outcomes: for our children to have been given the best start in life and to be ready to succeed; for their life chances and those of their families to have been improved; for us to have strong, resilient and supportive communities; and for the significant inequalities in society to have been tackled. The curriculum for excellence has an important role to play in promoting health and wellbeing for children and young people, and all of those in the education communities to which they belong. Health and wellbeing is now a curricular area in its own right, with a prominence akin to literacy and numeracy. Learning in health and wellbeing ensures that children and young people develop the knowledge and understanding and the skills, capabilities and attributes that they will need for mental, emotional, social and physical wellbeing now and in the future. That learning will promote excellence, confidence and independent thinking in young people. We also hope that that learning will establish a pattern of health and wellbeing that will be sustained into adult life and will help to promote health and wellbeing for the next generation of Scottish children. The experiences and outcomes in the curriculum for excellence, which describe the expectations for learning and progression that children should go through, highlight physical wellbeing. The learning covers areas such as knowledge about the human body, assessing and managing risk and the ability to demonstrate how children can keep themselves and others safe. The curriculum for excellence seeks to empower the teaching profession, enabling practitioners to teach more creatively and providing flexibility so that teachers, schools and local authorities can identify and pursue their own approaches and use their experience to deliver the outcomes. It is for schools and local authorities to decide what measures to take and what resources to put in place to take the learning forward. I agree with Hugh Henry that we should not prescribe what particular things schools should do. However, I have no doubt that teaching children about emergency life support and CPR would fit very well into the physical wellbeing part of the curriculum for excellence. Like others in the chamber, I encourage local authorities to reflect on that and on the benefit that can be gained from the teaching of emergency life-support skills and to consider including that in their curriculums. Meeting closed at 17:53.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. That sounded like I might have 15 or 16 minutes! I am pleased to open this debate on rehabilitation and enablement, particularly given their importance to and the role that they can play in the health and social wellbeing of the people of Scotland. As the motion states, it is essential that we recognise the importance of rehabilitation and re-enablement in supporting the health and wellbeing of Scotland’s population, the key role that rehabilitation and re-enablement services play in enabling individuals to live productive and meaningful lives and the importance of that approach in underpinning the future sustainability and affordability of Scotland’s health and social care service provision. I emphasise just how central the approach to enablement is to the Government’s ambition of improving the health and wellbeing of the population of Scotland, and my belief that rehabilitation and re-enablement will be instrumental in achieving many of the key national outcomes agreed both with NHS Scotland and by our local authorities. Scotland has a growing elderly population, which is testament to the many successful measures that have been taken over the years to improve public health overall and to the improvement in the standard of care that is available in the national health service. The fact that more people are living longer is not new information, but the way in which the demographics of Scotland are changing demonstrates the extent of the challenge that we face in ensuring that the systems that we have in place are sustainable and provide the best quality of care for individuals. We must recognise the full extent of the demographic shift in Scotland, the challenges that lie ahead and the financial pressures that will be experienced as a result. Let me remind the chamber of some of the challenges. It is predicted that there will be a 62 per cent increase in the number of over-65s by 2031. It is also predicted that emergency admissions will rise by 84 per cent by 2031; that by the age of 65 nearly two thirds of people will have one or more long-term condition; and that people with a long-term condition will be twice as likely to be admitted to hospital and will account for 60 per cent of all hospital bed days used. By 2031, it is predicted that there will be an increase of 144 per cent in the number of over-85s in Scotland. I believe that those statistics show the context for the need to address how we provide services and to ensure that they are both focused on the needs of individuals and sustainable in the long term. Our reshaping care for older people programme is focusing on improving services across health and social care for older people. All 32 partnerships agreed local change plans and received their allocations of the £70 million change fund available in this financial year. Following the 2012 spending review, we announced a further £80 million change fund for partnerships in 2012-13, with £80 million committed for 2013-14 and £70 million for 2014-15, to drive the development of services that optimise the independence and wellbeing of older people at home or in a homely setting. We will also continue to ensure that we address the challenges that arise even with the provision of funding through the change fund. Too many older people and vulnerable individuals end up in hospital when they should not, and too many stay there much longer than need be the case. That is why the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy recently announced new targets to reduce delayed discharges in our health settings: by April 2015 we want no one to be delayed in hospital for more than two weeks. Now, more than ever before, we need to deliver health and social care in an integrated way and to ensure that primary healthcare and community care staff work efficiently together to prevent unnecessary hospital admissions and inappropriate referrals to secondary healthcare services. Moreover, we must enable our health professionals and support staff to meet the growing demand for their expertise and interventions. That will require a not insignificant shift from traditional models of care that have tended to focus on deficits and naming and fixing problems to a model that embraces the concept of assets and sees the patient’s own experience and knowledge of their condition as a resource that can be built on to support resilience and self-management. Of course, rehabilitation is not a new concept. In fact, it was established around the time of the first world war to support soldiers who were recuperating and adapting to life after injury in service. Fundamentally, it is a partnership between patient and therapist as well as family and carers. It is not a passive process and relies heavily on the individual’s motivation and participation to recover and adjust, achieve their full potential and, where possible, live a full and active life, whatever their age. Improving community-based rehabilitation and re-enablement services is already integral to the prevention of dependency on healthcare and support services through the promotion of independent living, making better use of resources and improving outcomes for users. Although much has been done to develop rehabilitation and re-enablement services since the publication in 2007 of the delivery framework for adult rehabilitation, I recognise that we still have a significant way to go on this journey. Rehabilitation co-ordinators, directors of allied health professionals in NHS boards and directors of social work have all played an important role in mapping out services across health and social care and supporting multi-agency working to address gaps and join up service provision, particularly at key transitions between care settings. We have expanded rehabilitation and re-enablement services in a range of speciality areas such as chronic obstructive airways disease, stroke and cardiac services and have also seen significant growth in local authorities’ development of rehabilitation and re-enablement services, using occupational therapy expertise to transform the delivery of home care across Scotland. However, challenges remain in meeting the needs of those who require rapid access to advice and self-management support and in enabling the transition between services provided in hospital and community settings or for those with complex care needs and multiple long-term conditions who wish to remain in their own home. The earlier that advice or intervention can be provided, the more likelihood there is of a positive outcome, be it a return to work, preventing a condition from becoming chronic or avoiding hospital referrals or admissions to care settings. Indeed, such an approach will be critical, given the demographic changes ahead and the financial pressures that public sector budgets are already under.

I am aware that people wait too long to access rehabilitation services, including physiotherapy. As I develop my speech, I will try to explain to the chamber how we intend to address the issue and improve our approach to ensuring that people get more timely access to services. Current patterns of service provision are both unsustainable and undesirable. Without the implementation of rehabilitation and re-enablement strategies, the costs of health and social care for all ages are expected to rise over the next 20 years by about £2.5 billion. Now, more than ever before, we need to deliver health and social care in an integrated way and ensure that primary healthcare and community care staff work efficiently together to prevent unnecessary hospital admissions and inappropriate referrals to secondary services. To that end, we will soon be consulting on work that is already under way to strengthen intermediate care: entitled “Recovery, Re-enablement, Rehabilitation: a Framework for Intermediate Care”, its aim is to ensure that there is intervention at the earliest point possible. I take the opportunity to acknowledge the commitment, energy and enthusiasm that allied health professionals demonstrate in delivering the health agenda across Scotland. They are a key group of practitioners who support the delivery of rehabilitation and re-enablement care, and they are the only group of staff working across health and social care who are expert in rehabilitation practice at the point of qualification. AHPs have enthusiastically embraced opportunities to strengthen their role as first-point-of-contact practitioners, to extend their scope of practice and to deliver improved patient pathways through innovative ways of working. Their interventions include supporting faster access to diagnostic services and providing early intervention, as well as rehabilitation, to enable individuals to be supported more effectively in their own communities; supporting children to get the best possible start developmentally and enabling them to participate in education; enabling people with learning disabilities to live fulfilling lives; and supporting individuals with mental health problems to focus on their strengths, their recovery and their ability to remain in, or return to, work. In addition, people can self-refer to AHPs on a range of conditions, such as communication difficulties and musculoskeletal problems, as well as for foot care support and advice. Patients and carers consistently tell us that those services make a significant difference to their health and wellbeing and, importantly, to their quality of life. For individuals and families, particularly older people and those with dementia or complex needs, AHPs play a central role in helping them to live self-determined lives and to avoid unnecessary admissions to hospital or other care settings. In many areas, AHPs have taken the lead in ensuring that rehabilitation pathways for individuals are integrated across health and social care and, in doing so, have developed strong links with the voluntary and independent sectors. They have also actively facilitated partnerships and redesign initiatives that enhance the delivery of enabling services that can optimise an individual’s independence and wellbeing, and which ensure that services work across boundaries. AHPs’ leadership will remain key to the rehabilitation and re-enablement agenda, and I would like their leadership role to be further recognised and strengthened going forward. In addition, it is critical that the many good examples of rehabilitation and re-enablement practice that AHPs deliver are consistently applied across NHS Scotland to secure the maximum benefit for people across the country. There is no doubt that significant progress has been made, but there is certainly more to do. I am aware that we have improved overall access to rehabilitation services and that many people are seen by an AHP within 18 weeks, but I am equally aware that many have to wait too long to access those services, and that there continue to be gaps and inconsistencies in how services are provided. The chief health professions officer and AHP directors are now working collaboratively to address that situation and to help AHPs to manage demand and provide more flexible and responsive services across Scotland. In order to make further progress in that area, I have asked my officials to work with service leads to develop a national delivery plan for allied health professionals in Scotland, which will provide the opportunity to explore waiting times and other aspects of efficiency and productivity in the delivery of safe, effective, person-centred care. The intention is for the plan to be used as a strategic platform for future activity, including service redesign. Such a plan will be a first for not only Scotland but the whole of the United Kingdom. I expect the consultation to be published later this year, and I expect us to have finalised the plan by spring or early summer of next year. Obviously, as a former occupational therapist, I am biased, but I want to recognise the unique role that the allied health professions can play in the delivery of our health and social care agenda. We face many challenges in taking this matter forward, and demographic and financial issues will play their part in that. However, I have little doubt that AHPs have a significant role to play in the reshaping of our services. I hope that members will recognise that, in taking forward the work with a national delivery plan, the Government is committed to ensuring that we make more progress in this area.

We will look at the role that AHPs have across the board, whether in general medical services or in mental health. It is important that we are clear about their role and about how we can take a more coherent approach to ensuring that we address some of the gaps that exist in the service in a way that they have never been addressed before in order to ensure greater consistency across the country in how services are delivered and in what patients can expect to receive in their locality. I look forward to the debate. I am sure that members will express their views on the failings of the existing system and on how we should go forward. I look forward to listening to those constructive contributions. I assure members that, as we take forward the consultation around the national delivery plan, all constructive views will be openly considered. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of rehabilitation and re-ablement in supporting the health and social wellbeing of the growing older population, people with long-term conditions and those trying to remain in or return to work after illness or injury; further notes that rehabilitation and re-ablement are key to supporting self-management and enabling individuals to live productive and meaningful lives in their own homes and communities, and recognises the importance of this approach in underpinning the reshaping of community services as well as the future sustainability and affordability of health and social care provision.

Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson mentioned that the debate has been wide ranging, but it has also been useful and good. Members have raised a range of issues—some were helpful, but some were not so helpful. We will be able to consider some of the issues that have been raised in our national delivery planning. From the outset, I was keen to set the context of the debate. Malcolm Chisholm picked up on that in his speech. The demographics that we face in Scotland mean that we have to change, and not only because of the financial environment in which we find ourselves. Even if we were in the land of milk and honey and had much more public resource, we would still have to change how we do things and how we deliver certain services because of the significant demographic shift that is taking place. That is making it more difficult to create such change in the current economic climate, and it makes the environment more challenging for professionals and others to work in to achieve the necessary change. A large part of the problem is the demographic shift; it is not a purely financial problem. Several members referred to the change fund. Broadly speaking, members throughout the chamber feel that the fund is positive and can have a real benefit in changing the way in which services are delivered. Jackie Baillie, who unfortunately had to leave early, was concerned about a potential underspend in the budget and a rush to get money out the door. The fund is new and some organisations are still working together—in some cases for the first time—to get programmes together. The Government intends to ensure that the money is used as effectively as possible. The fund is not there simply to backfill services that have been drawn back; it is about transforming the way in which services are delivered. It could almost be interpreted as a form of bridging finance to try to achieve the transformation that we need in the community to allow resources to transfer from the secondary care setting. It is extremely important that we support both aspects of the service to allow that transition to take place. That is the intention behind the change fund.

That is a valid point. As I said, this is the first year of the change fund, so clearly there will be lessons to learn about how we can improve things as we progress. We have given an indication that we will continue the funding until 2014-15. Next year, 20 per cent of the fund will be for carer services. It is right that we do that because, given that part of the transformation that the change fund is intended to bring about is to provide more support to people in the community and encourage more self-management, one thing that will occur as a result will be a greater direct and indirect burden on carers. Therefore, it is extremely important that, as services are redesigned, we recognise the role and value of carers. That is why, in the next financial year, part of the fund will be dedicated to addressing carers’ needs. I have no doubt that we will be able to find some really good measures that have been introduced in some areas in Scotland through the change fund, but it is extremely important that we do not get into a cycle of reinventing the wheel. Every time a good initiative is identified in one part of the country, we must extend that practice and experience to other parts of the country. As the change fund progresses, we will be keen to encourage that to ensure that it happens. There will be considerable scrutiny of the fund to ensure that it is used as intended and that it is transforming services.

The joint future group is doing some of the work on the change fund, in relation to the local plans. We have 32 local plans in place. I am conscious of concerns about local authorities that I have heard from the third sector. One thing that we have included in the change fund is the need to ensure that measures are signed off by the local authority, the health board and the third sector, so that the third sector is at the table from the outset. However, I have heard concerns about Glasgow City Council and the way in which it is working with the third sector in relation to the change fund. We must consider how to address that. Mary Fee expressed concerns about the change fund and other aspects of the agenda such as self-directed support. Her speech largely involved her saying that we need more money for a range of measures. She is right that Governments must choose where to put their money. As a back bencher and a member of the Health and Sport Committee she has an opportunity to bring forward amendments to the budget bill to take money from one part of the health and sport budget and to reallocate it to another area if she is so minded. Given that she is nodding, I suspect that she will do that. In doing so, she will have to explain where the money will come from before she puts it anywhere else. If we are to have a serious debate about that, all members must recognise the financial environment in which we operate. It is entirely unrealistic and misleading to give people the impression that there is a pot of money that we can simply throw around. I turn to the integration of health and social care, which a number of members mentioned. Mary Scanlon says that she is frustrated about that because, since 1999, when she joined the Parliament, she has been expecting to see greater integration of health and social care. I am sorry to tell her that, when I started out as a new occupational therapist back in 1991, we were also going to have greater integration of health and social care. Therefore, I feel as though I have been treading that route even longer than she has, despite the fact that I am younger. [Laughter.] I say that in the nicest possible way. I reassure Mary Scanlon that the Government is determined to take forward that agenda in a way that has not been done before. We need to ensure that patients and others who require services receive services that work collectively to meet individuals’ needs rather than operating within their own silos—to use a term that I think Derek Mackay used—and for their own purposes. I know that Jackie Baillie is a bit frustrated that we have not made an announcement on that in the past seven months. Given the length of time that the agenda has been on the table under successive Governments, the seven or eight months that we have taken to try to ensure that we take it forward in the right way—so that we get it right and do not have any of the false starts that we have had over recent years—is time well used. The Government will present its considered view on how we drive forward greater integration of health and social care in a way that ensures real change on the ground. Derek Mackay made a good point about delayed discharge. I do not want to get into throwing brickbats about which party has done more than the other on delayed discharge. The reality is that delayed discharge is about human beings being somewhere they should not be when there is a more appropriate setting for them to go to. Our focus must be to ensure that services work together in a co-ordinated way, with a shared agenda and a shared priority of ensuring that the resource is provided timeously to allow someone who is presently in a hospital bed but can be moved out into a social care setting to move out into that setting. We will continue to work towards ensuring that that happens. A range of other issues have been raised. The number of allied health professionals has risen by 5.2 per cent since 2007. The Government continues to value the important role that AHPs play. Prevention is an important part of our spending programme. We have said that clearly. Dennis Robertson and Clare Adamson both raised that issue. Clare Adamson spoke about how we can prevent falls. During the summer, I launched a national falls prevention programme. It has a particular focus on the care home environment, which has been identified as one of the riskiest environments. That is not because the care in care homes is inappropriate but because they care for people who are much more frail than was the case in the past. About 1 per cent of falls translate into a fractured neck or femur. That costs our NHS some £73 million each year to address. If we can at least halve the number of falls, we can make a significant saving as a result. We have introduced the national falls prevention programme to try to do that more effectively. We intend to consult on a national allied health professional delivery plan for Scotland, which will be the first of its type for any part of the United Kingdom. We will publish the consultation document in December this year, and we expect to take forward the detail of the plan in April next year. I encourage members and all the organisations that have an interest in the delivery plan to make their views known during the consultation to ensure that we can continue to deliver the health and social care services that the people of Scotland deserve.

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing time for the debate, in which a number of very interesting points have been raised. Reducing prescription medicine waste across the NHS in Scotland is everyone’s business. From NHS clinicians and managers and the Scottish Government, to the behaviour of patients themselves, we should do everything we can to reduce unnecessary waste. It is important that we do not lose sight of the challenge of improving the quality of care as a whole within the resources that are available to us. We should seek to reduce waste wherever possible as we strive to improve overall service quality through the ambitions that are set out in the healthcare quality strategy for Scotland, which are that care should be person-centred, safe and effective and should happen where the most appropriate treatment can take place and appropriate intervention and support services are provided. A number of members, including Margaret Mitchell, referred to the research by the University of York and the University of London on evaluation of the scale and cause of waste of medicines in England. The Government has given that some consideration and members should be aware that the study did not find systemic problems with drug waste in the NHS or, in particular, in primary care. Although medicine waste deserves to be addressed, members will acknowledge that there are occasions on which it is unavoidable, although the study estimated that under 50 per cent of waste could be cost-effectively prevented in some fashion. As Margaret Mitchell rightly pointed out, there is more to be gained from helping people to take their medicines more effectively, even though that might increase the overall volume of drugs that are paid for. The most expensive drug, as Nanette Milne said, is the one that is prescribed but not taken. That is why we need to ensure that there is more education to support patients in taking their medication. In Scotland, more patients are registering with the chronic medication service, which is delivered through our community pharmacists and is designed to support people with long-term conditions and, in particular, to provide support in and advice on taking medication. It formalises the contribution of community pharmacists to improving the quality, safety and effectiveness of pharmaceutical care to patients with long-term conditions. Some 81,000 patients across Scotland are now registered with the chronic medication service, which offers each patient a comprehensive assessment of their pharmaceutical care needs in order to identify any problems that they might be experiencing with their medicines. The pharmacist and the patient agree the actions that are required to address the problems and they are recorded in an individual pharmacy care record that is regularly monitored and reviewed by the pharmacist. Later this year, we will further enhance that service in two additional areas. The first aim is to address early engagement with patients on newly prescribed medicines in order to increase patients’ compliance and to reduce waste. The other aim is to support patients who are on specific forms of medication, when greater support might be appropriate. That is all helping to pave the way to ensuring that pharmacists take a much more proactive role in working with patients and general practitioners in order to optimise the benefit to patients of their medication. That is also helping the Scottish Government to achieve its manifesto commitment “to further enhance the role of pharmacists ... and encourage even closer joint working between GPs, pharmacists and other community services” by capitalising on the investments that can be made through the chronic medication service. I am disappointed to have to inform Margaret Mitchell that the review is the result of our manifesto commitment to continue to improve community pharmacy, rather than the result of the motion that she has put before the Scottish Parliament. In addition, the research by the University of York and the University of London identified that systems that support closer professional management of medicine supply at the point of dispensing, such as the development of the pharmacy-managed repeat-dispensing process, might have a significant future role to play in reducing waste. We are piloting several prescribing and dispensing programmes within the chronic medication service with a view to rolling them out in 2012-13. That will allow community pharmacists to check that each medicine is required at each dispensing interval, thereby reducing the unnecessary waste that occurs through repeat prescriptions being taken when they are not required, as members have mentioned. We have already seen some promising results from the pilots, and we will continue to monitor them. The research has identified that further enhanced hospital and primary care liaison could, by improving the quality of care around the time of hospital discharge, help to reduce waste. Margaret Mitchell highlighted the benefits of electronic recording and sharing of information among hospitals, GPs and pharmacists. In particular, she mentioned the initiative that is taking place in the new Forth Valley royal hospital in my constituency. That system allows accurate recording of the medicines-reconciliation process and patients’ drugs history, prescribing by electronic transmission to pharmacies, and information sharing between acute care and community pharmacists. The pharmacy department at Forth Valley royal hospital is working on a Scottish Government sponsored project to assess the benefits of sending electronic discharge information, including any associated pharmaceutical care plan, to the patient’s community pharmacy when the patient is discharged from hospital. It is expected that the results of that project will be made available to the Government by the end of this year. We will then take an informed view of its benefits in terms of improving information sharing between hospitals and community pharmacists, and we will consider the potential benefits for patients. In addition, our e-health team has recently undertaken a pilot to allow hospital pharmacists and other hospital clinicians to access the emergency care summary to assist medicines-reconciliation activities. The pilot was considered to be successful, so following the current consultation we intend to roll it out across all health boards. The Scottish Government recognises the public concern that the NHS should not waste in any way the important money that it has, and that it should ensure that money is directed towards patient care wherever possible.

I am just about to draw my remarks to a conclusion. Waste by its nature cannot always be easily measured. Most health boards offer a service through community pharmacists whereby medicines can be returned for disposal. I hear what members have said about considering alternative measures for disposal, and I am happy to go away and consider whether we can put in place further measures. A number of members have raised concerns around waste of medicines. It is important that we put in place mechanisms that are effective in reducing such waste where it is reasonably possible. I hope that some of the measures that I have outlined this evening will reassure members that the Government is taking the issue seriously, and that we will consider further how we can make better use of medicines that are returned by patients. Meeting closed at 17:42.

All children who are assessed as having a definite need for orthodontic treatment, and who would benefit from orthodontic treatment, will be able to access such treatment.

Mark Griffin should be aware that, under the new criteria that were introduced under the index of orthodontic treatment need, where there is a clinical need, children will still be able to access orthodontic treatment. We, as a Government, have put considerable investment into oral healthcare in recent years and we are now starting to reap the rewards of that as Scotland’s overall oral health record is improving significantly. I point out that the provision has been introduced because it was one of the key recommendations in the dental action plan for Scotland, which was published in 2005 by the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration. We are now implementing various parts of the plan. It might also be helpful if I point out to Mark Griffin that, in Scotland, we are introducing it in the same way as it has been introduced in other parts of the United Kingdom. For example, the same index was introduced in England in 2006 by the Labour Government and it was introduced in Wales in April 2006, also by a Labour Government. It has also been introduced in Northern Ireland. The system makes the process around orthodontic treatment fairer, clearer and quicker. That is why children in Scotland who have a clinical need for orthodontic treatment will continue to receive it.

I should point out to the member that, under the index, children who require orthodontic treatment will receive it. That can involve a range of issues, including realignment of crooked teeth. That will still be available, where a clinical assessment has been undertaken. It is worth pointing out that, at the moment, the vast majority of orthodontic treatment that is provided under the general dental service provision is given to children from more affluent backgrounds, rather than those from lower-income backgrounds. Ensuring that we target resources at those who have the greatest need for dental treatment is a key part of the dental action plan that was published in 2005 and which we are committed to taking forward.

The cabinet secretary expects to meet the chair of NHS Fife on 21 November during her routine meeting with national health service board chairs. She will also be chairing the NHS Fife annual review on 28 November.

I am aware that NHS Fife is reviewing the provision of palliative beds in its area. However, I am not aware of any specific proposal that it has brought forward so far. I understand that it has in place a review group that is due to meet later this month to consider various options. If there are to be any changes, there is clear guidance that NHS boards have to conduct a public consultation exercise around the matter. Given that the annual review will take place on 28 November and given the member’s interest in the matter, I encourage her to go along to the public meeting within the annual review and to take the opportunity to raise the issue with NHS Fife on that occasion.

The soon-to-be-published Scottish strategy for autism contains a number of recommendations that will help to improve services and provide personalised support. In addition, the 10-year self-directed support strategy sets out a vision for the development of self-directed support nationwide based on a set of values and principles that aim to ensure that everyone who is eligible for social care has a choice in their support arrangements. The forthcoming self-directed support bill will underpin that aim.

I am aware of the concern that the member raises. Part of the reason for introducing the autism strategy is to address those issues and ensure that there is a greater consistency in the types of services that people with autistic spectrum disorders receive. Alongside that, subject to the Parliament’s agreement, some £10 million will be made available over the next three years to help to embed some of the recommendations around the strategy. Through doing that, we can help to ensure that the level and nature of services are appropriate and that they are provided in a way that better suits individual needs.

In September 2010, we published the “Scottish Good Practice Statement on ME-CFS” for use by general practitioners as part of the process of ensuring that people get better and more consistent standards of care, including quicker and more reliable diagnosis. The good practice statement is accompanied by a patient guide that sets out what someone should know if they or their doctor think that they might have ME. The statement has been issued to GP practices and consultants across Scotland to help raise both public and professional awareness of the condition. In addition, Action for M.E has been awarded some £42,000 from the self management fund to set up an online information and support hub for people living with ME, their carers and their families.

As I said in my previous answer, we as a Government are committed to ensuring that there is an improvement in the standard of care and services that people who suffer from ME receive. The member will appreciate that the DWP is a reserved area, although some of us feel that it would be better if it were responsible to this Parliament. However, I expect public agencies to be sympathetic to individuals who have conditions that might compromise their ability to make claims for benefits, for example. I hope that, in recognition of that, the DWP will take action in order to ensure that Mr Torrance’s constituents are given the assistance that they require in order to make their relevant benefit claims.

The member might not be aware of this, but the chief scientist office in the Scottish Government has already provided some £400,000 for the promoting action on clinical excellence—PACE—project that looks at cognitive behavioural therapy alongside exercise therapy as a mechanism for treating people with ME. The Medical Research Council has also indicated that it will provide some £1.5 million towards further research on ME and it expects bids from research practitioners in relation to how they can provide more treatment for people who suffer from ME. Research is being undertaken and the PACE programme is already showing some very encouraging signs of the benefit that that approach can have. I have no doubt that as the programme goes forward we will be able to look at its results to see what further lessons can be learned about the treatment of ME sufferers in Scotland.

We are generally supportive of the assessment of needs that was published last year. We recognise that it contains a number of recommendations that must be taken forward by individual health boards to ensure that they have the right service model at local level to meet the needs of those members of their population who suffer from ME. It is important to recognise that progress is starting to be made in that area. I understand that Lothian NHS Board has reviewed the clinical pathway for people who are diagnosed with ME to ensure that they are referred back to their general practitioner at an early stage so that they receive the clinical and wider support that they require. I expect boards across the country to use the good practice statement that was issued to look at how they provide services for sufferers of ME with a view to improving the level of service at local level.

Making further cuts in the number of deaths from heart disease is a key theme of the “Better Heart Disease and Stroke Care Action Plan” that was published in June 2009. We have therefore provided some £7.5 million of funding to the Scottish Ambulance Service for state-of-the-art defibrillators for all its ambulances to ensure that they are properly equipped to deal with sudden cardiac events.

I know from the range of parliamentary questions that the member has asked in recent times that he has a particular interest in the provision of defibrillators. I am sympathetic to what he has proposed and am more than happy to go away and look at that option. I know that the Scottish Ambulance Service is working with organisations such as Scotmid to look at the location of defibrillators in shops and other premises in rural areas that could be used for that purpose. I will happily look at the initiative that the member has suggested to see whether there is more progress that we can make on the issue.

I am more than happy to congratulate them. The school environment provides a good opportunity to work with young people to provide them with some of the life-saving skills that may be of use to them and to people in their communities. We are working in partnership with the British Heart Foundation and Lucky2BHere to create a case-study resource that can be used in schools across Scotland. Last night’s demonstration by Portree high school is a good example of how that resource can be used to the benefit of pupils across Scotland.

The genetic cascade testing of family members of people who are known to have FH is progressing well. Once people living with FH have been identified, NHS Scotland has an effective process in place to screen their relatives. To date, more than 1,000 people have been tested and 252 individuals with FH have been identified. However, we accept that more can be done in that area. We expect NHS boards to act on the findings of Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s heart disease report, which was published in September, to ensure that people living with FH are identified as soon as possible and treated appropriately in order to minimise the risk of complications. The national advisory committee on heart disease will monitor their progress closely.

Absolutely. Once FH is diagnosed, it is very treatable. That is a good example of where we can make progress in preventing people from developing the complications that may come from having FH. We expect NHS boards to recognise that investing in screening activity for FH can have a preventative spend aspect to it and can reduce the chances of someone developing heart disease or other associated complications. Regarding the member’s request for a meeting to discuss the matter in more detail with other parties, if he contacts my office, I will be more than happy to look at making arrangements for such a meeting.

I thank Paul Martin for securing this debate on an important issue and I welcome the campaigners from various campaign strands who are here this evening. It is clear from Paul Martin’s speech that there is strength of feeling in the local community about the future provision of rehabilitation services for people in the east end of Glasgow and about the future of Lightburn hospital. I am aware that Paul Martin has presented the cabinet secretary with a petition, which I think has been signed by about 12,000 people who oppose the closure of Lightburn hospital. I am not able to respond in detail to many of the points that have been raised in the debate. As members know, ministers have a formal role in cases of major service change and the cabinet secretary will in due course consider the NHS board’s proposals and come to a final view on the recommendations that the board has agreed. For that reason, she is not able to respond to the debate this evening. I assure members that, in coming to a decision, the cabinet secretary will consider all information that is available to her and take all representations into account, including the formal position of Glasgow City Council. In that respect, the debate is important in that it enables us to hear at first hand members’ views, which will inform the cabinet secretary’s considerations.

I will not comment on correspondence that I have not seen. I have made it clear that ministers will not get involved in some of the detail that has been explored in the debate, because of the formal process in which we are involved. I can advise members that the cabinet secretary has accepted an invitation to meet the save Lightburn hospital action group and listen to the group’s views, as part of her deliberations. I can also explain how the cabinet secretary will come to a final view. There are two strands of consideration. First, as with all ministerial decisions that relate to the NHS, our primary concern will be the quality of the service that is offered to patients. Secondly, the cabinet secretary must be satisfied with the adequacy of the public involvement, engagement and consultation process that the board has undertaken. On quality, it has been made clear to all boards that the benchmark for planning and redesign of all healthcare services is that plans must be fully underpinned by the three clearly-articulated and widely-accepted ambitions of our quality strategy, which are based on what people have told us they want from their national health service: care that is person centred, safe and effective. Achieving those ambitions for every patient must be the starting and finishing points of all service redesign proposals. The cabinet secretary will scrutinise Glasgow’s proposals for rehabilitation services against our three ambitions and she will need to be satisfied that patients will receive the quality of care that they deserve and are entitled to. On the requirement for NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to inform, engage and consult local people and other stakeholders when planning and developing health services, NHS boards have a statutory duty to involve patients and the public in the planning and development of health services. Guidance that was issued in February 2010, “Informing, Engaging and Consulting People in Developing Health and Community Care Services”, sets out how boards should go about doing that. The cabinet secretary will examine the board’s processes for developing the proposals for Lightburn hospital against the requirements that are set out in the guidance. I assure members that we have made it clear to all boards that we expect the interests of patients to be paramount in the development of services and that we expect patients’ views to have been sought from a very early stage of consideration. We expect the reasons for change to be defined clearly, and, where possible, we expect options to be explored and examined in an open way, underpinned with evidence to support the case for change. We will examine the board’s methods of communication with patients and the community that is affected by the proposed changes. The board must be able to demonstrate that potentially affected people and staff have been fully involved at all stages in the process. The board must show that, in coming to a decision, the views of patients, carers, staff, elected representatives and other stakeholders have been listened to, understood and, where appropriate, acted on.

The cabinet secretary has received the details and intends to engage with the campaign. Following that process, she will be in a position to make a decision. It is important not to set an arbitrary date and rush to a decision on that basis. We must take our time so that we ensure that we make the right decision in the interests of patients. To assist us in forming a view on the adequacy of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s processes, we have received a report from the Scottish health council, which was established to ensure that NHS boards meet their patient-focus and public-involvement responsibilities and to support them in doing so. The role of the council in this instance has been to quality assure the process from the early stages right through to the conclusion that has been reached by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and then to produce a report setting out its views on whether the board has involved people in accordance with the Scottish Government guidance that I referred to earlier. That report will form part of the cabinet secretary’s considerations. As I said, it would not be appropriate for me to enter into discussions or make comments about the specific proposals that have been submitted by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to the cabinet secretary. However, I am aware that transport and access issues are a concern for many. Be assured that the cabinet secretary will give careful consideration to all the issues that were raised during the consultation and to the board’s responses. I give members and the public a commitment that the cabinet secretary will not endorse any proposal that does not fit with national policy and guidance or does not guarantee a safe, high-quality and sustainable service for the people of the east of Glasgow. Meeting closed at 17:56.

I am pleased to open the debate on behalf of the Government. As the motion says, “significant progress ... has been made in mental health services, mental health improvement and mental health law in Scotland”. That progress reflects the priority that the Scottish Government and the Parliament have given to mental health since devolution. However, as the motion also says, “there is still work to be done”. We have recently published our consultation document on a new mental health strategy for Scotland, which is intended to build on previous and continuing work and to establish the priorities and actions for the next four years. There will be many opportunities for service users, carers, providers and professionals to engage with that consultation and to shape the agenda for the next few years. I will also be interested to hear members’ views in the chamber this afternoon. I will start with a few brief comments about the reports in the press over the past 24 hours relating to antidepressant figures. First, it is clear that there is a general misunderstanding of the relationship between prevalence and defined daily doses. Although the figure for defined daily doses has risen, the evidence from research is that the number of people who are taking antidepressants is not increasing. Secondly, the evidence is that general practitioners are prescribing appropriately and in accordance with clinical guidelines, often in conjunction with psychological therapies but also for longer periods, which is consistent with those guidelines. The Royal College of Psychiatrists and the Royal College of General Practitioners have previously raised that as a matter of concern with Opposition parties and will make further representations on it. It is not possible, in a brief debate, to capture all the work that has been undertaken over the past four years—and, indeed, in the period before that—but I will touch on some of the main achievements. In the previous session of Parliament, we made the commitment, as part of the national health service health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—targets, that we would improve the speed of access to specialist child and adolescent mental health services. We said that, by March 2013, no child would have to wait more than 26 weeks to begin treatment. That commitment was made against a backdrop of different levels of performance throughout Scotland, both in speed of access and in the number of children being seen by specialist services. Some children and young people are seen very quickly, but we know that others wait far too long to receive the care that they require. We have been working closely with NHS boards and other partners to develop information systems and referral pathways and to increase workforce capacity. We are confident that we will achieve the target by the set date. We know that earlier action is likely to have better outcomes and offer a benefit to children, their families and the health service overall. We have also supported the target with new investment to increase the specialist child and adolescent workforce. In 2011-12, that new investment equates to £5.5 million of ring-fenced money for specialist services, and that money will continue across the spending review period. It is a long-term investment in our children and young people. We are growing the specialist workforce. I can report a 33 per cent increase in the specialist workforce between the end of 2008 and March 2011, and we will ensure that the increased workforce capacity is maintained over time. That increase in workforce means that more children and young people are being seen and that they are being seen more quickly. Progress has been made on reducing the number of young people who are admitted to adult wards. Such an admission is an appropriate decision in some circumstances, but that is not always the case. When the 2010 Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland figures are published shortly, they will show an improvement of 18 per cent on the 2009 figure, but performance is not acceptable. I have asked for further work to be done to ensure that children and young people are always admitted to an appropriate location.

I appreciate that, but the figures are unpublished. In general, they will show an 18 per cent drop nationally in the number of young people who are admitted to adult wards. We have taken forward the agenda that is set out in “Towards a Mentally Flourishing Scotland: Policy and Action Plan 2009-2011”. That work covers the social inclusion of people with mental illness, the prevention of mental illness and the creation of good mental health. The agenda is challenging but it is one for which Scotland is well regarded. We have delivered our commitment and I will briefly mention three areas of work that have been covered. Our work to tackle stigma through our continued financial support of the see me campaign has been highlighted by the European Union as good practice and a demonstration of how national Governments can tackle the issue successfully. We will continue to work on that and we are considering how to take greater account of discrimination as well as self-stigma. Service users and their families will continue to be key to that work. Since 2008, the suicide rate has reduced. The figure for 2009 was the lowest for 20 years, and the 2010 figure was also one of the lowest for that period. Between 2000 to 2002 and 2008 to 2010, the suicide rate in Scotland reduced by 14 per cent. That is progress, but there is more work to do, and we will continue to develop evidence-based approaches to the issue. Progress on reducing suicide is a testament to the choose life programme and to the excellent local clinical work to tackle depression and alcohol abuse and to support the management of people with long-term mental illness. We met our target that 50 per cent of all front-line staff would receive appropriate suicide awareness training. People with mental illness tend to die younger and generally from physical health conditions such as heart disease and diabetes. The work that we have done to improve the physical health of people with mental illness has resulted in patients receiving regular physical health checks and being supported in developing healthy lifestyles and in tackling issues such as smoking and diet. That will continue to be part of our work to deliver excellent clinical outcomes and to support patient safety through effective medication management. As the first Government to establish dementia as a national priority, we published “Scotland’s National Dementia Strategy” in June 2010, which set out two key priority areas, as well as commitments to action. Work to deliver the strategy is being progressed with health boards, local government and organisations such as Alzheimer Scotland. We have exceeded our target to increase the number of people with dementia who are properly recorded on GP registers. Diagnosis leads to better information and support, physical health checks, medication when that would offer a benefit, and support for carers. We are considering how we can improve and enhance post-diagnostic support, with learning from the pilots that have just concluded, and how we can offer that service in a way that meets the needs of people with dementia and their carers.

We continue to take forward the dementia strategy. An annual report was published in September this year, and a further annual report will be published next year on the progress that we have made, so the Parliament will be able to check what progress has been made. We will continue to focus on two change areas: the provision of excellent support and information to people with dementia and their carers after diagnosis, and improvement of the care of people with dementia in general hospital settings. In particular, I am grateful for the support from the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, NHS Education for Scotland, the dementia service development centre at the University of Stirling and Alzheimer Scotland, which have assisted in taking the work forward. In the consultation document, we identify four broad areas of activity in which we believe we can have a significant impact on outcomes. In each case, the focus is on a particular target or objective, but we believe that the work will have broader benefits in integrating services and producing change. I have already mentioned work in two of the areas of activity—suicide reduction and dementia—but I also want to say something about our work on access to therapies and service structure. We are committed to meeting our target to deliver faster access to mental health services by delivering the 18-week referral to treatment for psychological therapies across all age groups from December 2014. On the face of it, that seems to be a clear and simple undertaking that can be agreed on all sides, but reworking how a complex system operates involves significant effort over time. We must also remember that the work on access to psychological therapies is just one part of creating a well-functioning mental health system. In parallel with that, boards and their partners will offer access to information and advice, self-help approaches—some of which will be online or given through NHS 24—bibliotherapy, counselling and other accessible low-intensity treatments, including exercise, to meet the needs of those who are experiencing psychological distress. We propose work to look further at the structure of services for people with severe and enduring mental health problems. During the last session, we undertook work to reduce readmissions, and we significantly outperformed our target. We also considered crisis and first-contact services. During the next period, we propose a more structured examination of first-contact, crisis, community and in-patient services to develop recommendations for service redesign. We now have better benchmarking information about mental health services than we have ever had before, and we have experience of and expertise in local service redesign. It is time to capitalise on the information that we have and to develop our understanding to improve services more effectively. The consultation on the draft strategy is open until the end of January 2012. I encourage members to engage in the consultation exercise; I also encourage them to encourage local organisations that work in the mental health field to engage in it to ensure that we have priorities that meet the needs of people with mental health problems in the years ahead. I move, That the Parliament recognises the significant progress that has been made in mental health services, mental health improvement and mental health law in Scotland, but notes that there is still work to be done and in that regard welcomes the publication by the Scottish Government of a consultation document on a new mental health strategy for Scotland that builds on previous and continuing work and establishes the priorities and actions for the next four years in support of a healthier and fairer Scotland.

This has been a very useful debate, with some very good speeches highlighting a number of important points. However, I should reassure members that we are debating a draft strategy and that it has been our genuine intention to provide an opportunity for members to engage with the process and shape the mental health policy for the next four years. I detected a note of cynicism in Mary Fee’s suggestion that we would listen only to certain people in this chamber. I assure her that I am more than happy to look at good ideas from any part of the chamber. Many members, in having only six minutes to make a speech on a very important subject, will not have been able to expand their points or to go into the level of detail that they would have liked. I encourage them, particularly the front-bench members who I am sure have a lot of experience in this field and have clear views on what should be in a strategy, to write to us. If they feel that we need to go further, they should let their views be known. Indeed, if they think that it would be useful to meet me and officials to discuss the issue, we will be more than happy to do so. That does not mean, however, that we will always agree with members. After all, at some point, we have to decide on what will be in the strategy. However, during the consultation period, I am more than happy to have an on-going dialogue with members across the chamber, especially front benchers with experience in this issue. Indeed, I see that one of them wishes to intervene.

I am absolutely delighted that Dr Simpson has taken up that kind offer; the pressure is now on Mary Scanlon and Alison McInnes to take it up. Time will tell. In developing the draft strategy, we decided to bring our mental health services work and our mental health improvement work into a single strategy, because the two areas complement each other. Rather than have them operate in separate silos, it made more sense to draw together those two strands of work. Judging from the tone of the debate, I think that there is broad recognition that that is the right direction of travel. It will be impossible for me to respond to all the points that have been made, but I have no doubt that they will be fed into the consultation process. However, I want to pick up on a couple of specific issues. A number of members mentioned choose life and the suicide prevention programme. Richard Simpson and Jackie Baillie made the point that suicide levels are increasing, but it is important to bear in mind the way in which those statistics are dealt with. They are taken on a three-year rolling basis because there will be annual variations. The overall trajectory is that suicide levels in Scotland are continuing to decline, but I recognise that more has to be done in that field. Although there has been a 14 per cent reduction in suicides since the prevention scheme was introduced, we need to ensure that we continue to make progress. Some members raised concerns, on the back of SAMH’s briefing, on the training of front-line staff in suicide prevention techniques and counselling skills. It is worth keeping in mind that the training that was done under choose life pre-2007 took place largely in the non-statutory sector—the voluntary sector—rather than in the health service. The programme that has taken place over the past four years has been a catch-up programme for NHS staff in the front line, so it is not the case that the voluntary sector and the wider non-NHS sector are being neglected. Training will continue to be an important part of our recognition of the value of choose life and there will, of course, be opportunities for staff members outwith the NHS to participate in that. I hope that that reassures members that it was not a case of one or the other; it is simply that there has been a catch-up programme for NHS staff. I turn to child and adolescent mental health services. I was a member of the Health and Sport Committee that conducted an inquiry into that area, and it is one that I am passionate about and in which I want to see real progress being made. We have invested significantly in the workforce and other resources over the past three years. As I said in my opening remarks, we intend to continue that investment. There has been a 33 per cent increase in the number of specialist staff who work in CAMHS. If we improve the quality of those services in the community, that will feed into a reduction in the number of young people who might be being admitted inappropriately to adult mental health wards. When the Mental Welfare Commission figures that I mentioned earlier are published, they will show that in the past year there has been an 18 per cent reduction in the number of young people who are admitted to adult wards. I have no doubt that the improving situation with regard to CAMHS capacity has contributed to that. Richard Simpson asked for the specific figures. I have them: in 2009, the level of such admissions was 184; in 2010, it dropped to 151. As I said in my opening speech, although progress is being made, not enough progress is being made. I want more progress to be made and, as a Government, we are determined to ensure that that happens. We are continuing to work with health boards across the country to ensure that the issue is addressed adequately. Murdo Fraser made a specific point about the number of CAMHS in-patient beds that were available. Richard Simpson rose— Let me finish this point, please. There was a report that recommended that 60 such beds should be available across Scotland. The report was revised and, if I am correct, that figure was revised to 48 beds, because of the remodelling of services in the community setting. We now have 42 such beds and a business plan is being put forward by NHS Highland, NHS Grampian and NHS Tayside to increase capacity in the Tayside area to 48. Progress is being made on what is a very specialised type of facility. It is important that we have the right skills in such facilities to ensure that young people receive the services that they require. There may be occasions when it is appropriate for a young person to be admitted to an adult ward. That may occur out of hours, or the risk to the person may be such that he or she must be admitted. It may also be an option if we are trying to keep the person close to his or her family. The person may have an important support network close by and, because many of these services are provided on a regional basis, it may be an option that clinicians have to take.

Under mental health legislation, there is a responsibility to ensure that an admission to a mental health bed is on an appropriate basis. Health boards and clinicians already have that responsibility but work remains to be done in this field. I cannot tell Richard Simpson exactly what the figures were for 2008, but our intention is to continue to drive this down. We will continue to put the services in place to achieve that. A number of members raised the matter of training for staff. In June 2011, we published the dementia skills framework to help to improve the level of skills of people in the national health service and within the social care setting. We have set targets on taking that forward. The prescribing of antidepressants was the only contentious issue during the debate. Members referred to the previous HEAT target, which was to reduce the prescribing of antidepressants. That target was not met and, when it was clear that it would not be met, a considerable amount of work was done to evaluate what is happening with the prescribing of antidepressants. A considerable part of the research informs the new HEAT target on psychological services, because that was a clear area in which we needed to direct more resources. Some of that research made clear findings, to which I now refer. They included “better identification of depression and better use of clinical guidelines may lead to an increase in antidepressant use, because it reduces the numbers of people prescribed inadequate doses for inadequate lengths of time”. The research also found that “improved identification may lead to more people being identified as needing treatment and for many of these, antidepressants (with or without psychological therapies) will be the best approach.” It went on to say: “experience in England, where there has been considerable investment through the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies Programme (IAPT), is that there has been an increase in antidepressant prescribing alongside rapid access to therapies. In clinical practice the combined use of antidepressants and psychological therapies is common and this practice is supported by NICE. These interventions are best seen as complementary, not as alternatives”. These are not my views, nor the views that the Government has tried to put on the figures that were released today. They are the views of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the Royal College of General Practitioners, in a letter sent to Jackie Baillie in April on this very matter. Depression is a clinical illness and it is appropriate for clinicians to prescribe what they see as, clinically, the most effective treatment for that condition. To say that that demonstrates a rocketing in the number of people who are prescribed antidepressants is simply wrong.

Reflecting on the issue of stigma, I do not think that we would have the same nature of debate if we were talking about prescribing clinical medication for physical conditions. We have to be very careful about the tone and nature of language that is used on the prescribing of antidepressants. I hope that members have found the debate useful. We will consider the views that have been expressed, and I encourage other members who wish to make their views known to make a submission to the consultation.

I congratulate James Dornan on securing the debate on a very important issue. The BMA survey underlines Scotland’s level of alcohol misuse, which is a significant problem and one that is significantly worse than it is in the rest of the UK. The figures are stark. At least 50 per cent of men and almost 40 per cent of women are regularly exceeding the sensible drinking guidelines. Scotland sees, on average, more than 100 hospital admissions every day due to alcohol misuse. The total cost is estimated at some £3.56 billion each year. That is equivalent to £900 for every single adult in Scotland. Patrick Harvie is correct that we need to change Scotland’s relationship with alcohol to a much more positive one, so we must be prepared to implement the measures that will allow us to do that. The Government wants a fundamental change in Scotland’s relationship with alcohol, so we have adopted a range of measures to assist in bringing that about.

From our point of view, it is important to deal with what we can at the moment through good evidence and do what we know can make a difference. That is why we have taken measures not only in legislation but under the alcohol framework. The framework has more than 40 different parts, which are about trying to change Scotland’s relationship with, and behaviour in relation to, alcohol. We have provided record funding for that: since 2008, £155 million has been put into it. We have a responsibility to take effective measures to address the problems that alcohol causes our society. I will touch on some of those that we have taken that are having an impact. We have made significant investment in alcohol brief interventions, which are about changing people’s behaviour and improving individuals’ health at grass-roots level. They are a great example of a preventative approach that works effectively and has a robust evidence base. We have been able to deliver 150,000 of those brief interventions through the national health service since 2008. We are ahead of schedule on that programme, and we want to take it from being a new initiative to embed it in normal day-to-day practice, so that clinicians and other practitioners do not have to think about adding it on. We will continue to drive that forward. A couple of members referred to the Alcohol (Scotland) Act 2010, which comes into force on 1 October. It will restrict promotions and off-sales, banning quantity discounts such as the three-for-two deals and offers such as taking 25 per cent off for those who buy six bottles. I served as a member of the Health and Sport Committee in the previous session of the Parliament and was bitterly disappointed at the approach that was taken on minimum pricing when it was considered then. All the international research is clear that three key factors drive alcohol consumption. The first is availability. That is addressed partly through our licensing legislation. Improvements can be made on that, particularly on public health, and I am keen for us to make progress. The second is advertising. Some progress has been made on that, and we continue to work with the industry to address the issues. The other factor that needs to be addressed is affordability. I have said time and again that until we are prepared to deal with affordability, all the other measures that are designed to change our relationship with alcohol are like trying to push water up a hill. Affordability is a key component in trying to change that relationship. I will tell members what is really disappointing. Some may think that politics was not played out in the committee’s and Parliament’s consideration of minimum pricing in the previous session, but some parties issued press statements opposing minimum pricing even before the Health and Sport Committee had considered a shred of evidence. That does not strike me as considering the evidence objectively and coming to an informed position. Sadly, it is exactly what happened.

Education is an element of that, but there is good research, which I think was carried out by the World Health Organization, that demonstrates that in order to fundamentally change the relationship that a country has with alcohol, education is just one small element and it is not an effective way in which to drive the necessary culture change. Education is important, but it will not deliver the degree of change that we need, given the nature of the problem in our society. However, education will continue to play a part. I hope that all members recognise that the issue of affordability must be addressed, although there might be arguments about how we should go about the process. Labour’s alcohol commission did not want to consider minimum pricing and those who gave evidence to it were clearly told that, but when the Health and Sport Committee considered the mechanism that the commission came up with, that mechanism simply did not stand up. Others have proposed that we tackle affordability through duty. Again, the experience on that proposal shows that it does not stand up. The first act of the Westminster Government was to reverse the increase in duty on cider, which is one of the cheapest drinks. To me, that does not demonstrate a commitment to implementing the measure effectively. There might be different views about how we should tackle the issue, but I recognise that there seems to be a growing consensus that we need to do so. I did not expect minimum pricing to become such a big issue in the current leadership debates. Jackson Carlaw has now bought into the idea, and the person who it seems will be elected as Labour’s new leader in Scotland supports minimum pricing. His biggest criticism is that the Government does not want to set the minimum price high enough. It will be interesting to see how the Labour Party reacts on that issue. The Government is determined to ensure that we change Scotland’s relationship with alcohol. It is a significant problem that affects all aspects of our society and one that we can ill afford to ignore. We are prepared to take the bold measures that are necessary to change that relationship. I hope that the Parliament, when it considers the minimum pricing bill, will be prepared to join us in supporting that bold measure. Meeting closed at 17:51.

An integrated programme for tissue viability was launched in 2008 and was supported by investment of more than £1 million. The programme has produced online resources for front-line staff, to raise awareness of the need for continuous improvement in the application of evidenced-based care, to improve the prevention, detection and treatment of pressure ulcers. Staff are supported in the delivery of care by a network of tissue viability nurses and quality improvement leads in each national health service board area.

Advice on the prevention of pressure sores is provided as part of the existing assessment process in relation to wheelchairs. Following the assessment, the person is informed of the potential risks and the measures that they can take to avoid developing a pressure sore. That is part of the on-going programme on the provision of wheelchair services in Scotland. Guidance should be provided to individuals when they are issued with their wheelchair.

This has been an interesting debate. It started off being about procurement, but it has gone into a range of areas around social care. It is important to properly recognise the financial environment in which the debate is taking place. The Scottish Government’s budget has been cut by £1.3 billion. That was started by the previous Labour Administration at Westminster and it has been accelerated by the current UK Government.

The eight years of Labour’s Administration in the Scottish Executive led to a year-on-year decrease in the percentage of the Scottish Executive’s overall budget going to local government. This Government has protected the share of the overall budget for local government, and increased it when it could. That is the financial environment in which the debate is taking place. We must also recognise that a substantial amount of money is spent on social care every year—£1.18 billion. Purchasing social care is not like purchasing paperclips. It is about providing the care that people need to support them in their most vulnerable situations, so it is important that it is high quality and flexible. To get greater consistency in the social care procurement process, the Government issued procurement of care and support services guidance to all local authorities in September last year. I recognise that it is early days for that guidance, and some members, such as Dennis Robertson, are concerned about whether it is being properly adhered to. However, Audit Scotland is considering the guidance as part of its investigation into the commissioning of social care and will report on it in January. That will show us clearly where local authorities are not adhering to the guidance, so we will be able to look at the matter in more detail. It is important that we do not call for a review or a new framework now when more than 100 different organisations were involved in developing the guidance over a two-year period. We should not simply throw that out and say that we need to do something else. We need to see what the Audit Scotland report comes out with early next year and then consider what further progress needs to be made. Some members referred to the integration of health and social care and the central importance that that has in improving people’s experience of how their care needs are properly met. That is not a new thing. Jackie Baillie might be new to the issue of the integration of health and social care and the variation in charges, having come to it during the past three years, but Mary Scanlon is right to say that it has been going on for almost 20 years. Jackie Baillie became involved in the issue when she went into opposition, but she was not interested enough to do something about it when she was in government.

I will finish my point. The Government is determined to drive forward the integration of health and social care in a way that has not been achieved for the past 20 years, so that people can receive care as they wish to receive it.

I am surprised at that, because the variation in charges has existed for almost two decades and not just for the past three years. Derek Mackay was right: what was Labour’s big idea to address the issue of health and social care integration? It was a national care service, involving a super-quango of 180,000 people stripped out of local government and the health service. However, Labour has gone all quiet about that now because it realises that no one supports the idea. On the issue of providers, I welcome the staff from Quarriers who have come to listen to the debate. I am more than happy to meet them later on today and have a discussion with them, if they get in touch with me. I recognise that real change is taking place in the sector, which different organisations must address. I encourage Quarriers and Unison to work as constructively as they can together to resolve their differences. I accept that there is variation across the country in charges for the provision of social care. However, what is important is that we take action to address that issue, which is exactly what COSLA is doing. It will report in November on how it intends to take that forward. The variation in charges for care homes has been around for a long time. Currently, we are working with COSLA and the sector on our national plan on payments for care homes to address the issue of charge variation. That occurs for a variety of reasons, but it is extremely important that we address the issue. The Scottish Government is determined to ensure that we integrate health and social care and that we get quality care for people who need it. We will continue to take the necessary action to ensure that that happens.

The member referred to a factual inaccuracy in our amendment. Will he clarify which factual inaccuracy he is referring to, because I am afraid that the budget cuts to the Scottish Government—not to the Scottish Parliament—started under the previous United Kingdom Labour Administration?

Will the member give way?

The national strategy for self-directed support was published on 23 November 2010—a joint strategy with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. It sets out a 10-year vision for the development of SDS nationwide, based on a set of values and principles that aims to ensure that all people eligible for social care have a choice in their support arrangements.

It is extremely important to recognise that people’s expectations around their care arrangements have changed significantly. People want much greater opportunity to control and direct their care in a way that is most appropriate for them. Very often, an individual is better placed to decide what their needs are and how they should be met in a more effective way. I have been encouraged by the views that have been expressed in support of the SDS bill during the debate on the legislative programme. The bill will ensure that we have statutory provision around how self-directed support should be taken forward; it will extend the eligibility of those who are able to participate in self-directed support beyond what is presently provided for under direct payments; and it will consolidate and modernise the legislation around how direct payments are handled.

The bill will provide the opportunity for people to choose between a number of options for taking forward their care arrangements. It will be for the individual who arranges their care to decide how their needs will be most appropriately met. We must recognise that some local authorities may find this process challenging. However, they must recognise that they can no longer provide care according to how they wish to provide it but must do so according to how the person wishes their care to be arranged. I hope that more and more local authorities will engage in doing that as they shape the care arrangements in their particular areas, so that individuals will have flexibility in choosing how their care is provided.

That is question 6, Presiding Officer.

Health Protection Scotland has undertaken a range of activities to raise awareness of the measles outbreak in mainland Europe. Travax, the travel health advice website for national health service professionals that Health Protection Scotland maintains, has been updated to reflect the current situation. Health Protection Scotland has written to professionals across the NHS several times—it wrote as recently as last week—to provide updated advice. In May, it wrote to directors of education to provide advice that was to be passed on to all parents on the importance of ensuring that children are protected against measles before any travel or school trips to Europe. Similar advice was also provided to universities and further education colleges. Health Protection Scotland continues to monitor the situation and will update its advice as required.

Stewart Maxwell raises a worthwhile point. For children to have the proper protection from measles, it is extremely important that they complete the two doses of the MMR vaccine. Practice nurses and general practitioners have done a considerable amount of work to recall parents and their children for the second dose. As a result of such initiatives, uptake of the second dose is 93 per cent at the age of six. It is clear that there is more progress to make, but I assure Stewart Maxwell that uptake of the first and second doses of the MMR vaccine is higher in Scotland than in any other part of the United Kingdom. It is important that parents recognise that their children need to complete both doses of the MMR vaccine to be properly protected from measles.

I would have thought that the MMR vaccine was a matter of importance that went beyond party politics. It is clear that significant progress has been made to meet the 95 per cent target at which we aim. Uptake among six-year-old children is 93 per cent, and our level is still significantly higher than that in other parts of the UK. We are making progress. GPs and practice nurses have done considerable good work to encourage parents to return. I am confident that that work will continue and that we can continue to make progress. I hope that we can continue to make progress on a cross-party basis, too.

Although there is no specific guidance on or recommended procedures for mesothelioma in general or taking an occupational history from patients with mesothelioma in particular, medical practitioners’ awareness of the condition is now much greater, and it is considered good practice to undertake this procedure with any patient suspected of having the condition.

Although the increase in the instances of cancer is relatively small, it remains a matter of concern, which is why cancer remains a top priority for the Scottish Government. The cabinet secretary outlined the initiative we are taking with the detect cancer early initiative, which will be backed by an additional £30 million to help to ensure that we get early diagnosis of conditions. That type of approach will help to improve the outcomes for those who are diagnosed with the condition. Although I mentioned to the member that there is no specific guidance in relation to taking down someone’s occupational history, I understand that clinical practice for dealing with individuals who may have a lung condition is often to consider their occupational history as a matter of course. However, if the member believes he has evidence of cases in which that has not been properly carried out, I would be more than happy to consider that. With regard to the member’s final point about the case that is before the Supreme Court, it would obviously not be appropriate to comment on a matter that is live before the court. However, the Scottish Government continues to believe that the legislation is right in both principle and law. I hope that the Supreme Court comes to a judgment soon on that matter.

Dedicated young carers services have an important role. They can help to implement the young carers strategy by providing a range of support to young carers across Scotland, including short breaks, emotional support, counselling and leisure activities. Our commitment to young carers is demonstrated by the range of funding that we provide in support of those services. Through the strategy, we have encouraged local authorities to continue the core funding of young carers services. Health boards have also provided support to young carers services by using some of the £4.9 million that we have allocated to them for such work in this financial year.

On the member’s final point, I confirm that we intend to include that classification in the school census. Later this year, we will bring forward a carers charter, which will look to provide further support. On the specific support that we are providing to young carers services, we are supporting a range of initiatives, from the young carers festival to a programme that I recently launched, called the Eryc and Trayc toolkit, which is for primary school children and is intended to help identify young carers who are at primary school. It is important that there is greater awareness among education staff of the pressures that young children who are carers may be under. For example, if they are late in arriving for school or late with their homework, it may be because of that caring responsibility. Therefore, it is important that we continue to raise awareness of the number of young people who are involved in caring. We continue to encourage local authorities to prioritise the need to support young carers. It is clearly for each individual local authority to determine how it utilises its budget but, as a Government, we have made it clear that young carers and carers in general remain a priority, given the important role that they play in our society. I encourage all local authorities to recognise that they need to support young carers in the best way that they can.

Since 2007, the Scottish Government has demonstrated a strong commitment to engaging, supporting and working in partnership with local communities to deliver improved health and wellbeing outcomes for Scotland’s citizens. We have supported a co-ordinated and strategic approach to building community capacity and enhancing local practice and solutions in the delivery of community-led health improvement. We provide financial support to a range of third sector health organisations with a view to supporting and developing the community-led approach to health improvement.

All the partners who have a role to play in improving outcomes for older people or for anyone who requires adult care or childcare are important. That means that, in trying to meet people’s needs in the most appropriate way, there must be a partnership among local authorities, the health boards, the third sector and independent sector. The member referred to a specific initiative in his constituency. It is one that—I must be honest—I am not entirely familiar with, but I would be happy to learn more about it from him. As we go forward, it is extremely important that a greater focus is given to the need to ensure that we prioritise outcomes. Part of our approach to the integration of health and social care is about trying to ensure a joined-up approach across different agencies that focuses on improving the outcomes for people within the community.

Our “Diabetes Action Plan 2010: Quality Care for Diabetes in Scotland”, which was published in August last year, includes more than 50 actions that are designed to support our ambition for a world-class diabetes service. The National Health Service boards’ diabetes managed clinical networks have all provided comprehensive reports to the Scottish diabetes group. They show that, overall, good progress has been made and that the MCNs are on track to achieve the vast majority of actions for which they are responsible. The reports have been published on the diabetes in Scotland website.

I am happy to agree with Humza Yousaf on the important work that Diabetes UK plays in raising awareness of diabetes. I visited its stand earlier this afternoon and had a go on what could only be described as the biggest game of Operation that I have ever come across. It is a good initiative that is being used for children from primary 6 to secondary 2 as part of the Diabetes UK live for it initiative, which is embedded in the health aspect of curriculum for excellence. The diabetes action plan highlights the need for people who may have diabetes to be diagnosed early and then access treatment and care as appropriate. It is also run in partnership with the keep well programme, through which some 90,000 people have had health checks carried out since 2008. In March 2010, we announced that the keep well programme would be mainstreamed across all health board areas. That will help to address some of the inequalities that need to be targeted and to ensure that primary prevention activity becomes normal practice within the national health service.

Smoking prevalence has dropped from 30.7 per cent in 1999-2000, to 24.3 per cent in 2009-10. In 2010, we supported 31,456 smokers to quit with the help of NHS Scotland smoking cessation services, which is up almost 12 per cent on the 2009 figure.

All health boards have a responsibility to ensure that they provide smoking cessation programmes in their individual areas. For example, in NHS Tayside, the give it up for a baby initiative targets in particular women who are pregnant and continue to smoke. Some of the initial outcomes from that initiative are encouraging, but we must wait to see its final outcome. Other initiatives are being undertaken by a range of health boards in Scotland, but the Government remains committed to reducing the number of people in Scotland who smoke. We also give priority to matters relating to pregnancy, trying to encourage young mothers not to start smoking again should they have been able to quit during their pregnancy. Progress has been made on reducing smoking in Scotland, but there is more to be done and the Government is committed to ensuring that more action is taken on that.

I am aware of the campaign and the debate that took place at the British Medical Association earlier this week. We are trying to add to our initial strategy on reducing smoking in Scotland and, as part of that work, we will consider a range of initiatives to address the level of smoking in Scotland. No doubt, the debate on the issue will continue over the weeks and months ahead.

Under the concordat that was drawn up in 2007 between the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, funding for local suicide prevention action in all local authorities, including Glasgow, is drawn from the overall funding that is provided to local authorities. Decisions on local spending priorities are the responsibility of individual local authorities in light of local need and circumstances.

Each of the 32 local authorities in Scotland has a tailored suicide prevention action plan, which sits alongside the choose life action plan that was launched by the Government back in 2002. The intention behind the strategy is to reduce overall suicide levels in Scotland by 20 per cent. To date, suicide levels have been reduced by 11.5 per cent and progress continues to be made. It is important that local authorities such as Glasgow City Council work in partnership with our colleagues in NHS Health Scotland to make the national strategy and local suicide prevention plans work together.

I was able to go along to that seminar for a short period and to hear some of the evidence that is being gathered from around the world on copycat suicides that take place on the back of what can only be described as irresponsible reporting by some media outlets. I encourage the media in Scotland to continue to act in a responsible way to ensure that we do not encourage such behaviour, and I would be more than happy to work with the researchers at the University of Edinburgh and with Samaritans on how we can improve the situation in Scotland by further reducing the number of suicides that occur here.

I congratulate the members who have made their maiden speeches this morning. The debate has been of very good quality, and a number of contributions in it have been informed not only by purely political experience, but by personal experience, which is always a valid part of any such debate. It is clear that events that have occurred recently—the cases with the Mental Welfare Commission, Elsie Inglis nursing home cases and the Southern Cross situation—have resulted in renewed interest, particularly in the media, in matters to do with the care of older people in Scotland. It is right that members should have an opportunity to reflect on those issues. Obviously, the events have resulted in a focus on the overall quality of care that is provided to older people in Scotland. Are they being treated with the dignity and respect that they deserve when they are being supported and assisted? Murdo Fraser was entirely correct: the vast majority of care that is provided in institutional and community settings for older people is good quality. I would not like the debate to create the impression that there is a crisis in how we provide care to older people. The vast majority of care is of a good standard. The important thing is to ensure that all the care that is provided to older people is of a good standard. Questions have been raised about the oversight system, how we monitor and assess the quality of care that is provided, how organisations such as SCSWIS respond to concerns that have been raised with them, and the inspection regime. It is important that we are assured that organisations such as SCSWIS act in a proportionate and thorough way when they receive complaints about standards of care. I believe that we have a robust process for inspections of our care homes and care home providers. However, Malcolm Chisholm made an excellent speech in which he made a number of important points about that particular regime. We are happy to consider a number of those issues to see whether there are further ways in which we can enhance the existing system.

I am happy to do that, because it is important that we have confidence in the inspection regime and that it picks up issues and follows them through to ensure that real, concrete improvements are achieved through the system. Like Mary Scanlon, I was deeply concerned when I read the Mental Welfare Commission’s report on the nature of the care that Mrs V received in an NHS establishment. However, I also recognise that that care does not reflect the overall care that patients with dementia receive in our NHS system or the social care sector. That said, it is clear that there is more to be done to ensure that standards are improved. This week, the cabinet secretary outlined the dementia care standards that we will take forward, and we have commissioned the chief nursing officer to look closely at the type of care that is being provided in that area to people in our NHS. A number of members have referred to the demographic challenges that the country faces in providing care to older people. Those issues carried over from yesterday’s debate. [Interruption.] It is important that we recognise the significant demographic change that will occur in the next 20 years or so. It is a good thing that old people are living longer, but the future shape of our care services, at the health and social care levels, must recognise the fact that we have an ageing population. In the past, there has been too much focus on institutional care. The reshaping of the provision of care must recognise not only the need to move away from the acute sector into the primary sector and the social care sector, but the need to give people more flexibility and more opportunity to shape their care arrangements in a way that is appropriate to them. The Government is committed to taking forward the agenda on self-directed support, which is about giving people an opportunity to manage and direct their care in a way that is appropriate to them. Several members, including Fiona McLeod and Dennis Robertson, argued that, if people want to stay at home, they should have the right to do so and should have the opportunity to make care arrangements to allow it to occur.

It is important that we give people as much flexibility as possible in how they manage their care arrangements. Some people have packages of care that are funded by the local authority and the health service, and we need to ensure that they have the opportunity to shape their care package in a way that is appropriate to them. Claire Baker talked about the future shape of the way in which we provide care in the community and raised questions about whether it should be provided privately or by local authorities. In the short term, our focus might be largely on Southern Cross, but in the medium to long term we are open to considering whether other models can be utilised to provide care in the community, so there is scope for that. The Government is more than happy to work with members if they have ideas about how that provision can be shaped. Several members mentioned that the issue of the integration of health and social care has been around for some time. Hugh Henry mentioned that we were having the same debate when he was a health minister some 10 years ago. Well, when I was a young occupational therapist setting out all those years ago in 1991, we were told that the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990 would result in integration of care, so the debate has been going on for decades. We need momentum and pace to create the necessary change. The Government is determined to ensure that we stop talking the talk and start walking the walk to get real and proper integration of services. Alison McInnes raised concerns that we might seek to centralise care. She might want to address that point to the Labour Party, given its proposals on a national care agency. We want to ensure that services are joined up in order to improve the quality of care that people receive. That has been required for some time, and we are determined to ensure that it is delivered. The Government is committed to ensuring that the quality of care that older people in Scotland receive is the best that it can possibly be. We will continue to take forward measures to ensure that that is delivered.

I thank members for their kind words on my appointment as Minister for Public Health. Had you been here earlier on, Presiding Officer, you might have been forgiven for thinking that you were in a meeting of the Partick Thistle supporters club, as a number of us have participated in this debate. However, I was surprised that Patricia Ferguson pointed out that I support Partick Thistle even though I represent Falkirk West. Falkirk Football Club is based in my constituency, so it is a challenge supporting Partick Thistle. However, Stenhousemuir and East Stirling are also based in my constituency, so by supporting Partick Thistle I can neutralise the issue at a local level. Several important points have been made during this debate, and unfortunately I will not be able to address them all during these closing remarks. However, I will do my best. If necessary, I can write to members on any outstanding issues. A number of important points were made with regard to the cabinet secretary’s responsibilities for the cities strategy, and those contributions have demonstrated the need for us to have a stand-alone debate on the cities strategy. The cabinet secretary has given assurances that such a debate will be held at a later date. In working on Scotland’s healthcare, the Government is absolutely committed to ensuring sustainable quality in our healthcare services everywhere in Scotland. With the demographic and economic challenges that lie ahead, we are clear that, although the right decisions will have to be made, at times they will be difficult. We are also clear that those decisions will have to be made on the basis of a paradigm shift in the way in which healthcare services are delivered in the future. Marginal change will not deliver the quality or sustainability that we—and, rightly, the public—expect from our healthcare system. When we ask patients, carers, staff and other interested people about what they regard as the top priorities in healthcare in Scotland, they give a clear answer. They want a system that treats patients with care and compassion; they want clinicians to communicate clearly and to give clear explanations about treatments and people’s conditions; they want effective collaboration between clinicians, patients and others who may be involved in an individual patient’s care; they want to be treated in a clean and safe care environment; and they want continuity of care between the acute care sector, the primary care sector and the social care sector—they want the process to be joined up. People also want Scotland’s healthcare system to lead in clinical excellence—leading the world in the ways in which people can be treated more effectively for a whole range of conditions. We must have a healthcare system that reflects the priorities of the people of Scotland. Members have highlighted a number of priority areas. I turn first to the issue of financing our NHS. Some of the contributions from Labour members were a little difficult to listen to, as this SNP Government was criticised over the budget settlement for the NHS this year. Only the SNP went into the election committed to protecting the budget of the NHS and ensuring that it continued. In Scotland, per head spending on health services is greater than it is in England. It is important to keep that in context. Also, between September 2007 and September 2010, the total number of staff employed by the NHS in Scotland rose by 3.6 per cent, compared with a rise of only 3.2 per cent in England. There is clearly a challenging road ahead in financing our NHS, but significant progress has been made. Under the SNP Government—

I want to make some progress first. Under the SNP Government, the cancer waiting time target was achieved. During the past few years, we have also been able to reduce the number of people who have died from heart disease and stroke; we have reduced infection rates within our NHS; and health boards, although they have made efficiency savings of £300 million over the past year, have also achieved the lowest waiting times within the NHS. The SNP Government has also committed to the biggest capital investment in the health service in Glasgow—to the tune of £842 million—through the Southern general hospital, which has been funded through public sector capital expenditure.

I assure the member that the Government is fully committed to the provision of the sick kids service here in Edinburgh and that that will remain the case. I want to make progress on a few other issues that have been raised during the debate. Margaret McDougall made a point about NRAC and the way in which the allocation of funding is made under that system. I am not entirely sure that Margaret McDougall is aware that NRAC takes deprivation into account when allocating funding. There is also a technical advisory committee looking at some of the issues that the system has with remote and rural areas. Several members have raised the issue of health inequalities, and the Government has put in place a number of measures to tackle health inequalities in Scotland. One of those measures is the early years strategy, which is about early intervention. Derek Mackay made a strong point about trying to intervene to avoid crises developing in individuals’ lives. We have also introduced the equally well and achieving our potential programmes. Alongside those measures, the Government abolished prescription charges, thus ensuring that the final element of taxation on people’s ill-health was removed. A significant amount of work has been done on health inequalities, but I recognise that some of the elements around that issue in Scotland are deeply embedded. I am sure that all members acknowledge that there is no simple or quick solution in tackling such problems, which have become embedded over generations. I suspect that it will take generations for us to address those problems and to achieve an effect that will satisfy us all. I turn to caring for older people. Earlier, Jim Eadie made a strong contribution to the debate and that issue will be debated further tomorrow. Improving the quality of care for older people is a key priority for the Government, but it is worth keeping in mind Scotland’s changing demographic. People in Scotland are living longer, which is a good thing, but by 2033 the number of people who are aged over 60 will have increased by approximately 50 per cent. In itself, that might reflect the fact that people are living healthier lives and that some of the health improvement initiatives that we have introduced are bearing fruit. However, that change will also impact on the funding of services. In 2008, approximately £4.5 billion was spent on health and social care for people who are over 65. Of that, £1.1 billion was spent on social care and the other £3.4 billion on NHS care. If those costs are projected across the demographic changes that are taking place in Scotland, by 2016 we will have had to invest a further £1 billion in those services, and a further £3.5 billion will have to be invested by 2031. As we shape our future health and social care programmes, it is essential that we recognise that those highly significant demographic changes are taking place. A number of members raised the integration of health and social care, which remains a priority for the Government—we will continue to pursue that, to ensure that the issue is addressed effectively. On mental health, we have made a commitment to look at introducing further policies such as a programme to improve child and adolescent mental health services and a new programme for advancing the treatment of people with mental health problems. I am acutely aware of the responsibility that the people of Scotland have placed on our shoulders to ensure that we have a health service that provides the quality of care that they deserve and from which future generations will benefit. The chamber can be assured that this Government will make the decisions that are necessary to ensure that we have a healthcare system that is fit for the 21st century.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what additional assistance it has provided to support, and help people find, employment in the Falkirk West constituency. (S3O-13316)

The minister will be aware that HEROtsc, which is based in Larbert in my constituency, has benefited greatly from support from the Scottish Government, creating some 200 new jobs. The same is true for Malcolm Allan Ltd, which is one of the country’s leading food manufacturers. In addition, Alexander Dennis Ltd has benefited greatly from the Scottish Government’s green bus fund and secured 46 of the 50 buses that will be manufactured through that scheme. Given the progress that has been made in the area, what further measures does the Scottish Government intend to take to continue to promote employment in Falkirk?

I welcome a number of the local residents of Denny and Dunipace who have come here for this debate because it is on a very important issue in their community. On the banks of the River Carron in my constituency are the two small towns of Denny and Dunipace. Together they have a population of around 15,000 and are the second-largest population centre in my constituency. In 1877, the villages of Denny and Dunipace were joined to form a single burgh and have remained that way ever since. However, for many centuries they were quite separate communities that lay on opposite banks of the River Carron. Tradition has it that in the 13th century, the priest in Dunipace was the uncle of William Wallace, and that the great man himself made many visits to Dunipace at that time. Denny was little more than a small village until the middle of the 19th century, but it has a long history that goes back to the medieval period, and it played a role in the wars of independence. Like many communities in the central belt, both Denny and Dunipace were greatly affected by industrialisation in the 19th century. Linen production and calico painting attracted workers from across the district and the population of the area continued to rise in the 20th century. New technologies brought decline to and, subsequently, closure of many of those industries. The area then turned to blackband ironstone mining to feed the iron industry in Falkirk. Coal mining, iron founding, brickworks and chemical works all played their part in the industrial make-up of the Denny and Dunipace area. In more recent years, the soft waters of the River Carron were favoured by paper mills, which saw the Carrongrove paper mill being established—exporting paper across the world and employing hundreds of men and women locally. However, the paper mill has closed. The communities of Denny and Dunipace are proud. They have a strong sense of community that is shaped largely by their past and a strong desire to see the area improve in the future. However, it is an area that is blighted by the most neglected town centre that one could possibly imagine. Town centres often serve as the heart of a community, where people shop, meet, work and socialise in the evening. They serve as the hub that draws the community together and they are often viewed as the window into the wider local community. Think about when one comes into a town for the first time: first impressions are so important. A clean, pleasant, welcoming town centre gives the impression of a pleasant and welcoming area. However, when visitors come into a town centre that is run down, unpleasant and uninviting, for many of them it is simply a matter of continuing to pass through. The desperate state of Denny town centre has not happened overnight. A legacy of neglect of the town centre over decades has led to the situation in which we now find ourselves. Six or seven years ago, Falkirk Council finally recognised that the town centre of Denny needed to change. However, despite widespread local consultation and the development of a master plan for redevelopment, for almost five years Falkirk Council has talked the talk of regeneration, but it has certainly not walked the walk. Not a single brick has been removed or laid as part of the so-called regeneration. In fact, Falkirk Council seems to be intent on making the situation even worse, given the £140,000-worth of temporary repair works that it has carried out in recent months, which have defaced buildings that many would have thought could not be defaced any further. I understand the need to carry out essential repairs, but I do not accept that a town centre that is already a carbuncle should be made even worse by such works. That is simply unacceptable. Because of the way in which Falkirk Council has treated the people of Denny and Dunipace and the lack of progress that it has made on regeneration of Denny town centre, it would be fair to say that the people have lost confidence in the council. They have been told that the economic downturn has prevented the original master plan from being taken forward, so I, along with many others in the town, have asked for the council to produce an alternative plan that can be delivered in the present economic climate and which reflects the desires and aspirations of the community. To this day, we are waiting for the council to present us with an alternative plan. The people of Denny and Dunipace have lost confidence in Falkirk Council and rightly so, but they are united in their desire to see the heart of their community restored. Over the past year, several campaigners in the town have organised a number of public meetings and protest marches around the blocks, all of which I have attended. Those events have brought together the old and the young, those who were born and bred in the area and those who have recently moved there. The message that has gone out from all those events is that the people of Denny and Dunipace are fed up waiting for the council to take the action that is needed, and that they will not sit back and allow the neglect of their community to continue. The campaign to fight Falkirk Council’s neglect took a new twist in September last year, when the local campaign group asked for the town to be awarded the carbuncle of the year award because of the state of the town centre. As a result, it is the holder of the “plook on the plinth” trophy. I do not expect the minister to be able to solve the problem, but I hope that he and other members will recognise that the community of Denny and Dunipace is, frankly, fed up with Falkirk Council’s lack of action, and that they will agree that it is now time for the council to deliver on the regeneration of Denny town centre that has been promised for so long. The very heart of the community is in desperate need of regeneration. Jobs are being lost as businesses pull out of the town and others choose not to locate there because of the condition of the town centre. Having a carbuncle for a town centre eats away at the community’s sense of pride. The community in Denny and Dunipace is strong and has pride in its local area. That sense of community and pride needs to be matched by a town centre that will serve as the new heart of the community. It is time for Falkirk Council to show the people of Denny and Dunipace the respect that they deserve by delivering on the promise of regeneration now.

The cabinet secretary referred in her statement to the general trend of strong progress that the Government has made in tackling delayed discharges. I, too, remember the time under Labour when more than 2,000 people were waiting six weeks or more for a discharge. I bring to her attention information that has become available in the past hour that the SNP-Lib Dem budget in Fife Council includes £4 million of additional social work spending to go towards adult care to help with progress on delayed discharges. Interestingly, the Labour group on Fife Council today voted against that extra £4 million and proposed an alternative budget that has no additional money for social work.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that that is yet further evidence of the false outrage from the Labour Party and that it demonstrates the hypocrisy that lies at that party’s heart?

I am one of four members of the Health and Sport Committee whose direction of travel in the past six or seven months has gone from membership of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee to consideration of the Palliative Care (Scotland) Bill to consideration of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill. There was a synergy between those three bills to a large extent, which made it an interesting time for those of us who went through the issues. People often say that two things in life are certain—taxes and death. What becomes of us after our death? Who knows? The only certainty is that our passing away will have to be certified. The bill will improve on the existing legislation, which goes back to the 19th century. I had considered the bill before it arrived at the Health and Sport Committee, but I do not think that many other members had given it much consideration before then. The bill was introduced after a considerable number of years in which representations had been made to the Government on the need to reform the law. One person who has advocated reform for some time is Graeme Easton, a funeral director in Bonnybridge in my constituency, who is the president of the British Institute of Funeral Directors. He has highlighted to me for a time the need to reform the death certification process. I welcome the bill as a step in the right direction, despite some concerns that have been expressed, to which I will return. I welcome in particular the removal of the historical difference between the costs of a burial and the costs of a cremation. It is important to recognise that step. It is not entirely clear to me why such a marked distinction was made. I can presume only that it was based on issues with medical science when cremations began to take place and on the fact that a buried body can at least be exhumed, which cannot happen after a cremation, as Ian McKee said. However, things have moved on and we need legislation that reflects that. The bill seeks to achieve that. The cost to a family for a cremation is significant. It is almost a straight £150, whereas a burial incurs no charge. Moving to a universal charge of about £30 for cremations and burials is reasonable, although it means that burials, for which people previously did not pay, will incur a £30 charge. As Richard Simpson said, part of the genesis for the bill was the investigation into the Harold Shipman case. As the committee fully accepts and as even the witnesses who gave evidence to the committee accepted, there can be no fail-safe system. No piece of legislation could be brought before the Parliament to ensure that such a case never happened again. The aim is to put in place a reasonable and proportionate system to deal with the issue. I will not rehearse many of the concerns that members have already raised, particularly on training and education for certifying doctors, which are extremely important. A legitimate concern is whether the new system will be as robust as the existing system is. We will have to keep an active eye on that. I repeat that we are trying to find a reasonable and appropriate system. Comparisons have been drawn with the new system that has been introduced in England and Wales. The cost to families of that new system is significantly higher than that of either the system in Scotland now and the one that the bill proposes. We must be mindful that, if we wanted to ramp up the potential checks in any new system, that could increase the costs of certification that families must deal with. Before we jump into saying, “Let’s just do a bit more,” we must recognise that we are shifting the financial burden on to families, because—as the committee agreed with the Government—the process should be largely self-financing. I listened closely to Ian McKee’s contribution. He is a good friend and always someone who is prepared to challenge the vested interests in the medical world, his former profession. I very much respect him for that. I have long been puzzled by why doctors are paid £73 for two certificates of cremation. The rate may be reasonable when compared to fees of around £200 an hour for a lawyer, but I do not think that doctors should have been paid that sort of money in the first place—never mind people making comparisons between them and lawyers. Some in the medical profession may not agree with that, but I suspect that the debate on the matter has more to do with the GP contract than anything else. At some point, I would like to see doctors not being paid for any of this type of thing. Unfortunately, GPs and others in the medical profession are paid for things that we should get as a matter of right from people who are in well-paid public sector jobs. I was taken by the concerns that were expressed by people from the Muslim and Jewish communities, in particular Leah Granat, about the need to ensure that the bill recognises the religious observances of faith groups that wish to see the disposal of a body within a 24-hour period after death. I note that the bill provides for an expedited procedure, but there remain concerns that delays may be caused if a case is elevated to a level 2 review. From the minister’s comments so far, I recognise that she is prepared to improve the bill further. I hope that we can provide that assurance to those in faith groups who remain concerned. Overall, like other members who have contributed to the debate, I am happy to support the bill at stage 1.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support the bus manufacturing industry. (S3O-12736)

The minister will be aware of the delight of Alexander Dennis Ltd, the bus manufacturer that is based in my constituency, at the recent announcement of the green bus scheme, which will see 46 of the 50 buses that will be manufactured under that scheme being made by the company in Falkirk. The workforce recognises the importance of the scheme and the fact that, proportionately, the spend on the Scottish green bus scheme is significantly greater than that on the English green bus scheme. Given the importance of the scheme, will the minister consider whether it can run into the future to try to promote greater moves towards green buses, which have great environmental benefits and also help manufacturing industry players such as Alexander Dennis, in my constituency?

I was pleased that the cabinet secretary confirmed that he will continue to provide funding for the small business bonus scheme, which helps to support some 1,500 businesses in my constituency. I know from my discussions with many of those businesses that they greatly value the scheme, even though it is opposed by the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats. How does the cabinet secretary’s proposed financial settlement for local government in Scotland compare with the settlement that the London Government has proposed for local authorities south of the border?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that in Bonnybridge, in my constituency, there is strong support for the re-establishment of a train station in the town, but that is not included in the present transport projects review. The cabinet secretary might not be aware that there is considerable frustration in the town because Falkirk Council has been unwilling to make the strongest possible case for the station, on the basis that the project is not in the existing review document. If there is a strong case for such a station to be established, will there be an opportunity for it to be included in  the transport project review list as something that could be considered for future funding?

I, like other members of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee, thank those who took the time to submit evidence to the committee or to present evidence to it directly. I also acknowledge the work that Margo MacDonald has done to get her bill to this stage. One of the most challenging aspects of the bill has not been trying to deal with some of its technical deficiencies, of which there are many; it has been trying to address the fundamental aspects that underpin the bill, which raise substantial moral and ethical issues. The bill has largely polarised views. The evidence that we received did not contain much in the way of, "I maybe support it or I maybe don't." People tended to be either for it or against it. Before I move on to some of the technical issues with the bill, I will try to address, in the limited time available to me, two central components of the bill: autonomy and dignity. The bill, in principle, hinges on the concept of personal autonomy, that an individual who is terminally ill should have the option to be prescribed medication to end their own life or to have it administered by another individual—assisted suicide or voluntary euthanasia. However, in my view, there is a contradiction in the concept of personal autonomy as it is presented in the bill. I will outline why that is the case. If I accept in principle the concept that an individual's personal autonomy should be respected in order that they be able to end their life, it seems illogical that the bill should place limitations on that autonomy. For example, why should someone who is diagnosed with a terminal illness have to wait until they are not likely to live much more than six months before their personal autonomy is respected? Why should the person's  autonomy be limited until they find life intolerable and/or are no longer able to live independently? A variety of checks and balances in society impact on personal autonomy for us all. Over the years, the courts have acknowledged the right to a private life, but they have also acknowledged that that right may have to be tempered in the interests of wider society. I respect the fact that some individuals and groups feel that the balance is not always correct—on occasions, that might be the case—but the bill's impact must be considered in the wider context of our society, and I do not believe that the concept of personal autonomy that it proposes is in wider society's interest.

He is entirely entitled to his view, but members must make a judgment on whether they support the concept of personal autonomy in the bill. I turn to dignity, which is the second important concept that underpins the bill. The bill makes a direct link between assisting someone to die and the concept of dignity. It was clear from the evidence that we received that there is no agreed definition of dignity. There are those who believe that the only dignified way of dealing with suffering is through ending life, but there are others who believe that dignity is inherent and remains with a person no matter the circumstances. I, as a committee member, have to make a judgment about which side of that divide I stand on. I believe that dignity is inherent and that the key to preserving it for people who are terminally ill is to provide good-quality palliative care and to respect the individual in their dying days. It is not helpful to link dignity to the process of death in the way in which the bill does. As the committee recognises, it is impossible to achieve agreement on the definition. As other committee members said, there is clarity in Scots law on assisted dying or voluntary euthanasia: it is illegal. The arguments on legal confusion are not justification for trying to change the legislation in Scotland. I turn to a couple of aspects of the bill on which there are serious concerns. The bill's policy memorandum seeks to draw comparisons with other jurisdictions that have comparable legislation. However, the committee  found that no other jurisdiction has comparable legislation. The member in charge calculated that 100 people per annum may use the bill's provisions if it is enacted. That figure was based on findings from Oregon. However, in Oregon, only assisted suicide, not voluntary euthanasia, is available in statute. We would be better drawing a comparison with the Netherlands, which would suggest that the number would be 10 times greater—1,000 people per annum would use the bill. I do not believe that the bill is in Scotland's interests. I hope that members of the Parliament will support the committee's recommendation.

The minister will appreciate that the powers to grow Scotland's economy are essential. Does she therefore share my disappointment at the comments made earlier today by the Secretary of State for Scotland when he ruled out the possibility of further tax powers being included in the bill, including power over corporate taxation? Will the minister press the London Government to ensure that it improves the Scotland Bill so that it includes the powers that are necessary to promote economic growth?

I have no intention of quoting Richard Simpson in  the course of my speech, even if Ross Finnie chose to do that this afternoon. The tenor of this health debate is a little healthier than was last Wednesday's, but yet again we are not unanimous in our position on the bill that is before us. From the debate thus far, there is clear agreement on the importance of patient rights and the need for those rights to be upheld. Our NHS should always ensure that it acts in the best interests of patients wherever possible. Unfortunately, that is not always the case. As we clearly demonstrate in our stage 1 report, the committee was unable to come to an agreed position on whether legislation is the best option to improve patient rights in our health service in Scotland. I am mindful of the sharp divide between those who support and those who oppose the bill. Broadly, those who represent patient interest groups and other interest groups in the NHS favour legislation, and those in the professional bodies that represent those who work in the NHS appear to be strongly opposed to it. That may, in itself, suggest that we have the balance somewhat correct. I recognise that some members believe that setting out a list of rights in a bill that has limited legal enforceability is not the appropriate way to go. As Christine Grahame said, some committee members see the contradiction in that. Over the course of the evidence that we received at committee, I was not persuaded that, if greater legal enforceability were introduced into the bill, there would be a desire out there to rush to the courts to enforce the legal provisions. The suggestion that including greater legal enforceability in the bill would somehow create a charter for lawyers is well off the mark and somewhat unfounded, on the basis of the evidence that we received as a committee. The cabinet secretary has indicated that she is prepared to look at how the provisions of the bill could be improved at stage 2 to give greater enforceability. I welcome that. I often deal with complaints from constituents about our health service, but no one has ever come into one of my surgeries and said, "I am here because I want to take our health service to court." Even if the bill were to provide greater legal enforceability, I suspect that no more of my constituents would rush into my office to say, "I want to take the NHS to court." In most instances where the NHS has got it wrong, it holds up its hands and says so. Unfortunately, at times there are cases where the NHS is not prepared to do so, which is to be regretted. I believe that that is influenced in part by the fact that at times there is a culture of fear in our NHS; a culture that says that admitting to mistakes leaves the NHS open to potential legal challenge. One of the benefits from the bill could be that we start to address that  unhealthy culture, which can exist in some parts of our NHS. In preparing for the debate, I thought about our experience in the lead-up to the coming into force of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. I remember when the Information Commissioner of Canada came to the Parliament to share his experience of the introduction of freedom of information in his country. He was clear that the issue and challenge was not the coming into force of the legislation but changing the cultural mindset of the public agencies affected by it. I have no doubt that since the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 came into force, many of our public bodies have changed their mindset and their attitude to making information available, and that there has been a significant cultural shift in the way in which they do that. I believe that one of the bill's potential benefits is that it could help to make the cultural shift that is necessary in the NHS, thereby ensuring that patients' rights are much more central to the decision making of clinicians and management and the way in which they plan and manage their services. Jim Elder-Woodward summed up the bill's importance fairly well when he gave evidence to our committee. In talking about the need to ensure that we have an NHS that is truly mutual, he said: "If we are to work on the basis of mutuality, each person around the table needs to bring a resource with them. For patients, the resource will be the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill".—[ Official Report, Health and Sport Committee , 29 September 2010; c 3456.] That can be provided by passing the bill.

Like other members of the Health and Sport Committee, I begin by offering my thanks to our able clerks for their work during our consideration of the bill and to the witnesses who took the time to submit evidence to the committee.  Tackling Scotland's relationship with alcohol remains a serious public challenge for our nation. I have no doubt that every member in the chamber has, at some point, witnessed at first hand the great damage that alcohol misuse is causing in our society. From the time that I have spent with the police in my constituency, I have seen the damage that it causes to communities, individuals, families and property and the subsequent financial costs to policing, justice and health. Although we might all recognise the scale of the problem, we also recognise that there is no silver bullet, quick solution or single policy that will have the impact that is necessary to change the problem quickly. That is why I supported the bill when it was introduced. It provided a comprehensive package of measures to tackle the problem more effectively. If we are serious about trying to create the culture shift that some people keep lecturing us about, we need such a comprehensive package of measures. Even though the bill still contains some important parts, I regret the removal of minimum unit pricing. I fail to understand why we, as a Parliament, have chosen to remove one of the strongest elements that we could have had in our toolbox for dealing with the issue. Many of the arguments on minimum unit pricing have been well aired today and I, too, do not intend to rehearse them again. However, in almost 12 years in the Parliament, I have never witnessed such unified support outwith the Parliament for something that was being debated by its politicians. It united GPs, consultants, children's charities, the churches, some of those who are involved in alcohol production and those who are involved in the licensed trade. Of course, during our consideration of the bill, a number of different views were expressed. During the past few years, I have noticed the rather underhand way in which some within the alcohol industry have gone about challenging aspects of the proposed legislation. I was recently chatting to a medic who is involved with public health, and he drew a close parallel with the way in which the tobacco industry used to behave 20 or 30 years ago when measures were being proposed to curb the use of tobacco. The tobacco industry divided opinion, misinformed and undermined measures in order to undermine the possibility of any agreement being reached. Those in the alcohol industry who have behaved in that way during the past few months and years have done themselves no favours, and their behaviour will be recalled by a number of us in the years to come. In passing the bill in its amended form, we provide a partial answer to the nation's problem with alcohol. However, the elephant remains in the  room—cheap booze. Until the Parliament is serious enough to face up to that challenge, we will continue to struggle to tackle what is a serious public health problem in our society.

Like other members, I was somewhat sympathetic to the concept that Labour has raised. However, when Labour's alcohol commission published its report, I was disappointed to note the lack of evidence that it presented on the issue. I hoped that, when witnesses from the commission appeared before the Health and Sport Committee, they would be able to elaborate further. Unfortunately, they failed to do so. For those who did not witness that particular evidence session, I can only describe it as being somewhat painful for the commission members who gave evidence and for the Labour members on the committee, because it was so pathetically poor. Given the lack of evidence, I was delighted yesterday when into my inbox popped a paper by Jackie Baillie entitled "Caffeinated Alcohol: an explosive mix: evidence, opinion and action". I was desperate to read the evidence but, as I went through it, page after page, I found no evidence. There was lots of opinion and a wee bit about action but, in reality, no evidence. In the evidence that the Health and Sport Committee received and to which Ross Finnie referred, Chief Superintendent Bob Hamilton stated that banning Buckfast "would have no great impact because people would simply drink something else." He continued: "Moreover, people do not buy only Buckfast; they might drink cider or whatever".—[ Official Report, Health and Sport Committee , 15 September 2010; c 3308.] As Jackie Baillie stated earlier, we cannot "knowingly pass a law" that is not legal. As we have heard, the proposal in amendment 28 is likely to be illegal.

Our nation's alcohol problem is probably the biggest public health challenge that we have faced in a generation. I recognise that some measures that will be necessary to try to redress the balance will not always prove to be popular. However, we as politicians and as a Parliament must be honest in presenting measures that can be effective in making a difference. I have no doubt that the Scottish Government has tried to achieve that in the bill. What has been evidenced so far is that the Opposition parties have failed on that point. No Opposition party disputes that, as alcohol has become cheaper in the past couple of decades, consumption levels have risen. That is a basic law of economics. All the parties accept that price has an important part to play in tackling the problem that our nation faces. The challenge and the question are: what are we prepared to do about that? Today, the Parliament has two options. One is to do nothing and accept the status quo of pocket-money-priced alcohol; the other is to take forward an effective measure that will start to address the issue and put us on track in dealing with pocket-money-priced alcohol. Some have argued that the price would be better addressed through duty and taxation. Let us reflect that one of the Liberal Democrat-Conservative Government's first acts was to reverse a 10p increase in the tax on cider. That in itself shows that the United Kingdom Government has no interest whatever in tackling the problem effectively. To say that we should leave the problem to another Parliament to deal with is to do nothing more than just accept the status quo.  I realise that some have not been persuaded by minimum unit pricing, but let us consider who they are—Opposition parties and a large section of the alcohol industry. I regret that parties in the Parliament have been more receptive to the message from the alcohol industry than to that from the public health services. I would always say that, in trying to deal with our nation's alcohol problem, advice from the alcohol industry should be taken with much caution. That is a bit like asking the tobacco industry how we should tackle our smoking problem. I have little doubt that, in trying to create the change that we need in our society, we must use every tool in the box to tackle the problem. One of the most significant tools is tackling price. I urge members who are prepared to rise to the challenge that our nation faces in its relationship with alcohol to do so by supporting the amendments in Nicola Sturgeon's name.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's response is to the study by the Independent Scientific Committee on Drugs that placed alcohol above heroin and crack cocaine in terms of the harm that it causes to society. (S3F-2676)

The First Minister is right to point out that the Opposition parties in the chamber have brought forward no credible alternative on pricing other than to say that they hope that the United Kingdom Government implements massive duty rises on what they call problem drinks. I draw the First Minister's attention to recent claims in an Institute for Fiscal Studies report that it is not possible at present under European Union directives for all alcohol duty to be set according to  the number of alcohol units. It is therefore impossible for the UK Government to achieve the benefits of minimum pricing via taxation, as the Opposition parties had hoped. Does the First Minister agree that the only meaningful action that this Parliament can take to tackle the issue of cheaply available alcohol is for it to take its responsibilities seriously and vote for minimum pricing next week?

I congratulate James Kelly on securing time for this important debate, which could not come at a better time, given that we are in the midst of the Commonwealth games in Delhi and that two very important football matches will soon take place. Although sport has a significant role to play in our society, one of the many challenges that it has faced over recent years—most notably with the creation of the Scottish Parliament—is that it has been difficult to create a unified voice in taking forward a common agenda in sport. At times, people have been at pains to contradict one another when they should have been working in a more unified way to try to impress on politicians in all parties the importance of sport. I am delighted that after many years of work in trying to create that uniform voice, we now have the vote for sport pledge and the sports manifesto that the Scottish sport alliance has produced. I  congratulate Kim Atkinson and her team on ensuring that that has been achieved. I encourage all members in the chamber and all candidates who are planning to stand at next year's elections to take the opportunity to sign the pledge. In the present economic climate, to which James Kelly referred, it is extremely important that we do not lose the focus on the value of sport in our society. Given that 80 per cent of funding for sport comes from local authorities, it is important that sports budgets are not seen as being the soft option when it comes to making the cuts. Sport clearly has an important role to play in making our society more cohesive and healthier, and in improving wellbeing overall. Given the significant health challenges that we as a society face, any undermining of the tools that we need to tackle our unhealthy diet and environment will only weaken our ability to meet those challenges more effectively—indeed, arguably, it could compound those problems yet further. Although there are benefits from sport for health, wellbeing and social cohesion, we should also be prepared to celebrate sport for sporting purposes. It is important that we recognise that sport can be good fun, enjoyable and challenging, and that it brings a lot of wider benefits. We should be prepared to speak about sport for sport's sake, because it is a good thing in its own right, as the vote for sport initiative acknowledges. The athletes of team Scotland who are currently representing their nation in the Commonwealth games in Delhi have got there only because of the investment that has been made during the past few decades. It is important, if we want to have a team Scotland of which we can be proud in the Commonwealth games in 2014 and 2018, that we continue that investment here today. I hope that we can, through the vote for sport initiative, continue to maintain the necessary level of investment to ensure that we are successful as a sporting nation. My message to members is that they should sign the pledge and stand up for sport. I wish team Scotland in Delhi and in Prague good luck.

To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet  Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met the chair of NHS Forth Valley and what issues were discussed. (S3O-11457)

I draw to the cabinet secretary's attention concerns that have been raised with me by NHS Forth Valley staff about the availability of parking for staff at the new Forth Valley Royal hospital. Will she outline what advice the Scottish Government gives to health boards when planning for such new facilities on what parking should be provided for staff? Will she also advise which public authority has the final say on what level of parking should be provided? Is it the local authority or the local health board?

I will not offer another definition of "clinical portal". Members have provided several definitions and I suspect that the members who still do not understand what a clinical portal is probably never will.  It is fair to say that clinical portals, e-health and telehealth make for a dry topic. I confess that I have never had a constituent come to my surgery to complain about problems with the clinical portal or e-health. However, constituents have expressed concern about the loss of medical records and their difficulties in accessing records. I have little doubt that an appropriate, effective clinical portal offers a key way to address issues that my constituents have experienced over the years. When the public sector talks about being innovative and finding IT solutions to such problems, I am conscious that it does not have a great track record in the area. However, it is fair to say that the NHS has gradually introduced more and more IT into its processes during the past 25 years, which has revolutionised how many patients are treated. The challenge is to ensure that we continue to find innovative and effective IT measures that will improve patients' treatment in the NHS. The key test of such innovation must be whether it improves patient experience. That is the principle. The committee heard that, rather than patients' interests being central to the matter, innovations have been stifled over the years by what appears to be professional self-interest. That is sad. I will return to the issue, which relates to telehealth more than it relates to the clinical portal. Significant progress has been made in the development of an effective clinical portal, as members said. The main objective, however, is to improve patient experience and during the committee's evidence gathering I was concerned about the lack of patient engagement in that development process. I accept that the clinical portal programme board is trying to shape things and take the initiative forward at national level, but I am concerned that there is no permanent patient representative on that key body, which is largely made up of clinicians and IT experts. That in itself represents a failure on the part of some of the people who are leading the approach in the NHS to recognise that the clinical portal is about making life easier and better not just for clinicians, but patients. I hope that there will be greater engagement with patients in future, to ensure that the portal is designed to reflect their views. We should not overplay the extent to which professional self-interest is stifling developments in telehealth, but nor should we underestimate the impact of such self-interest. When the committee started its inquiry, I was under the impression that telehealth had made significant progress over the years. I was disappointed to find that little progress has been made and that the progress that has been made has been relatively slow.  I acknowledge that progress is starting to be made in some areas, but there seems to be a pattern with telehealth. People will say, "Let's try a pilot in this particular field and see how it runs for a few years." If an initiative proves to be quite effective, we will hear no more about it. Ian McKee highlighted what happened with the telehealth programme that his practice developed some 35 years ago. I hope that one of the key objectives of the Scottish centre for telehealth with its move into NHS 24 will be ensuring that pilots and programmes that are developed are rolled out throughout the country so that good practice is spread across different health boards. We need to ensure that we capture the benefits that come from those pilots and do not lose them time and again. That appears to have been the pattern over the past two or three decades. Professional self-interest, particularly in relation to dermatology, was highlighted to the committee. Greater use of telehealth in dermatology could probably be well developed, but it was suggested to the committee that the real inhibitor to that is that fewer dermatologists would be required to do the work that is currently done. It is not exactly in the dermatologists' interests to be too enthusiastic about the introduction of greater use of telehealth in that field and I have no doubt that elements of professional self-interest will creep in to undermine telehealth developments in other areas of health care. To conclude, it is extremely important that we try to make greater progress in the use of telehealth, but we must also be prepared to confront professional self-interest when it arises. The key way to achieve that is through strong leadership in driving forward telehealth measures in the NHS. It is probably better to do that in the current economic climate than it has ever been.

The cabinet secretary outlined that there were in the course of using the buddy system, some delays in information being passed back to the Scottish Ambulance Service. Although I recognise that an investigation into that matter is taking place at present, given that we remain committed to the buddy system in the meantime, is the Scottish Ambulance Service introducing any interim changes to try to ensure that in the unlikely event that we require to do the same again, we minimise delays?

We have heard this morning about the extent of Scotland's problem in its relationship with alcohol. The evidence that the committee received clearly illustrated the deep-rooted and long-standing problem that Scotland has in that relationship, which is causing serious damage to individuals, families and communities throughout Scotland. The committee received evidence from children's organisations, churches, health professional groups, medical professional groups, poverty groups, the Royal Society of Edinburgh and students organisations. As a member of the committee, I thank those organisations for the time that they took to submit their evidence to us, the range of which demonstrates the extent to which the issue affects our society. The committee's stage 1 report makes it clear that, despite the measures that have been taken by present and previous Governments to tackle Scotland's relationship with alcohol, more needs to be done. If we are to achieve real change in the area, we must implement radical measures that will start to change Scotland's relationship with alcohol. I believe that, collectively, the measures that are proposed in the bill will achieve that. Much of today's debate has focused on minimum pricing, which was also the case during consideration of the bill in committee. A series of arguments, many of them legitimate, have been made against minimum pricing. The main one, which was made at the outset, concerned the legality of minimum pricing. The main proponent of that argument was the Scotch Whisky Association. However, it is clear from the evidence that the SWA submitted to the Health and Sport Committee that a lot of the detail is fairly  speculative in nature. The degree of certainty that the SWA tried to present to the committee in its argument demonstrates that it is simply trying to talk up the issue of illegality despite the fragile legal basis for its proposition. The more measured evidence from the Law Society of Scotland demonstrated that there is the potential to ensure that minimum pricing is capable of complying with EU law. It is not acceptable for those who oppose minimum pricing to shout as loudly as possible that it may be or is illegal, despite the limited legal basis for that argument.

Robert Brown makes a fundamental mistake: even if the minimum price was announced today or last month, that would not stop those who argue that minimum pricing is illegal. Any provision of this nature could be challenged in the European courts. Overcoming the issue of legality is not dependent purely on the announcement of the minimum price. I turn to another argument against minimum pricing, which is the impact that it would have on low-income families. Again, that was a legitimate concern raised by committee members and by other members today. However, when we hear politicians arguing that the policy will have a serious impact on people from low-income families, I would expect the same argument to be made by those who work with children from low-income families and with families who are on or below the poverty line. It is interesting that the evidence that the committee received from such organisations does not make that argument. In fact, they say that they support minimum pricing. They raise concerns that the policy could have an impact on low-income families, but they ask us to monitor the impact of the policy once it is introduced.

I am not entirely sure how relevant that is to the issue. As the member will be aware, Children 1st, Barnardo's Scotland and other organisations support minimum pricing as a way of trying to deal with the serious damage experienced by low-income families as a result of overconsumption of cheap alcohol. The member raises another argument that has been created for political reasons, without any evidence to support it.  Another main concern is over the potential for minimum pricing to put more money into the retailers' pockets. Again, that is a legitimate concern. However, we must consider the evidence that the committee received on the issue. Increased income for retailers in this regard is driven by two things: one is to do with minimum pricing, and the other is to do with the ban on discounting. What I find interesting is that those who argue against minimum pricing on the basis that it will increase retailers' profits are perfectly happy to support the ban on discounting, despite the fact that it will also increase retailers' profits. That position is completely hypocritical, yet it was adopted by Richard Simpson today. I welcome the fact that people on all sides of the debate recognise that price and availability are important drivers in the consumption of alcohol. However, it is staggering that those who oppose minimum pricing as a serious attempt to tackle the problem in Scotland have not come up with one alternative measure to ensure that we get on top of the issue.

Although my political instincts may wish me to say otherwise, it would be churlish not to welcome the fact that the new London Government has taken a new approach in seeking to establish more constructive relationships with the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament, as we seek to tackle the problems that our nations face. However, the so-called respect agenda, which has been referred to a number of times, is anything but special. In fact, that agenda should be the norm for how two Governments and two Parliaments interact with each other in a mature and responsible way. If anything, the new respect agenda only serves to highlight the sheer lack of respect that the previous Labour Government had  for the Scottish Parliament, and for the SNP Government in particular. Sadly, the new Labour approach to that relationship seemed to be shaped more by Labour MPs' petty jealousies about the Scottish Parliament and a hatred of the SNP's being in government. Despite our considerable political differences with the new London Government, if there is an opportunity to take Scotland's interests forward with it, we should work to do so to try to achieve that. The late Donald Dewar often pointed out that devolution is not an end in itself, but is very much a process. It appears that the new London Government, in trying to take forward the Calman proposals, recognises that. It will be no surprise to members to hear that I, as a nationalist, believe that the best option for my country is that it should be a normal independent country. However, I also welcome a number of proposals in the Calman report, which the London Government is now looking at taking forward. My colleagues have referred to a number of measures that SNP members are happy to support. That does not prevent us from highlighting the fact that there are serious concerns about the financial elements of the proposals in the Calman report. Even in what Scotland Office ministers have said over the past couple of weeks, I have detected hesitancy in their comments on the financial package that came with the Calman report. I suspect that that is a reflection of their realisation of the limitations of the proposals. The Calman tax proposals are more reflective of a desire to find common ground for the unionist parties than of a desire to provide a financial package that effectively delivers more fiscal responsibility. In creating that compromise, a financial package has been produced that many leading economists and businessmen have viewed as being potentially damaging to Scotland's interests. The proposals would do no more than take Scotland from a position of getting its pocket money from the London Government to its having a Saturday job. If the objective is to create greater financial responsibility and transparency, I do not see how the Calman proposals can achieve that. That is where Labour's problem lies in signing up entirely to the Calman report. Calman's proposals have been largely overtaken by events. The comments and concerns of a number of leading economists must be taken seriously. Professor Andrew Hughes-Hallett, who was a member of the advisory panel to the Calman commission, has been quoted a number of times. He said of the tax proposals: "However attractive the Calman proposals might be in the political context, they are seriously flawed ... for simple economic reasons".  We have a responsibility to listen to such concerns. In doing so, we should be prepared to move beyond the political context of the proposals and ensure that the measures that the London Government takes forward create greater financial responsibility in Scotland and are based on sound economic grounds. The tax elements of Calman's proposals are far from radical, and they certainly could not be considered to be a significant step towards full fiscal responsibility. As my colleague Alasdair Allan highlighted, they would not give us control over tax revenues, rates or offshore revenues. That would place our financial responsibility largely on a par with that of local authorities. I am prepared to take the new London Government's respect agenda at face value, but its actions will demonstrate the true extent of its commitment. In economic terms, respect for Scotland involves our having fiscal responsibility that allows the Scottish Parliament to take greater control over Scotland's financial affairs. The Steel commission report summed up the best way of achieving greater financial responsibility when it spoke about allowing the Scottish Government to "raise as much as practical of its own spending." One option may be to have all taxes raised and held in Scotland and a portion paid to the London Treasury. Another option may be the assigned-revenue route. I am more supportive of the first option, although both are simply much clearer and focused than the Calman proposals. If the London Government is serious about respect, it must recognise such weaknesses and take measures that will deliver more financial responsibility.

The NHS is one of those public institutions that is held dear by the vast majority of the public. Everyone would prefer not to have to use the NHS, but we are very grateful for it when need arises, as I found recently when I had to go to the A and E department at 2 o'clock in the morning with one of my sons. The vast majority who use the NHS have a positive experience of care provision. However, what makes the NHS perhaps unique among public bodies is the way in which people simply place their trust in it. People place their trust in the doctors to make the right clinical decisions to ensure that, as patients, they receive the best treatment and the treatment that they require. People also trust that the staff will act in their best interests in their time of need. People trust that everyone in the NHS has the shared objective of doing the very best in caring for them. That said, there are clearly times when our NHS does not get it right. Sometimes, the quality of treatment or quality of care that the staff provide to patients is not what it should be. There are clearly times when the very complex system that is our NHS does not work collectively in the best interests of the patient. Given that all members will have received complaints from constituents who have raised concerns about the failings of the NHS—some members might even have personal experience of that—it is important that we take the right measures to try to rectify those problems. The cabinet secretary rightly pointed out that we no longer receive complaints from constituents about waiting times for particular procedures. That is certainly my experience, but I now receive more complaints about the quality of care that people receive from the NHS. I believe that it is important to ensure that the trust that people place in the NHS is returned in the quality of care that they receive from the service. That is why I think that the quality strategy is both timely and welcome. In few public institutions do people place such trust in the organisation itself, quite literally on a daily basis. Patients place their lives in the hands of the NHS and rely on it to get things right for them. It is essential that the quality of our NHS is as high as possible throughout the patient journey  so that patients get the necessary care and support. No doubt the debates around greater efficiency and productivity in the NHS will continue over the weeks and months ahead. Given the growing financial pressure that all of the public sector is under, there will be further debate about whether we can get more out of the existing financial envelope for public services to make them more effective in delivering the services that are required. I say to Jackie Baillie that it is fantasy to think that we can have cuts by the UK Government to the Scottish Government's budget but not expect that to trickle down in some way and impact on our public services. The question is about the priorities that the Government chooses for any additional spend. I repeat: it is complete fantasy to think that cuts to the Scottish Government's budget will not impact on public services in Scotland.

It is remarkable that the cabinet secretary has managed to secure that increase in funding for the NHS here in Scotland in the face of a £500 million cut to the Scottish Government's grant, which was made by the previous Labour Government. We can clearly see where the Scottish Government's priorities lie: in protecting front-line public services such as those in the NHS. I particularly welcome the recognition in the strategy document for staff and for the focus in the NHS on being caring and compassionate. Staff have a key role in delivering that care. We can have state-of-the-art hospitals and the best clinicians in the world—we have many of them in the NHS in Scotland—but we must ensure that the quality of NHS staff is as high as possible. That can be the tell-tale mark of the patient's experience of the NHS. Staff have a central role in delivering the strategy. It is through high-quality staff that we can deliver high-quality care for patients in the NHS.

For a minute, Presiding Officer, I thought that you were going to say that I had 18 minutes. Six minutes will suffice. As a number of members have indicated, it can be difficult at times to get people to engage with the Europe debate. I agree with Sandra White that it can be difficult to engage the public on European issues, largely because of the complexity and lack of transparency that is often perceived to be associated with them. Engagement with members in this establishment is also an issue, as is  reflected by the rather sparse attendance at this debate—although I suspect that subscription to the debate on the zero waste plan will be no greater. The attendance at today's debate highlights the need for us to ensure that members are as engaged as possible with the EU process.

I will return to that issue later, when I discuss the role that the Parliament has to play. As Irene Oldfather outlined in her opening remarks, the purpose of today's debate is to give members an opportunity to debate the EC's work programme and to express their views on issues to which it relates. Those include the CAP, the CFP, renewables, health and new competences for which the Lisbon treaty provides. There is a slight danger that it is always the same individuals in this Parliament who are involved in EU policy issues. We must try harder to engage other members to take a greater interest. The new work programme, as outlined by the EC, will take us to 2014. It is helpful in that it covers a three-to-four year period as opposed to being set annually, which will provide new opportunities for us to be more focused in our engagement with the EU. Opportunity is very important. Notwithstanding the complexities of the EU process—which several members and I have referred to—and the limitations that we have as a nation and as a non-member state of the EU, we must, with the extension of the EU's competences into a range of areas which are devolved responsibilities here in Scotland, be much more intelligent in how we engage in the process. That is not something that only applies to the Scottish and UK Governments; it also applies to this Parliament. It is important that the Government of Scotland undertake the necessary tracking work to see what is happening in Europe at various times and that, where necessary, it works with the EU and co-operates with it where that is in Scotland's interests. It is also important for the UK Government, which is engaged as a member state, to flag up issues to the Scottish Government at a much earlier stage where it can, if it believes that there are issues that have to be addressed. Although there are opportunities arising from the work programme, there is a need to be much more  engaged in it, and I recognise that there are limitations, which Murdo Fraser highlighted. One is the very limited consultation period that may be available in which to make known views. Irene Oldfather highlighted horizon scanning, which is an effective way to pick up on such issues much earlier in order to maximise our influence on policy development and to extract as much benefit as we can from any future policy direction at EU level. At Parliament level—as was highlighted by Pauline McNeill, Helen Eadie and others—there is a much greater role for the subject committees to be interested in EU matters, in particular with the extended competences within the EU under the Lisbon treaty. I recall from my years on the Justice Committee that we expressed considered interest in issues relating to EU justice and home affairs matters. One of the real limitations on the committee's ability to engage was the volume of issues that came forward at EU level. I recall hearing evidence from Scottish Executive officials that so many EU justice and home affairs meetings were taking place that it was difficult for civil servants to cover all of them. In her intervention, Helen Eadie raised the issues of health and sport, which are areas in which the EU now has some competence. She is quite correct: the EU issues that are meant to be considered by the Health and Sport Committee have had to be postponed for a few weeks. It is, however, fair to say that they have had to be postponed in order for the committee to deal with the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill because individuals such as herself have been seeking further evidence on the bill and we have had to put back EU matters that we should have considered much earlier. This has been a wide-ranging debate: there are those who would like to see the Scottish Government being a member state within the EU and representing Scotland's interests by that means; there are supporters of a United States of Europe; and there are those who would like the Scottish Government simply to operate through the UK Government, as at present. Whatever members' views may be, this Parliament cannot avoid the fact that the role of the EU in our daily lives over the next couple of years and in the future, is likely to increase. Therefore, the Scottish Government and Parliament must do everything possible to ensure that we serve the Scottish nation's interests.

A number of constituents who are stranded overseas with children who are due to start their exams next week have been in touch with me to say that their return flights are scheduled to leave just before the start of the exams or after they have taken place. The cabinet secretary said that SQA has put in place contingency arrangements to deal with the issue, but will he give us a bit more detail about the provisions that will be put in place for children who might not have had enough time to revise for their exams, or who might miss them because of delays?

To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the chief fire officer of Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service. (S3O-10047)

The minister will be aware that Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service purchased two combined aerial platform appliances several years ago, at a cost of some £450,000 each. Since their day of purchase, the appliances have never been operational, due to very serious defects within them. When they are loaded with water and crewed up, they are actually overweight for use on roads in the United Kingdom. Serious failings were made in how the vehicles were procured. I know that other fire authorities have purchased similar vehicles and have experienced the same problems, and some fire services continue to purchase the appliances. Given the serious problems that have occurred with the vehicles in the course of the procurement process and given the considerable amount of taxpayers' money involved, does the minister agree with me that there is a need for a very thorough investigation to consider how the mistakes in the procurement of the appliances were made?

In February, I had the pleasure of being part of a CPA Scotland branch delegation to Malawi, led by Karen Gillon. It had been five years since I was last in Malawi, and a n

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's response is to the report produced by the youth commission on alcohol. (S3F-2288)

The commission's report makes some 38 recommendations, a number of which focus on providing leisure activities for young people to offer a genuine alternative to drinking. Does the First Minister agree that providing diversionary activities for Scotland's  young people has a vital part to play in challenging our binge-drinking culture? Will he inform the Parliament what action the Scottish Government is taking on that?

I want to focus my remarks on Alexander Dennis Ltd, the UK's biggest bus manufacturing company, which is headquartered in my constituency, where it employs 900 people. It is the biggest manufacturing company in my constituency and, outwith the local authority and NHS Forth Valley, it is probably the biggest employer. Therefore, it plays a very important part in the economy of the Falkirk area. The recent economic downturn has had a serious impact on the company. In the past year, I think that four or five of the major bus operators in the UK have significantly reduced their capital spend on purchasing buses. Some have gone from an annual capital spend of £50 million to £70 million on buses every single year to a planned capital spend of only £15 million to £20 million. That has had a serious knock-on effect on companies such as Alexander Dennis. As a number of members have said, the workforce has played its part in trying to address the economic difficulties that the company faces and, for a number of months, has been on a three-day week. The economic downturn has also had a serious impact on Alexander Dennis's supply chain—many of the small and medium-sized companies that supply it with parts and materials. I know that Scottish Enterprise has been working hard with those companies to try to sustain them through the downturn. Like others have done, I pay a personal tribute to the significant contribution that the workforce at Falkirk has made in going to a three-day week to support the company through the downturn. The move back to a five-day week in April has been realised only because of the significant contribution that the workforce was prepared to make when the company found itself in economic difficulty. It is also important to recognise that Alexander Dennis has a very good future ahead of it. We should not create the impression that the company is not capable of growing and developing and returning to the level that it was at before the economic downturn. I know that the company is very keen that the idea does not take hold that it is not capable of moving towards a good future. The cabinet secretary will be aware that, for many years, I have pressed him regularly about providing greater support to the bus industry and the bus manufacturing industry. One of the key issues that Alexander Dennis has often raised with me—I believe that the company raised this with  the cabinet secretary when he visited the factory—is how to create incentives for bus operators to move towards having more environmentally friendly buses. It suggested to me that the BSOG mechanism could be used to create such an incentive. I am particularly pleased that the Government has gone down that route, because the company's view is that it is a more sustainable way of encouraging bus operators to move towards low-carbon and hybrid buses. I want to focus on hybrid buses in particular. Alexander Dennis is not just a UK or European leader but an international leader in hybrid bus technology. All the independent assessments of hybrid bus technology point to Alexander Dennis being a world leader in that respect. However, one of the challenges that Alexander Dennis has faced is in creating a platform so that bus operators recognise that hybrid buses have serious benefits for them. For some time, the company has been looking for a way to create that platform so that bus operators in Scotland and the rest of the UK can see those practical benefits. Despite the financial benefits of reduced fuel costs to the bus operator, hybrid buses are significantly more expensive than normal, less environmentally friendly buses—they are £100,000 to £150,000 more expensive. It is therefore difficult to get bus operators to buy into making that move unless they can see the practical benefits of it. That is why I welcome the £1 million that has been given to SPT to create the platform that the company has been looking for. Cathy Jamieson talked about compliance with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. The bus operators have a timeframe for single-deck buses to be DDA compliant by 2015 and for double-deck buses to be compliant by 2017. I would not like to see any slippage in that timeframe, because that would undermine the potential benefits for companies such as Alexander Dennis and the wider environmental benefits. I know that that matter is outwith the minister's competence, but I hope that he will take the opportunity to make representations to UK ministers and seek an assurance that they are not looking for further slippage in the timeframe, which would be a retrograde step that would damage companies such as Alexander Dennis in the future.

During her discussions with representatives of NHS Fife, will the cabinet secretary take the opportunity to raise with them the support that their director of public health has given to the introduction of a form of minimum pricing for alcohol in Scotland, a position that is now supported by all directors of public health in Scotland? Will she also raise the fact that the NHS Fife director of public health is now joined by four of the most eminent experts in public health in the world in calling for the introduction of minimum pricing in Scotland?

As far as the budget process itself is concerned, over the 10 and a half years since this Parliament was established, there have always been calls for more and more detail on the draft budget and committees have complained about the lack of time to scrutinise properly the relevant aspects. Some of the comments that have been made over the past few months and weeks, and even today, about that lack of detail are very familiar—in fact, they have been around for many years. The only difference is that some who now peddle those arguments are the very people who dismissed them in the past.  The whole process has been given an added edge by the fact that this budget is being taken through by a minority Government. Of course, some will say that because a minority Government has to negotiate much more widely the process becomes messy, which in some way undermines the Government's strength. One might argue that, given that the people of Scotland did not give any single party the mandate to rule fully in the Parliament, the inclusive nature of this budget process and the fact that there had to be dialogue with other parties have made the process itself more open and engaging than ever before. I have no doubt that the additional measures that the cabinet secretary has implemented in response to suggestions on independent scrutiny of the budget will enhance the process yet further for parliamentarians throughout the chamber and will assist the committees in scrutinising the process more effectively.

The level of detail that the cabinet secretary has released this year in relation to scrutiny of the Scottish Government's budget is greater than has ever been released in the preceding nine years. We must give some credit where it is due. I now turn to some specific measures in the budget. I can say to the cabinet secretary that, in the past five months, I have received no representations from any constituents on the reinstatement of GARL, but that hardly a day goes by when I do not have a constituent making representations to me on housing problems and the lack of available social housing. In its most recent estimate, Falkirk Council said that it had approximately 17,000 units, but approximately 12,000 people on its housing waiting list. However, for the first time in many years, Falkirk Council is embarking on a social house building programme, as a result of the additional investment that this Scottish Government has put into providing social housing. I am delighted to hear about the further £31 million that has been made available for more social housing, because that will bring direct benefits to my constituents on an issue about which they make representations to me.

I am afraid that I have too much more to say. I am also delighted that the Government is maintaining the small business bonus scheme.  Every small businessperson that I have spoken to in my constituency over the past year has highlighted the importance of the scheme in sustaining their business through this period of economic difficulty. Many small businesses have saved thousands of pounds, helping them through the economic downturn, and the scheme's impact should never be underestimated. The extra £10 million that has been provided for home insulation is also essential. One plea that I make to those who will be involved in deciding how the money will be used is for greater support to be given for properties that are difficult to insulate. I have many constituents who live in old properties and who struggle to maintain them and keep them heated. I hope that greater recognition can be given to the problem that many of those properties are difficult to insulate. I fully acknowledge the economic difficulties that the country faces and the pressure that that has put on the Scottish Government's budget. Not all aspects of the budget can be maintained, but this budget strikes the right balance and, for that reason, it should be supported at decision time.

To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to promote Scottish produce. (S3O-9343)

The cabinet secretary will be aware from his recent visit to Malcolm Allan Ltd—a food production company in my constituency that has been highly successful in expanding its business over recent years and which has benefited from Government support, for which I know that it is grateful—of the potential that exists for that company to grow even further. I am sure that the same is true of other Scottish food producers. Is the Scottish Government looking at taking further measures to help to support greater expansion of such companies so that we ensure that we continue to develop them to the economic benefit of the communities in which they are based?

Tobacco remains a product that causes great damage in our society. We all recognise that there is no single action that we can take to make our society tobacco free and that there are no quick answers. I believe that one key measure in tackling the problem of smoking in our society is to change our cultural attitudes and the place that tobacco has in our society. It is fair to say that the legislation to ban smoking in public places was one of the most significant steps that the Parliament has taken in that process; the measures in this bill continue it. The tobacco industry has long argued that tobacco displays in shops are not a form of advertising but purely a display for its products. However, given the industry's track record, it is difficult to know when we should believe it. The evidence shows clearly that, since a ban on advertising cigarettes was introduced, the number of brand variants in tobacco displays has increased dramatically. That is all about getting more shelf space and advertising the goods a little more in shops. As we continue to try to change the place that smoking and tobacco have in our society and to change attitudes, it is time that we ended the highly visible promotional displays that exist in such prominent positions in our shops. That would signify our intent to make those changes. I accept that there is limited evidence about the potential benefits from a ban on such displays. That is largely because such bans have been in place for only a short time in other jurisdictions. However, I prefer to take the precautionary approach and ban displays now to prevent more people from taking up smoking and damaging their health in the future. It is important, too, that we ensure in the bill that tobacco is treated in the same way as other high-risk products such as solvents, alcohol and fireworks, and that we end the purchase of cigarettes from vending machines, whether operated remotely or not. Tobacco should not be exempt from the way in which we deal with other high-risk products, and it is welcome that we are bringing our treatment of tobacco into line.  Given that tobacco causes significant damage to individuals and families, and to our society as a whole, we must do everything possible to tackle the issue. I believe that the bill is a further important step forward in ensuring that we do exactly that.

In speaking against amendments 1 and 2, I note that when a very similar amendment to amendment 1 was lodged at stage 2 the committee did not support it. It is worth bearing in mind that one in 10 of all Scottish 13 to 15-year-olds who smoke regularly access their cigarettes via vending machines. As a result, banning these machines is one of the best ways of ensuring that such a source is not available to them. I understand the concerns raised by rural communities, where in the absence of a shop the local pub might sell cigarettes. However, under the legislation, those pubs will still be able to store cigarettes behind the counter and sell them to people face to face. The argument that children who live in a pub will be able to access the cigarettes stored behind the counter is somewhat ridiculous; after all, the same argument could be made with regard to access to alcohol, and no one seems to have a problem with that. In that light, I think that the argument is something of a red herring in dealing with what is an important matter. Moreover, we have no robust evidence to demonstrate that remote-controlled vending machines are a much more secure way of ensuring that young people cannot access cigarettes. I believe that, given the lack of evidence, we should not take such action. I also note that we do not allow fireworks, solvents, alcohol or other harmful substances to be sold in vending machines. Why should such a deadly product as cigarettes be exempt from that? I believe that we should ban these vending machines and that the bill's approach to the issue is measured and proportionate.

As a couple of members have said, mental health services are often called the Cinderella of our national health service. During the inquiry, I was struck by how CAMHS appear to be the Cinderella of the Cinderella service, as they are often simply not a priority. During the inquiry, I had the pleasure, along with Ross Finnie—I said that I had the pleasure along with him, not the pleasure with him—of visiting the Barnardo's family placement service in Edinburgh, which is based at Haymarket. It is a specialist service that works with children and families who are often referred by a statutory service such as a CAMHS team or educational psychologist. Over the course of the visit, I was struck by the real difficulty that children, young people and their families can have in accessing services. I am referring not to a difficulty in accessing services purely because of a lack of capacity in the existing infrastructure but to the failure at times to recognise that a child is presenting with symptoms of an emotional or mental health problem. We heard that getting past the first hurdle—establishing the need to refer a child to services—is a real difficulty.

I recall the strong evidence that we received from Professor Law. The visit emphasised for me the real need to ensure not only that adequate services are made available but that those who work with young people have the skills and training to allow them to identify issues at an early stage. Other members mentioned that. As Christine Grahame said, even  the pre-school stage is important if we are to prevent problems from developing further down the line. Clearly, as we heard in evidence, early intervention is a key priority in trying to deal with the issue. We have to recognise the challenges in trying to make early interventions at the pre-school stage. My children go to pre-school, and I am not sure how I would react if a nursery nurse were to tell me that my son was presenting with emotional problems. If pre-school staff are to take on this role, we need to recognise the dramatic change that it may make in their relationship with parents. It would be extremely important to ensure that we train staff not only to recognise things but to do so to a deep and meaningful degree. There may be a need for measures to be instigated in programmes that pre-school establishments have in place. Also, if we expect staff to pick up and highlight issues to parents, it is crucial that the correct infrastructure is put in place to support them. Much has been said on the need for professionals to pick up on issues, but we cannot get away from the fact that the first port of call in picking up on any children's mental health issue is the child's parent or carer. We should not expect health visitors or anyone else always to have to pick up on these things; parents have that responsibility. I took from the inquiry the need to ensure that parents have a better understanding of the issues around attachment and the emotional problems that can arise as the child develops, so that they can take action to address them when possible. The framework addresses many of the fundamental problems that the committee highlighted in our inquiry report. I recognise fully the minister's personal commitment to the issue and that the Government is taking forward implementation of the framework. Although local authorities and health boards have the responsibility to take forward the framework in their local areas, I am concerned by the evidence that we heard about who exactly is in the driving seat. I am conscious that health boards and local authorities have different priorities at times and that it can be difficult to get them to agree. We should look to take forward interim measures that allow us to see whether progress is being made. I note the minister's comments and that she will work with the committee to address the matter. The committee's report provides a detailed and considered focus on some of the deficiencies that exist in services for children and adolescents who have mental health problems. It is clear that those deficiencies have developed over a considerable period, and it is fair to say that the minister has been dealt a difficult hand in trying to sort out many of the issues. The minister and the  Government have given priority to the framework. We are travelling in the right direction, and I hope that we will continue to give priority to the framework in the future so that we can make real change.

How much influence will communities that are affected by the line have on mitigating measures that are brought forward by the applicants and who will have the final say on whether the measures are acceptable?

To ask the Scottish Government how public authorities will be expected to exercise their duties under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights when withdrawing funding from mental health services. (S3O-8737)

The minister will be aware that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is a multilateral treaty that has been ratified by the UK Government. The United Nations committee that is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the treaty recently made a number of recommendations about implementing it more effectively in Scotland, including recognising the need to intensify efforts to overcome health inequalities, and to decrease the number of suicides among mental health patients. How does the Government intend to respond to those recommendations?

Earlier, the minister mentioned the approach that is now being taken to fire safety regulations for bed and breakfasts. Having made representations to him on the matter, I put on record my thanks for the way in which he has handled it. There are a limited number of bed and breakfasts in my constituency, but the owners of these establishments very quickly raised with me their concerns about the apparent heavy-handedness of the new regulations. The minister's pragmatic approach, which included convening a cross-party group to discuss the matter, has resulted in a more proportionate application of the regulations and is exactly the type of response that members across the chamber should expect when they raise concerns with ministers. A number of speeches in the debate and, indeed, the report itself illustrate the complexities of trying to reduce the number of fire deaths in  Scotland. As members have pointed out, significant progress has been made in the past 10 to 20 years. However, the figures for Scotland remain stubbornly high compared with other parts of the United Kingdom, and we need to do more to bring the numbers down even more. Like other members, I very much acknowledge that Scotland has an extremely professional and highly skilled fire service that we can rightly be proud of. However, I think that people too often overlook the job's real risks and perhaps think that it is not quite as dangerous as it actually is. In that respect, Lord Foulkes's speech about the sad loss of the firefighter Ewan Williamson illustrated the real dangers of the role. The minister will be aware of my long-standing interest in fire sprinklers. Indeed, a number of years ago, I sought to introduce a member's bill to encourage the installation of fire sprinklers in a range of properties. I have to confess that, when I first made the proposal, I got almost the same reaction as Lord Foulkes got 30 years ago when he tried to introduce a bill to ban smoking in public places. Many people laughed at me and wondered why big ugly things like sprinklers should be installed in domestic premises; after all, they would only soak everything when they went off. Most people perceived domestic fire sprinklers as being like industrial fire sprinklers, and I recall many people questioning the logic of my proposal. However, having pursued the bill, I welcomed the fact that the Scottish Executive at the time took on roughly 80 per cent of my proposals and introduced new fire regulations through the Building (Scotland) Act 2003 to provide for fire sprinklers in properties such as residential homes and sheltered housing. When such places are built now, fire sprinkler systems must be installed in them. When I go to primary schools, I am often asked to talk about one thing that I have done in politics. In reply, I often refer to the fact that I will be able to lie in my nursing home bed, point to the ceiling and say, "I helped to make sure that these places are a bit safer by having fire sprinklers installed in them." An overly cautious approach to fire sprinklers has been taken in Scotland and throughout the UK, although experience in Scotland, the UK and internationally clearly shows that fire deaths simply do not happen in domestic premises with fire sprinklers installed in them. Given the stubbornness of the high numbers of fire deaths in Scotland, we must be prepared to take a much more robust approach to introducing such things. Some fire services in Scotland have taken a much more enlightened position on fire sprinklers than others. Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service, which covers my constituency, has always been proactive in pursuing and  encouraging their introduction. When architects are looking to build new houses or buildings, for example, Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service is often willing to compromise on fire safety regulations, building control and so on if fire sprinklers are installed. That often allows architects much greater flexibility in designing buildings. The problem is that not all council building control offices are prepared to offer such flexibility with the fire service. Given that the report recognises the value of fire sprinklers, I hope that it will result in fire services in Scotland having a more consistent approach to encouraging their use in premises where that use is appropriate. The ministerial advisory group could have a role in encouraging fire services in the country to take a much more consistent approach. I fully recognise the cost implications of introducing fire sprinklers in premises on a retrospective basis, but we could make clear progress on introducing them in new-build properties. Specifically, the Government could intervene in new-build council and publicly owned buildings. We are still building schools and hospitals with no fire sprinkler systems installed in them. Let us keep in mind that, when we lose a school as a result of a fire, we are left with the disruption that is involved in all the children having to be relocated to other schools. We should have regulations that mean that fire sprinkler systems are installed in all new-build schools. If they are installed when schools are being built, our public infrastructure will be much more effectively protected. Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service asked for a sprinkler system to be installed in the new hospital that is being built in my constituency, but the health board and the public-private partnership company refused. We should be clear: all new hospitals should have fire sprinkler systems installed in them. The sprinkler challenge is set out in the report. A big part of it is to change public perceptions about sprinklers. I hope that the Government will consider what it can do to address the misconceptions that many people have about domestic sprinklers.

Will the member give way?

Clearly, Scotland has a long-standing and deep-seated problem in its relationship with alcohol. Some argue that the problem has reached such an extent that alcohol has started to form part of the Scottish identity. The question that parliamentarians must ask is whether we are prepared to allow many of the problems that are associated with the misuse of alcohol to be seen as part of Scotland's modern identity. The facts lay bare the extent of our nation's difficulty with alcohol. Some 42,000-odd hospital admissions per year result from alcohol-related problems. Over the past 30 years, the incidence of liver cirrhosis has increased by 450 per cent. One in 20 of all deaths recorded by the national health service are directly attributable to alcohol. Those figures illustrate the extent of the health problem that we now face as a result of our overconsumption of alcohol. The financial costs to our society have also been recognised: some £2.25 billion, through health and justice spending and through lost productivity, can be associated with alcohol. According to the World Health Organization, alcohol is now the third-highest risk factor in ill health—after high blood pressure and unhealthy diet—in developed countries.  As a society, we must be prepared to implement the necessary measures to deal with the issue. Consumption of alcohol is driven by two clear aspects: availability and price. Clearly, the liberalisation of licensing laws over many decades has resulted in alcohol being much more available now than it has ever been. Alongside that, the price of alcohol has dropped dramatically in the past 15 years, at a time when average incomes in the United Kingdom are estimated to have increased by some 50 per cent. That combination of increased availability and lower price is clearly fuelling the ever-rising number of people who overconsume alcohol. What are the best options for dealing with the issue? I agree that health interventions have an important part to play. I fully agree that education has a key role to play, although I also recognise that quite a body of international research highlights that education is one of the least effective measures for dealing with those who have long-standing alcohol consumption problems. I agree that enforcement has an important part to play, although some of the comments that have been made about it are misleading. Minimum pricing is not simply about trying to deal with underage drinking in which enforcement has a clearer role to play; it is about trying to deal with the wider problem of alcohol consumption in our society.

I hope to come to that very point later in my comments. The issue is complex and it will require a complex strategy to deal with it. However, we cannot avoid the fact that price is a key driver in the consumption of alcohol. There is no big-bang approach to the problem and no silver bullet, as Jackie Baillie stated. Instead, we have to look at the evidence base. Robert Brown raised the possibility of people crossing the border to purchase alcohol. It is interesting that research from Canada, where eight out of 10 provinces have introduced minimum pricing, shows clearly that those people who live in provinces with no minimum pricing policy do not cross the border with the intention of purchasing alcohol. We now need an opportunity in this Parliament to consider the evidence base for alcohol minimum pricing. I regret today's attempt by the Tories to force a decision on what are the best measures to deal with the problem into an hour  and a half's debate. That is why we should have an opportunity to consider all the evidence and all the issues when the bill is considered in committee and the chamber.

To ask the First Minister whether the recent opinion from the European Court of Justice on tobacco pricing affects the Scottish Government's plans to introduce a minimum price for alcohol. (S3F-1974)

The First Minister will be aware that some organisations have questioned whether minimum pricing for alcohol is compatible with EU law. He referred to the statement that the European Commission has already issued. Is he aware that the Commission has also stated that two key criteria must be complied with if minimum pricing on alcohol is to comply with EU trade treaties? First, minimum pricing must apply to all relevant traders within a national territory. Secondly, it must have the same impact on domestic and imported products, if they are discounted. Can the First Minister confirm that the policy that the Scottish Government is pursuing will comply with those two key criteria?

To ask the First Minister what evidence there is to support the Scottish Government's plans to tackle alcohol misuse. (S3F-1922)

The Sheffield study, which demonstrates the economic, health and social benefits of introducing minimum pricing, follows on from a gathering body of international evidence that supports such a policy, given the gains that could be derived from it. I am sure that the Deputy First Minister agrees that although minimum pricing can play an  important role in addressing Scotland's unhealthy relationship with alcohol, it is essential that we take every opportunity to inform individuals of the direct health risks that come from consuming too much alcohol and that, as overconsumption of alcohol is one of the main lifestyle risks in relation to breast cancer, the launch of breast cancer awareness month today provides an ideal opportunity to get that message across.

What consideration is given to the moving of abnormal loads from the roads to alternative modes of transport, such as rail? The minister will be aware of the serious problem that has been experienced in the Larbert area of my constituency. Does he agree that, where abnormal loads are being moved by rail, as they are in Larbert, the rail operators should be looking to use rolling stock that minimises the associated noise and vibration?

I will focus on the tobacco control aspects of the bill. When the Parliament legislated to ban smoking in public places, it took a significant step in tackling the 13,000 deaths that occur each year as a result of smoking-related illnesses. Many of the scare stories that were peddled when the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill was being considered have never been realised. The accepted norm now is that pubs and other public places are smoke free. The ban on smoking in public places was not simply about the practicalities of banning people from smoking in public places; it was also about changing public perceptions about what smoking is. For too long, smoking was perceived as the social norm, despite the strong evidence that demonstrated its serious health consequences. Banning smoking in public places has significantly changed the public perception of smoking in our society. I accept that the individual has a right to choose to smoke or to take up smoking, but, given the health consequences of smoking and their impact  on our health service, society has a responsibility to take action to address those consequences in such a way as to indicate that smoking is not the acceptable norm. Policies should reflect that. The steps relating to tobacco control that the bill proposes represent another opportunity to take further action to change tobacco's position in our society, particularly in the eyes of young people. The tobacco industry has strongly opposed banning the display of tobacco in shops. It was dismissive of the proposal; indeed, at times, it sneered at it in its oral and written evidence to the committee. I confess that I was rather suspicious of its motives, given that it was so ferocious in its opposition to the idea. I recognise that it must be able to recruit new smokers to replace the 300 people a day who die in the United Kingdom as a result of smoking-related illnesses, but if we accept its view that tobacco displays merely let smokers know what is available for purchase in shops, it will have absolutely no objection to the displays being removed and shops having A4 pieces of paper on which are listed all the tobacco products that are available in them. Those pieces of paper will serve exactly the same purpose as, according to the industry, the displays currently serve. That begs a question. Why have displays grown considerably in size in recent years? Brand variants come out on almost a monthly basis. If tobacco displays have no impact on whether young people take up smoking to replace those who die from smoking, the industry will have no objection to displays being banned. Even if we accept, despite the evidence from Saskatchewan and Iceland, that there is limited evidence on the possible benefits of a ban on displaying cigarettes, I believe that the evidence that demonstrates the benefits that will come from a ban will become stronger in time. It may take a generation for that body of evidence to become substantial enough to support the overwhelming case for a ban, but I would much prefer to be part of a generation that is prepared to make a decision on that than wait to allow the tobacco industry to reap more misery on people in 30 years' time as a result of their taking up smoking. We should make a decision now and not wait for others to die of tobacco-related illnesses over the next 20 or 30 years. The Conservatives are very wrong about vending machines. The committee's position on the matter was not reached on the basis that we were unable to witness a practical demonstration of a remotely-controlled vending machine but because we were not persuaded that that would make any difference whatever. I welcome the announcement that the minister is looking into the issue of proxy purchasing and how  to address it. That will be welcomed universally, not only across the industry—including retailers—but in the Parliament. My father is fighting lung cancer. It will probably take his life. We should take steps to ensure that other families in Scotland are not exposed to the misery that smoking can cause. The bill goes a significant way towards helping to ensure that that will happen.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to promote the use of more environmentally friendly buses. (S3O-7718)

The minister will be aware that Scotland's biggest bus manufacturer, Alexander Dennis, is based in my constituency and employs some 1,000 workers. He will also know from my representations to him that Alexander Dennis is a world leader in hybrid bus technology. I welcome the consideration that the Government is giving to a scheme to promote the use of environmentally friendly buses, but can he tell us when he expects such a programme to be implemented? He will agree that such a programme will assist in ensuring that the Government's ambitious carbon reduction targets are met and that valuable employment is secured in my constituency.

Like many people, I recognise that the decision that the cabinet secretary had to reach has probably been one of the most difficult made by any minister in the short life of this Parliament. I have spoken to many constituents and friends about the decision; although some supported it and others opposed it, all said that they were very glad not to have been in the position of having to make such an extremely difficult decision. I believe that the cabinet secretary took the right decision for the right reasons. Indeed, the documents that have been released in the past 24  hours demonstrate that he conducted the whole matter in accordance with the law in Scotland. One element that has been particularly challenged is the cabinet secretary's decision to visit Mr al-Megrahi in Greenock prison. Recently, there has been confusion about whether the visit was about the compassionate release request or the prisoner transfer agreement. As the documents that were published yesterday show and as the cabinet secretary himself has stated on a number of occasions, the visit was purely about the prisoner transfer application. I concede that—

No—I want to make some progress. It is fair to say that the visit to the prison was unprecedented. However, it is worth keeping in mind the fact that the prisoner transfer agreement under which the application had been made was also unprecedented. The agreement was the first to have been signed by the UK Government that did not require the prisoner's consent to repatriation. Jack Straw made it very clear to the Joint Committee on Human Rights that, where a prisoner has not made an application, they should be given the opportunity to make representations to the decision maker. Of course, written representations could have been made and, under normal circumstances, that might have been appropriate. However, we need to consider the facts of the case. Every other party involved had been given the opportunity to discuss the matter directly with the cabinet secretary either in person or by videolink. Would it not have been rather strange to refuse the very person who was the subject of the application the same opportunity? It could well be argued that, had the cabinet secretary spoken to all other parties but refused to speak to Mr al-Megrahi and had then turned down both applications, such a decision, because of its quasi-judicial nature, could have been open to judicial review. Given the importance of the decision, I think, on balance, that the cabinet secretary's prudent approach in ensuring that all parties had the opportunity to make direct representations to him was the right one.

Unfortunately, Mr Brown is trying to rewrite what happened. The note of the  meeting makes it quite clear that it was about the prisoner transfer agreement. I want to move on to another important issue: the compassionate release system in Scotland. I believe that, despite what some have said in recent days, the compassionate release procedure is a strength of our justice system rather than a weakness. In recent weeks, the Opposition parties have all tried to state that, in some way, the compassionate release procedure has not been applied correctly in this case and that, given the horrific nature of Mr al-Megrahi's crime, he should not have been entitled to such consideration. Although such a position might, on the surface, seem attractive, what it does not make clear is how we can have a compassionate release system that is determined by an individual's crime. Should we have a list of crimes for which individuals should not be entitled to compassionate release? In effect, such a move would turn a quasi-judicial system into a political system.

We must ensure that we have a consistent approach to dealing with these matters. The cabinet secretary took the same approach to this case that he took with the other 25 cases in which compassionate release was granted. As the documents published by the Scottish Government clearly demonstrate, the cabinet secretary followed due process in reaching his position. I am sad to say, however, that the attacks by Opposition parties on their own legal system with regard to the compassionate release procedure serve only to further their narrow political advantage. They do not recognise the damage that they might cause to our justice process. While Iain Gray is saying that he would not have released Mr al-Megrahi at all, his masters in London have been telling the Libyans something entirely different. While the Tories here have been saying that Mr al-Megrahi should have been allowed to go to a hospice or some kind of hospital somewhere else, David Cameron has been saying that he should never have been released in the first place. Then we have the Lib Dems, whose leaders of the past have stated that the decision was clearly the right one. When it comes to standing up for the principles of humanity and decency, I would rather be standing alongside towering individuals such as Nelson Mandela than so-called political leaders in the Parliament with their small-minded, double-standard politics.

The Cabinet Secretary for Justice will be aware that others outside Scotland have criticised our legal system and the application of justice in this case. He will also be aware that there was a wide range of support for the decision to release Mr al-  Megrahi on compassionate grounds, ranging from the former First Minister, Henry McLeish, to the Law Society of Scotland. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, if a prisoner fulfils the criteria for compassionate release that are set out in our justice system, as Mr al-Megrahi did, to deny that release would be to politicise that decision? Can the cabinet secretary confirm whether anyone who has met those criteria before has ever been refused compassionate release?

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on achieving the lowest underspend since devolution. That is yet further evidence of the prudent way in which he is managing the Government's finances. As the cabinet secretary will recognise, it is not in the best interests of the people of Scotland either that billions of pounds of Scottish taxpayers' money languish in Her Majesty's Treasury's accounts, or that our account down there has zero pounds and zero pence in it. Will he advise us how he believes he can achieve the right balance to ensure that sufficient resources are available to be used at the right time by the Scottish Government?

To ask the First Minister how the outcomes of the Scottish Government's alcohol summit will be taken forward. (S3F-1813)

I draw the First Minister's attention to a letter in The Herald today, from Stephen House, the chief constable of Strathclyde Police, which states: "Cheap drink is fuelling crime in Scotland. It is blighting our communities, damaging our quality of life and even costing lives. It cannot go on." There is overwhelming evidence that the price of alcohol and the level of consumption are closely linked—similar evidence was submitted at the alcohol summit. Will the First Minister ensure that when a minimum pricing scheme is introduced, it will tackle the problem of cheap alcohol effectively? Such a scheme is regarded as a key way in which we can go about changing Scotland's unhealthy relationship with alcohol.

To ask the Scottish Government what assessment has been made of the environmental impact of increasing the use of rail freight. (S3O-7372)

The minister will, from this morning's debate, be aware of my concern about the level of vibration that my constituents in the Larbert area are experiencing as a result of heavy coal-train freight. During the debate, the minister said that further monitoring of noise and vibration on the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway might be required, but it was not made clear whether the Larbert area, which is affected by the problem, would be included. I am keen to ensure that my constituents' problems are not overlooked. Will the minister ensure that further monitoring on the SAK line includes the Larbert area?

Is the minister indicating that Transport Scotland will undertake assessment work in the Larbert area as a result of the findings of Falkirk Council's assessment work?

Will the member give way?

Does the member recognise that, as I mentioned in my speech, the Alloa line is not a new line but has always been the responsibility of Network Rail? In rerouting the freight, the company has removed the problem from the Grahamston line—my constituents living adjacent to that line experienced a very similar problem—to a line in another part of my constituency. Neither of those lines is new. I accept that the coal needs to get to Longannet, but I want to ensure that Network Rail, which has always been responsible for the two lines in my constituency, does what is necessary to get rid of the vibration problem.

I thank members who signed my motion and helped to secure time for this debate on what is an important issue for many of my constituents in the Larbert area. The railway line was first laid in Larbert by Scottish Central Railways back in 1848. Larbert is a community with a long-standing association with the railway. Indeed, Larbert station is one of the busiest in Scotland, with links to Glasgow, Edinburgh and the north of the country. For many of my constituents in the Larbert area, the railway is part of their lives. They are used to issues that arise from living in close proximity to a railway line. However, towards the end of 2008, residents began to express concern about the problem of significant vibration, the nature and scale of which were in excess of anything that they had previously experienced. The significant change that occurred at that time was the rerouting of heavy coal trains to Longannet power station through the Larbert area and on to the new Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway line. The problem that my constituents in the Larbert area were now experiencing had previously been experienced by those in the Falkirk Grahamston area—the problem had switched from one area to the other. I recognise that there are issues concerning the Stirling to Alloa line itself, and I know that my colleagues Keith Brown and Bruce Crawford have been pursuing those on behalf of their respective constituents. However, I am sure that members will respect the fact that the motion for debate today specifically relates to the problem in the Larbert area. I understand, as do many of my constituents, that the use of our railway has changed considerably over the years, particularly with the  increasing movement of freight on to rail. Most people welcome the fact that heavy freight is being moved from roads on to rail, as part of a responsible approach to tackling some of the environmental challenges that we face as a nation. As we change the use of our railways, we have to recognise the impact that that can have on communities who live beside them. We have a responsibility to constituents, such as mine in Larbert, whose lives have been badly affected by a sudden change of use of the line there. To illustrate the scale of the problem, I will run through some of the noise and vibration data that have been collected by Falkirk Council's environmental health department, which were published only last week. The data reveal that coal train vibration readings are proportionally higher than those of passenger trains by a significant level. The average vibration level for a coal train run by DB Schenker Rail (UK) Ltd is 0.075mm per second, compared with 0.025mm per second for a Freightliner coal train, on average. The vibration range for DB Schenker coal trains is more than double that of First ScotRail passenger services or Freightliner coal trains. That raises serious questions about why one coal train operator is causing a level of vibration that is so significantly higher than that caused by another coal train operator, whose length of train is only marginally shorter. The two extremely high vibration levels that were found by Falkirk Council were 0.091 and 0.097mm per second, and they were both recorded for DB Schenker trains that are classed as fast trains; a level of 0.041mm per second was recorded for a train that is run by the same operator and is classified as medium speed. That, I believe, demonstrates that an acceptable level of vibration could be achieved by reducing the speed of the trains concerned. The comprehensive, manned data that were collected by Falkirk Council demonstrate the extent and nature of the problem that is being caused to my constituents in the Larbert area. Since the turn of the year, I have been in regular dialogue with Network Rail although, I must say, it has not always been on friendly terms. Its representatives attended a public meeting that I organised for my constituents in the area, and I have also held meetings with representatives of DB Schenker and Scottish Power. All those parties have a responsibility to work to find a solution to the problem and to ensure that the matter is suitably resolved. I accept that primary responsibility for addressing the issue lies fairly and squarely with Network Rail. I also accept that Network Rail has undertaken some work on the line in the Larbert area. However, I know from the time that I spent at  a polling station in Larbert last Thursday, and from my surgery in Larbert on Monday night, that whatever Network Rail has done over the past couple of months, it has made very little difference. One of my constituents who attended my Monday evening surgery, who is deafblind and who is very sensitive to vibration, explained to me that, if anything, the problem has worsened over the past couple of months. I recognise that the minister cannot direct Network Rail, as a private company, on what it should do to tackle the specific problem in Larbert. However, I hope that he will agree that Network Rail has a corporate and social responsibility to have the matter resolved. I believe that several options are open to Network Rail to resolve the matter. First, it could reduce the coal traffic speed through Larbert, especially at night, as Falkirk Council's data prove would make a difference. Secondly, it could renew the track at Larbert and introduce measures that have been shown in research from around the world to mitigate vibration problems and have been used in other railway lines. Thirdly, it could request that DB Schenker use the same type of wagons as Freightliner, which the Falkirk Council data show would make a significant difference. However, the present situation is not an option. I have constituents whose lives have been made a misery by the trains because they are unable to sleep at night and face potential damage to their property. There is growing anger and frustration in the community at Network Rail's failure to address the problem sufficiently. Unfortunately, I suspect that Network Rail thinks that, as time goes by, my constituents will just go away and will get used to the vibration problems. Let me be clear: they will not go away and neither should be they be expected to accept the problem. Network Rail, DB Schenker and Scottish Power all have a serious responsibility to tackle the problem. As I mentioned, they have a corporate and social responsibility to ensure that the issue is addressed sufficiently, and I hope that the minister will do what he can to ensure that they fulfil that responsibility.

All members will agree that the cashback for communities scheme is very worth while and that excellent work is being done to support a range of organisations across the country, including some in my constituency. Perversely, it is a fund that we would prefer not to have—we would prefer it if no proceeds were gained from crime—but I suspect that the utopia of a society free from crime is beyond even the present excellent Cabinet Secretary for Justice. I recall visiting the Irish Criminal Assets Bureau back in 2000, along with my colleague Roseanna Cunningham, to consider how it was developing a similar initiative. Margaret Curran has made reference to what has been done in Ireland. The Irish have been trailblazers in the seizing of criminal assets from individuals. Their bureau has proved to be very successful over the years and set the template for the system that was introduced in Scotland.  I recall from my time dealing with the legislation on the Justice 1 Committee, some six years ago, that it had cross-party support. I recall that, when we considered it, there was a considerable level of uncertainty on the part of the then Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, on what would actually happen with the assets that were seized under the legislation. One suggestion was for the assets seized within a particular constabulary area to remain in that area. That idea was pushed aside on the basis that it would have meant that the bigger force areas probably gained disproportionately from the overall scheme. The general view was that, whatever happened with the money, it should go into a general pot and the whole of Scottish society should benefit. That is why I think that the present scheme is worth while and working well in its present form. There are a number of issues with the way in which the scheme is operating at present. If I have one criticism, it is that the pot of money is too small. That is not to say that I want to encourage more people to get involved in criminal activity so that we can seize their assets; rather, I want to consider what more we can do to seize more assets so that communities can benefit. I hope that the minister can expand in his closing remarks on what measures the Government is considering to increase the size of the pot. Retribution is one of the key three key pillars of our justice system in Scotland. Although the cashback for communities system is not exactly a direct form of retribution, it is an important signal to communities that, where we can, we will seize the assets of those who profit from criminal activity and use the money for wider community benefit. I agree that it is not the chain gang, but it certainly sends out a clear message that we will do everything possible to seize criminals' assets and make better use of them in our communities. I want to pick up on another two issues linked to cashback for communities. The first is on the groups who can apply for the present scheme, and the second is on the groups who could apply if the present scheme was altered. A number of organisations in my constituency, from YouthLink Scotland to the midnight football league and the Scottish Rugby Union through Falkirk rugby club, have all benefited from money that is provided through the scheme. However, I have been working with a number of organisations in my community that would benefit from the scheme if they had the capacity to develop their organisation so that it qualified. A couple of those organisations are Camelon Juniors football club and Dunipace Juniors football club. Those clubs sit at the heart of the local community and have facilities that, with a wee bit of extra investment, could be opened up for much wider benefit.  Those clubs are working to become community football clubs under the Scottish Football Association scheme. If they succeed in securing that status, they will be able to apply for funding from the cashback for communities fund in its present form. However, the clubs have limited capacity to become community football clubs because of the number of volunteers who are involved with them. One of my real frustrations, which those clubs have, too—I think that a couple of members have mentioned this—is that they need just a wee bit of support to help them gain the status of community club, which would open the door to cashback for communities funding. For almost a year and a half now, I have been trying to get Falkirk Council to work with those clubs, not to give them money but to have officers work with them to develop their capacity and to help them become community football clubs and then apply for funding through the scheme. However, it has been like drawing teeth, because the council does not regard providing such help as necessarily part of its responsibility, as it does not deal with the administration of the funds. If there is one message that I hope the minister takes away from my contribution to the debate, it is the need to ensure that local authorities, which have the capacity to assist organisations to develop themselves and potentially benefit from the scheme, regard themselves as part of the way in which we can unlock the money and get it invested in some of our most deprived communities through those organisations. I hope that the Government will consider how we ensure that local authorities do more to achieve that. The second area that I want to pick up on is that of organisations who cannot apply for the present scheme, namely professional football clubs. The cabinet secretary will be aware of the excellent work that is done by Stenhousemuir Football Club in my constituency, which should be congratulated on securing promotion to the second division on Saturday past. The club does fantastic work with some 5,000 kids per week and uses its all-weather football pitch for a range of initiatives that it runs in the local community. However, because it is a professional football club, it cannot benefit from the cashback for communities scheme. The club operates on a shoestring and does not have much more than junior clubs, which can benefit from the scheme. In my view, small clubs such as Stenhousemuir, which have a very important part to play in our communities and have facilities that, with a wee bit of extra investment, could be opened up more to the community and provide wider benefits to it, should also have the opportunity to benefit from the scheme. I hope that the cashback for communities scheme will continue to benefit a range of organisations, but we must consider how we can  evolve it more effectively so that more organisations benefit from it, whether under the existing rules or under rules that we amend to allow other organisations to get money from the fund.

I associate myself with the cabinet secretary's comments about the efforts of NHS staff. I mention particularly the staff of Forth Valley NHS Board, who have to a degree been at the forefront of dealing with the issue. The cabinet secretary referred to the fact that the virus could return in the autumn or winter when, traditionally, our NHS is under greater pressure because of the seasonal increase in influenza. Are any specific measures being taken to plan for the possibility of the virus's return in the autumn and the consequent resource impact on local health services?

I am pleased that the minister said that she was determined to continue to push the case for the proposed cut in lottery funding in Scotland to be reversed. It is easy to underestimate the value of lottery grants of £10,000, £15,000 or £20,000 to community organisations. Such funds will dry up if the cut in lottery funding proceeds, which will have an extremely damaging effect on local communities and could affect our ability to obtain legacy benefits from the 2014 Commonwealth games. I am interested in the fact that Jamie McGrigor is anxious about the impact that the cut in lottery funding could have on organisations that are based in Scotland. I would be interested to hear from the Conservatives whether they have made representations to their colleagues in London with a view to ensuring that if a Conservative Government is elected at Westminster, it will take action to halt the cuts that are likely to take place. The Conservatives should demonstrate not only that they are prepared to say in the Scottish Parliament that they would like the cuts not to take place, but that they will do something about them if they are in a position to do so in the coming year. A lot has been said about the legacy. I agree with Jamie McGrigor and, in particular, Ross Finnie about the evidence on providing a lasting legacy from countries that have hosted major sporting events such as the Commonwealth games and the Olympic games. For example, the fantastic bird's nest stadium that was used at the most recent Olympic games is no longer a sporting theatre; it is just another tourist attraction at which folk are dropped off. That demonstrates how difficult it can be to build on the interest that is generated during such major events. However, Glasgow is somewhat different, because many of the important facilities are already in place, and the new facilities will be sustainable, given the city's population. Everyone is united on the need to maximise the legacy benefits from the games. The challenge for us, though, is to learn from those who have hosted previous events such as the Commonwealth games but been unable to achieve a lasting legacy, and to take the right course of action to  ensure that we do not repeat the mistakes of the past. A lot has been said about one of the key aspects of the legacy, which is that the games will inspire many more young people, and possibly older people, to become active in sport. I have never subscribed to the idea that we would end up finding our gyms full and our sports centres crammed to the rafters with people because of the Commonwealth games. The games will stimulate much greater interest, but translating that interest into activity will probably be one of the greatest challenges that we face. If we are to capitalise on the interest that is generated by the games, it is extremely important that we put in place the right sporting infrastructure in order to harness it at the time. Frank McAveety raised a number of important points about sporting infrastructure in Scotland. By getting the infrastructure right, we can have a big impact on the physical activities that are provided in our schools. It is clear from evidence that the Health and Sport Committee received in our pathways into sport inquiry that there is a need to ensure that physical activity and physical education are seen not as an add-on in the school education system but as an important core aspect at both primary and secondary level. We should also consider what more we can do to increase the physical literacy of our children at pre-school level. Some local authorities are more proactive on that issue than others, but improving the provision of physical education and physical activity at pre-school, primary and secondary levels would be a significant legacy inspired by the Commonwealth games. I hope that the Government will do more to ensure that we achieve that. One of the real strengths of the Glasgow 2014 bid was that it was seen as a Scottish bid—it was seen as the games coming to Scotland. It is important that we are not complacent, that we remain vigilant and that we do not allow the games to become a Glasgow festival or Glasgow-centric. I recognise that Glasgow will receive many great benefits as a result of hosting the games, but it is important that communities throughout Scotland feel as though they are part of the legacy and part of the games. We should work harder to ensure that we keep alive the spirit that was so evident at the time of the bid. I hope that the Government will continue to press for greater engagement throughout the country in programmes that are linked to the 2014 games.

The First Minister is aware that more than 500 jobs are at risk because of T-Mobile's decision to move work from a Scottish company to the Philippines. The decision impacts not only on Telecom Service Centres Limited workers in my constituency, but on workers in Greenock. A letter from T-Mobile states that it is "working closely with TSC to minimise and mitigate the losses". However, my constituents tell me that there is no evidence whatever of that. The workforce is rightly angry that they have been dumped for a cheaper overseas option after years of dedication. They are highly skilled professionals offering an industry-recognised and proven high-quality service. Will the First Minister assure me that he will use the full resources of the Scottish Government, first to try to dissuade T-Mobile from taking those jobs overseas or, if that fails, at least to ensure that T-Mobile lives up to its promise to minimise and mitigate the job losses?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the Scottish Football Association about the proposal for a GB football team at the 2012 London Olympics. (S3O-6653)

Will the minister assure me that she will continue to work with the SFA in opposing the idea of a GB football team, which could jeopardise the future independence of Scottish football, and that she will work with the SFA to ensure that the damaging proposal never sees the light of day?

The cabinet secretary referred to the provision of an additional 600 cleaners in the NHS, which will mean an extra 32 cleaners in my health board, Forth Valley NHS Board. However, she will be aware that quality is as important as quantity. Will she therefore ensure that tackling or assisting in tackling HAI will be a key priority for the new cleaners?

I believe that most members recognise that antisocial behaviour is caused by a small minority of people in our communities. Even so, it is one of the biggest problems that our communities face. Whether it is caused by antisocial neighbours playing their music too loudly during the night, youngsters drinking in parkland, or groups of young people hanging around the shops and verbally abusing those who pass by, it is a regular source of complaint from my constituents. I recognise that much of that behaviour does not register as serious on the scale of criminality, but it erodes and undermines the quality of life that people expect to have in the communities that we represent. I recognise—as I am sure other members do—that there is no single route to tackling what is a complex problem, and it would be naive in the extreme to think that we could legislate our way through the problem. Nevertheless, legislation has a place, which is why I supported the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill when it was before the Parliament. During the bill's passage through Parliament, there was a public expectation that it would do much more than it has been able to do. The act still has a role to play today and will have a role to play tomorrow, but the new framework is a step forward in adding to the work that has already been done. It is grossly misleading to suggest that we are taking a soft approach—the "soft-touch Scotland" approach. Today, there appears to be a competition between the Tories and the Labour Party to see who can be the most right-wing, punitive party in dealing with the issues. It is not about that or about hugging a hoodie; it is about being realistic about how we can deal with the issues in a much smarter and more effective way. I find it reassuring that a range of organisations have been party to the development of the framework, from the police to Victim Support Scotland and from young people's organisations to front-line antisocial behaviour officers who work on the issue day in, day out. A wide range of different experts and organisations have been involved in developing the framework.

The minister made such a reference when he was intervened on. The document shows that a number of different groups in different communities were engaged in the process, and local authorities were consulted extensively, including elected members who represent their communities. There has been a fair level of community involvement, and in attacking the organisations that have helped to form the framework we do them a disservice. It is clear that they put a considerable amount of energy and work into developing a framework that they believe will improve the strategy for dealing with antisocial behaviour. The framework seeks to build on the 2004 act. In my constituency, there was an issue with car cruisers. At certain points, we had almost 1,000 car cruisers congregating in Falkirk town centre once a month, causing havoc in the local community and a considerable disturbance to local residents. The police sought to address the issue largely by containing it until they were pressed to take a more robust approach because of community concerns. They turned to the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, but one of the failings of the act is the fact that it can address antisocial behaviour by someone in a vehicle only if the vehicle happens to be moving at the time. If the vehicle is stationary, the act is unable to assist the police in any way. I therefore welcome the minister's willingness, expressed in the document, to amend the 2004 act to allow us to deal with the problem of antisocial behaviour that is associated with stationary vehicles. I hope that his visit to my constituency, on which he witnessed the problems that we are experiencing, has played a part in ensuring that the issue will be effectively addressed. The framework is an important step towards our taking a more preventive approach alongside the legislative approach as and when that is necessary. Alcohol is often one of the biggest contributing factors to antisocial behaviour, which is why, if we are to gain the maximum benefit from the legislation and framework, it is crucial that we have an effective alcohol strategy that deals with the flow of alcohol in our communities. If we do not stem that problem, some of the real benefits that could come out of the strategy will, sadly, be undermined.

To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it is giving to supporting bus manufacturing. (S3O-6497)

The minister will be aware that Scotland's largest bus manufacturer, Alexander Dennis Ltd, which is based in Falkirk in my constituency, recently announced 150 redundancies. Will the minister assure me that the Government and its agencies are doing everything possible to support the company at present? Also, will the Government consider encouraging bus operators in Scotland to consider using hybrid buses? That would not only benefit our environment, but help to boost our economy through companies such as Alexander Dennis, which is a world leader in that area of technology.

McMahon is actually Irish for Matheson.

As the First Minister will be aware, earlier this week, bus manufacturer Alexander Dennis, which is based in my constituency, announced that up to 150 employees will be made redundant. He will also know from his recent visit to the plant that the company is a world leader in hybrid buses, which it exports around the world. Does the First Minister share my frustration that none of the major bus operators in Scotland—or, for that matter, in the rest of the United Kingdom—uses hybrid buses? Will the Government look at what action it can take to encourage bus operators in Scotland to move towards using such buses, as it will not only help our economy but benefit our environment?

On a more constructive note, the cabinet secretary referred to the extensive work that she has undertaken with the private sector. She said that she has engaged with several hundred employers, along with sector skills councils and the skills utilisation leadership group. How does she see employers responding to the skills strategy? What does she expect them to do to ensure that it is implemented effectively?

The First Minister will be aware that Scotland's problem with alcohol has been allowed to develop over decades. The most recent figures demonstrate that previous Government policy on the issue has failed to tackle the problem effectively. Given the scale of the problem, will the First Minister outline the annual cost of alcohol misuse in financial terms to our national health service and justice system?

The minister will be aware of the recently published Scottish Council for Development and Industry Scottish manufactured exports survey, which recorded a 2.4 per cent drop in export sales by Scottish companies. However, looking to the future, the survey highlighted Asia, identifying China and India as the top areas for potential new market growth. Is there a need to review the China plan and consider whether it should be altered as a result of the economic downturn? When the minister brings forward the India plan, will he ensure that it takes full account of the economic downturn, so that it can maximise the potential of our export market there?

Like other members, I thank the Justice Committee for the important work that it has done in its inquiry. A significant body of evidence has already highlighted the importance of community policing and the benefits that it brings, but the committee's report adds weight to the argument that effective community policing can be extremely valuable. I recently made an interesting visit to a school in my constituency, during which I was quizzed on my role as an MSP—I am sure that other members have had the same experience. I took  the opportunity to ask the youngsters what career they were thinking of following. It was clear that my answers to their questions did not have much bearing on their career choices, because none of them indicated that they had any desire to go into politics or to be an MSP. However, several of them said that they were interested in becoming a police officer. When I pressed them on the type of policing that they would like to get involved in, one pupil said that they would like to work in Strathclyde Police's helicopter, another said that they would like to drive the fast police cars of the traffic division, and another said that he would like to be an undercover officer in the drugs squad. All those jobs are much more exciting than being an MSP, of course, but it is interesting that none of the pupils mentioned that they were interested in being a community police officer. I recognise that, as Robert Brown said, policing is much more sophisticated and high tech than it was when officers used tall hats to see over walls—that has been overtaken by the use of closed-circuit television and other sophisticated forms of surveillance, including high-tech helicopters. Despite what kids see on TV and the availability of such sophisticated equipment, in my view the core purpose of policing has not changed. Community policing is as valuable as ever; arguably, it is more important in today's society than it has ever been. It is often forgotten that the intelligence that allows the drugs squad to undertake high-tech surveillance operations in communities or the transport division to bring in the helicopter in support of its work is frequently obtained through the local community police officer. The committee's report has highlighted a number of important issues that impact on the effectiveness of community policing. Constituents constantly raise with me the issue of abstraction, whereby community officers, who are meant to be dedicated to a specific area, are seconded to work in other areas on particular projects that might be the flavour of the month. When I sit down with senior officers in Central Scotland Police, they often reassure me about their personal commitment to community policing and how much they value it, but I know from experience that community police officers are often seen as a soft target when it comes to pulling officers off their normal duties and putting them on to others. We must ensure that we address that attitude in policing, when it is possible to do so, so that the important role that community policing can and does play is not just paid lip service but is recognised in practical terms. That leads me on to tenure. I agree that it is necessary to provide greater security of tenure for community officers who are allocated to a specific area, regardless of whether it is a multimember  ward. Central Scotland Police used to have the objective of keeping community officers in the same area for 18 months, but I know from conversations with members of that force that community officers might move on to other areas after nine months or a year. If we do not provide greater security of tenure for community police officers, we undermine their ability to develop their skills and their knowledge of their areas. They have to be given a good length of time to work in the communities that they serve. I acknowledge that we are talking about operational matters, but I hope that ministers will give greater direction where they can. They should emphasise to chief constables that they should address the issues if they can. When constituents come to me about policing issues, they are not looking for major surveillance operations or big fancy community operations; they are looking for police officers who will be part of the local fabric and will work effectively with tenants associations and community councils. They do not want the police to be regarded as a group of individuals who sit in the local police station and turn up in their police cars only when an incident occurs. They want their community police officers to be seen working in the community outwith the times when they are called on to perform specific duties. They want the officers to turn up at community council meetings, to meet tenants associations and to work with youth clubs. Such proactive work is valuable, but it is undermined if the officers are unable to work regularly in the same area. Effective community policing is policing that is seen to be part of the local community's fabric. Reaching that point takes time and effort. When the Minister for Community Safety addresses the Justice Committee's report, I hope that he will refer to extending the length of time for which officers are allowed to serve in communities.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will consider extending the range of football clubs that can benefit from the cashback for communities programme. (S3O-5836)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the valuable role that Stenhousemuir Football Club plays in providing access to sports facilities in my constituency. Between 3,000 and 4,000 youngsters use its facilities each week. However, it is prevented from bidding for money from the current cashback for communities programme. Will the cabinet secretary consider allowing small community-based clubs in Scotland to bid for money from that programme in order to enhance their facilities? That would benefit the wider community.

To ask the Scottish Government when it last met  representatives of ScotRail to discuss ticket pricing. (S3O-5733)

I want to bring to the minister's attention concerns that my constituents have expressed about ScotRail's ticket pricing. A cheap day return ticket from Falkirk Grahamston to Edinburgh is the same price as a cheap day return ticket from Dunblane, Bridge of Allan or Stirling, despite the fact that Falkirk Grahamston is considerably further along the line towards Edinburgh. Will the minister ensure that there is greater transparency in respect of how ScotRail sets its pricing structure and that there is greater equity in how it decides what prices should be from given stations?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and what was discussed. (S3O-5644)

The minister will be aware that I have raised concerns about a care agency in my constituency that went into administration without having directly contacted Falkirk Council to advise that it could no longer meet the care needs of its clients. Given that such agencies provide care and support to vulnerable and dependent individuals, does the minister agree that they should be required to give reasonable notice when they can no longer meet those care needs? Will she take forward the issue with the care commission to see how regulation on the issue can be improved?

Can the minister explain how the mortgage to shared equity scheme fits in with the Government's overall housing strategy? Given that an applicant's lender will have final say on whether ministers can take a share in their property, has the Council of Mortgage Lenders indicated whether its members are prepared to engage in the scheme to make it effective?

The member picked up what I said incorrectly. I said that health boards have, to an extent, forgotten that their purpose is to serve the communities to which they provide services. Directly elected members would provide a more focused approach to engaging effectively when listening to communities.

Presiding Officer, you were given notice of my delay in being present at the start of the debate.  Unfortunately, I missed the cabinet secretary's opening speech due to Network Rail arranging a signal failure that affected my train journey this morning. As a regular train user, you will no doubt appreciate that difficulty. Naturally, we are very proud of our national health service, which holds a unique place in the minds of people throughout Scotland. The NHS is a public service that people strongly believe belongs to them rather than to a particular Government at any given time. People believe that the service exists for the collective benefit of everyone in our society. I am always reassured by the public's considerable depth of good will towards the staff who work in our NHS—which does not always apply to those who work in other public services—although that good will towards NHS staff often stops at the door of the health board. In dealing with NHS issues, I am always aware of the fact that people have a level of emotional attachment to the NHS, particularly the local elements of the service. That emotional attachment often becomes extremely evident when health boards consider closing or reconfiguring local health services, as happened in the Forth Valley NHS Board area—which covers my constituency—and the Lanarkshire NHS Board area. Despite the public meetings and other events that took place, there was a genuine public perception that, before proposals even went out to consultation, the health boards had already decided how they would reconfigure services, which services would be closed and which hospitals would no longer provide particular services. To some extent, people have become so cynical that they often feel that the consultation process is nothing more than a window-dressing exercise. We could get into a debate about whether that is true, but I believe that people have a genuine grievance. The issue is well illustrated by the thousands who turned out for the public consultation events that were organised by Lanarkshire NHS Board. Despite overwhelming opposition within that community to the proposals to close or reconfigure services, the board ignored the outcome of the consultation and tried to drive ahead with the proposed changes. In my view, such experiences undermine the public's confidence that health boards listen to the communities that—I emphasise this point—they exist to serve. I believe that having a directly elected element on our health boards provides the potential to create a level of openness and transparency in how our NHS operates that is missing. It is also worth reflecting on the fact that our NHS boards are responsible for spending some £8 billion-worth  of taxpayers' money every year. In my view, such a large budget justifies greater democratisation in how it is used. Like other committee members, and other members who are present today, I felt that it came as no surprise that every health board that made a submission in response to the committee's call for evidence on the bill opposed the idea of having any element of directly elected representation on health boards. Unison summed up the matter well: "Opposition to the Bill in the main comes from the health establishment that believes health is too complex for mere mortals to comprehend. This reflects the 'we know best' top down health management culture that needs to be changed." One health board—Lothian NHS Board—that gave oral evidence to the committee went so far as to suggest that it had actually consulted patient groups and other interested parties before submitting its views to the committee. However, when we asked for evidence of that, it became clear that that was not the case whatsoever. If there is one lesson that comes from our evidence-taking sessions, it is that some health boards—I think, sadly, the majority—seem to have forgotten that they exist to serve the public interest rather than their own interests. I believe that one result of having a directly elected element on our health boards is that it would help to refocus minds on that. An extremely important point is that, once the pilots are up and running, health boards must not interpret the inclusion of an elected element as in some way removing the need to continue to engage with and consult the communities that they exist to serve. Like Cathy Jamieson, I agree that having directly elected health board members should complement on-going engagement with the communities that health boards exist to serve. I turn to a couple of issues that were raised by the committee in its stage 1 report. The cabinet secretary's response that she will provide details of other types of pilots before stage 3 consideration of the bill is extremely useful. I think that it would be worth running other types of pilots to see what value can be gained from them. Another issue concerns restricted posts within the health service, the holders of which might not be entitled to stand for election to the health board. As currently drafted, new schedule 1A, which the bill would insert into the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978, could lead to a lack of consistency in how boards designate certain post holders as not being entitled to stand in a health board election. I believe that the amendments that the cabinet secretary plans to lodge at stage 2 will help to address that. It is extremely important that, if we are to have a  register of restricted posts—as is the case in local authorities—we have consistency in the way in which that is applied by health boards across the country. Finally, like others, I am prepared to support the amendment to the motion, although I suspect that it may have been overtaken by events, given the cabinet secretary's response. I hope that other members will be minded to support the general principles of the bill later today.

The nature of this debate is somewhat different from our March 2008 debate, which became rather polarised around the positions of either having an opt-out system or continuing with the present system with some changes. The organ donation task force report has changed the tone and nature of the debate to some degree.  Like others, I very much welcome the report and the way in which the task force has considered the issue in such detail. The report clearly sets out not only the challenges that our country faces in increasing the level of organ donation but the action that is necessary to increase such donation by 50 per cent in the next five years. It is fair to say that achieving a 50 per cent increase in five years is an ambitious target, given the history of the issue and the different actions that have already been taken to try to improve levels of organ donation. However, with its expertise, the task force clearly believes that the target is achievable. When we consider the organ donation figures in the rest of Europe, it is worth bearing in mind that even after a 50 per cent increase in Scotland, our organ donation rate will be considerably below the average of many other European countries. That means that a 50 per cent increase in the next five years is only the first step in increasing our organ donation rate to be more in line with the European average. I confess that I am something of a convert to the opt-out system. Like many, I have always recognised that the key way to increase organ donation is through the necessary infrastructural change in our health service. From the recommendations and findings in the task force's report, it is clear that the task force sees infrastructural change as key to achieving an increase—the evidence from Spain speaks for itself. That is not to say that I believe that an opt-out system does not have a role to play, because it might have a role to play further down the line if the infrastructural changes do not deliver the necessary increase that we want. The infrastructural changes that must be made will not necessarily all be made quickly. That applies particularly to the cultural change that is necessary to go from seeing organ donation as unusual to seeing it as the norm in our health service. It is important to recognise that, even with a review in five years or sooner, instituting all the infrastructural changes that are important to achieving the 50 per cent increase might be difficult. Like others, I welcome the £5 million that the cabinet secretary has committed to providing over the next three years. I also welcome the fact that the review need not take place after the full five years and that it might be sooner. On that basis, I will not support Richard Simpson's amendment, because I believe that a review should take place. The motion provides certainty about that. It would help to have more clarity about the factors that could trigger the review. For example, will a 15 per cent increase in the number who are on the organ donor register in three years' time  allow us to say that we are not making enough progress? Will a 15 per cent increase in organ donations by year 3 allow us to say that we must review progress? It would help if the cabinet secretary gave more detail on the factors that she thinks will be taken into account in deciding on an early review. As other members have said, it is important not to forget the human side. Our Parliament and the Government have a tremendous responsibility to get the system right. I have a family friend whose mother will, just this week, donate a kidney for transplantation because a kidney is unavailable for him and the future availability of a kidney is likely to be limited. Since that young man has had to go on kidney dialysis, he has lost his job and much of his social life. All the wider aspects of life that are affected by organ failure should never be forgotten. That is why, unlike Lord Foulkes, I believe that preventing the unnecessary death of 1,000 people throughout the UK every year is extremely worthy of debate in the Parliament. I would have thought that someone of his experience would recognise that the debate should not be about making cheap political points for his narrow political interest, because it is about saving individuals' lives.

The minister will be aware that there are communities throughout Scotland that are well served by railway lines but not by stations on those lines. That is the case in the Bonnybridge area of my constituency, which has seen a rapid increase in its population in the past five years. How should Transport Scotland and Network Rail identify areas like Bonnybridge, where particular advantage could be gained from opening stations?

I am sure that the minister will appreciate that Scotland's third sector has an important role to play in strengthening the partnerships between communities in Scotland and Malawi. In the light of the thematic approach that the minister is taking with the policy on international development in Malawi, can she outline the areas in which she believes Scotland's third sector could play an important part in delivery of that policy in Malawi?

I, too, congratulate Jackie Baillie on progressing her bill so far. Any member who has pursued a member's bill will know that it is a long journey simply to reach the point of committee scrutiny, never mind a parliamentary debate at stage 1. I believe that the principles of the bill deserve to be commended, and I hope that all members will find it in themselves to support it this evening. As other members do, I regularly receive complaints from constituents about misuse and abuse of disabled parking bays. I agree with Jackie Baillie that the issue is about quality of life. Although I have received many complaints over the years, it has been only in the past couple of years—since my mum became a blue badge holder—that I have appreciated the impact that abuse of spaces can have on a person's quality of life. She has benefited from the scheme when I have been taking her to places. The extra provisions that the bill will make for protection of disabled parking bays is extremely important. I will raise three issues, which I hope will contribute to improving the overall provision of disabled parking bays for individuals, and the specific impact that the bill will have. There appears to be a lack of logic in relation to how local authorities currently apply advisory restrictions to use of disabled parking bays. In my constituency, Falkirk Council applies an advisory notice—in particular to on-street parking in the town centre—that applies only from Monday to Saturday. As one of my constituents put it to me, his disability lasts seven days a week, not six. Consequently, when he is shopping in the town centre on a Sunday, most of the disabled parking bays are taken up by individuals who do not qualify for a blue badge. I am sure that members will appreciate that at this time of year, Sunday is a normal trading day in most town centres. Interestingly, Audit Scotland recently advised Falkirk Council that it should charge for its parking areas on a Sunday because it is a normal trading day. There is an issue of consistency with regard to how authorities apply advisory notices, so we need to ensure that legislation allows local authorities to deal with such matters consistently. Disability is not something  that an individual has part-time, so it is reasonable to expect that disabled parking bays will not operate part-time. The second issue is linked to the bill itself—it concerns the random approach that appears to be taken in deciding how many disabled parking bays there should be within local authority-owned parking areas. I will give an example from my constituency. The car park in Meeks Road has 337 spaces, five of which are designated for disabled people. Close by, in Melville Street, there are 67 spaces, five of which are designated for disabled people. Clearly, the Melville Street car park has a much higher proportion of spaces for disabled people. When the matter has been pursued with the council, however, there appears to be no logic in how it decides how many disabled parking bays to provide. If we are to provide that disabled parking bays can be enforced so that they are not abused, we also need clearer guidance on how local authorities determine how many disabled parking bays should be provided in car parks. If the legislation is to be effective, then a further point needs to be addressed, on which I will give an illustration from my constituency. One of my constituents qualifies for a blue badge and also qualifies under the local authority's scheme to provide a designated disabled parking bay outside their house. Another constituent moves into the street who also has a blue badge and qualifies for parking under that criterion, but does not meet the council's criteria for having a disabled parking bay outside their house. Inevitably, we end up with a fight over the disabled parking bay. The council is unprepared to address the matter, and the police cannot address it because, as far as they are concerned, even though there is an advisory notice, any blue badge holder can use the space. That problem illustrates the disjointed way in which we decide whether people can have a blue badge and whether they should be able to get a designated disabled parking bay through their local authority. Greater consistency in how local authorities address such issues will help to improve the provision of parking bays for disabled people throughout Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to help to reduce fire-related deaths. (S3O-4826)

I am sure that the minister shares my concern about the figures in the fire services inspectorate's recent annual report, which reveals a 62 per cent increase in fire-related deaths and a 23 per cent increase in injuries related to fire incidents and also confirms that three firefighters lost their lives in the course of their duty last year. Will the minister ensure that the working group that he has established under COSLA gives open consideration to the possibility of greater use of domestic fire sprinkler systems, which international experience demonstrates have an important part to play in reducing fire-related deaths?

I am sure that all members are rightly proud of our NHS and the dedication that its staff demonstrate daily and hourly in ensuring that it serves the people of Scotland as effectively as possible. In the past 18 months, the Government has ensured that the underlying principle of the NHS being free at the  point of delivery has been extended further with the abolition of prescription charges, the ending paying for parking at hospitals and the move away from private finance initiatives and the difficulties that they can cause in the NHS setting. The idea of a patients' rights bill sits well with the philosophy behind what the Government has set out to achieve in the past 18 months. However, over the past 18 months—in particular, since I joined the Health and Sport Committee—I have, in dealing with a number of the health professional bodies, been struck by how often the rights of patients are largely overlooked in those bodies' eagerness to promote themselves. Given the vested interests of the different professional organisations in our NHS, I understand that they have important issues to address, but when I am in dialogue with them, I often feel that they do not recognise that the NHS not only exists for the people of Scotland but belongs to them. It is not an extension of any one professional body or collection of professional bodies, and it does not belong to any political party—the Government of the day is merely the custodian of the NHS. There is an issue around the vested interests within the NHS and the way in which the professional bodies within it conduct themselves at times. Enshrining patients' rights more visibly in the law could help to address that. A good recent example of vested interests making their voices heard by the Parliament is the way in which the NHS boards have been desperate to ensure that the Health and Sport Committee and the Government are aware that they oppose the idea of having elected representatives on elected health boards. It must be the first time all the health boards have been singing from the same hymn sheet in the evidence that they have submitted. However, when I have discussed with my constituents the possibility of their being able to elect representatives to their health board, they have been keen on the idea. It is therefore important that we are prepared to enshrine the rights of patients in law in order to keep in check some of the professional self-interest that can arise within the NHS. I agree with Cathie Craigie that the NHS must move on because society has moved on. The days have largely gone of a doctor or nurse telling someone what treatment they are going to receive and how things are going to be done and the patient just accepting that, although there is a generational issue—I do not mean to be ageist—in that younger people are probably more assertive in ensuring that their rights are exercised. Christine Grahame does not appear to agree with me, but that is my experience. We believe in the principle of having a written constitution for our country, and a bill that enshrines patients' rights within the NHS is entirely consistent with that.  Like other members, I receive complaints from my constituents that tend to focus on the lack of communication in the NHS and, at times, the lack of respect that is shown to patients and their families. They also focus on the failure of parties within the NHS to take their concerns and views seriously when they are expressed. I agree with Christine Grahame that one of the biggest challenges that we will face in ensuring that a patients' rights bill is effective will be in changing the culture in the NHS. When the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill was passed, it was noted that one of the biggest challenges that we would face in ensuring that people could assert their rights effectively under that legislation was in changing the culture within public organisations. In that context, the role of the patients' rights officer, to which the cabinet secretary referred, will be important. The fact that those officers will be independent is welcome. However, the people who will play an even bigger role are the NHS staff, who must ensure that patients are informed of their entitlements and rights, and must act accordingly. It will be important, when the legislation is introduced, to have a considerable lead-in time to ensure that those cultural issues can be addressed. I turn briefly to the decision that was announced earlier this week by the Secretary of State for Health regarding top-ups. One of the founding principles of the NHS was that everyone should be treated equally and should have equal access to treatment. The Scottish Government is consulting on the issue, but I must say that, if we are to maintain the principle of all patients being treated equally and fairly, we need to ensure that we do not get into a situation in which a patient is receiving treatment X in one bed while the patient in the next bed is also getting treatment X but with something added because they have a bit more money. That would undermine the philosophy behind not only patients' rights legislation but our NHS. I firmly believe that enshrining something in law might not necessarily make a great change the day after the bill is passed, but it will ensure that people have the legal rights that they are entitled to and will become more aware of them as a result. Accordingly, I will support the bill when it comes before the Parliament.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government will take to address the link between youth offending and alcohol. (S3F-1108)

I draw the First Minister's attention to research that Glasgow Caledonian University published this week that demonstrates that the number of young offenders who blame alcohol for their crimes has almost doubled in the past 30 years. Does he agree that that evidence further demonstrates the scale of the problem that our nation faces in its relationship with alcohol, and that it illustrates why we need a strategy that tries to change that relationship using bold ideas and effective solutions to ensure that change happens?

To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of the fire service. (S3O-4548)

The minister will know that the Treasury in London provided extra funding to cover changes to the pension arrangements for the fire service and the police service in England and Wales. Does he agree that it was wrong of the Treasury not to ensure that additional funding was provided to the pension schemes for firefighters and police officers in Scotland? That demonstrated a lack of respect for Scottish firefighters and police officers. What progress is being made on securing Scotland's share of the additional funding?

Although there appears to be no consensus on raising the age for the purchase of alcohol in off-licences, I think that there is a consensus on the scale of the problem that we face in Scotland in dealing with the nation's unhealthy relationship with alcohol, which costs the nation £2.25 billion—not to mention the individual, family and community misery that it brings. On 25 June, Parliament had an opportunity to debate the proposals in the Government's consultation document. During the past three months, communities and groups throughout Scotland and every member and party in Parliament have had an opportunity to feed in their views on what would and would not work and on what should be included in the strategy. It is becoming apparent that members have not even bothered to make the effort to do that, because they cannot engage effectively in the debate—

Sit down. Members have been happy to feed their views into the consultation on local income tax but have not fed their views into a consultation on one of the biggest public health problems that our society faces. Murdo Fraser had the cheek to start his speech by saying that we need a mature debate, when his motion sets out no alternatives and says nothing about the scale of the problem but simply opposes one element of a wider strategy.

I made representations on a number of occasions. Murdo Fraser introduced the debate, so it is a cheek that he did not feed his views into the consultation. During the past 30 years we have heard much about the cultural shift that Ross Finnie mentioned, but we have not heard hard detail  about how we can create such a shift. A targeted approach has been tried but has not made the significant impact that is needed if we are to change the culture. Our generation must be prepared to make the tough decisions that will start to change the culture. No single element of the Government's proposals will change the unhealthy relationship that we have with alcohol, but collectively the proposals can do so. The Opposition could have fed in its ideas at the start of the process, but it did not bother. It is important that the Government acknowledges that the evidence from the pilots raises interesting issues. During the six-month pilot in Stenhousemuir in my constituency there was a 40 per cent reduction in breaches of the peace, a 20 per cent reduction in minor assaults and a 60 per cent reduction in serious assaults. The police will tell members that no additional resources were provided, so the approach was cost neutral. The increase in the age limit was an essential part of the local strategy. I hope that the Government will assure us today that it will listen not just to the vested interests of certain groups that have run high-profile campaigns, but to constituents such as mine, more than 600 of whom have responded to my local consultation, with 78 per cent in favour of increasing the age limit. We need to ensure that the communities who suffer the misery that is caused by our unhealthy relationship with alcohol have their views taken into consideration. I hope that, in publishing the outcome of the consultation, we can ensure that it is not just the vested interests of organisations that the Tories might be happy to argue for, but the views of communities that are listened to.

I thank those members who have taken the time to support my motion. I am particularly pleased that the motion has gathered support from across the chamber. Unfortunately, most families will be touched by the illness of cancer at some point, either directly or indirectly; my mother is currently being treated for cancer and, thankfully, her treatment has been successful so far. Given the trauma that individuals experience when they are informed that they have cancer, the last thing that will be on their mind is the financial consequences of having such an illness, but the wider social impact of dealing and living with a cancer diagnosis has only recently been properly acknowledged. A central issue is the recognition of the significant financial consequences of the disease and the emotional impact that the experience can have on the lives of patients and their families. Recent research from Macmillan Cancer Support demonstrates that many people in Scotland who are affected by cancer experience significant levels of poverty as a direct result of a cancer diagnosis. For people who are living with cancer, financial concerns are a cause of considerable stress, second only to physical pain. About 90 per cent of people who are affected by cancer experience a drop in income and an increase in their daily living expenditure because of their diagnosis. It is simply wrong that patients who have the considerable worry of a cancer diagnosis should also be burdened with financial  worries. Too many Scots who are affected by cancer do not get the financial support to which they are entitled, and the take-up of benefits among terminally ill people in Scotland is the lowest in the United Kingdom. Experience has shown that effective, targeted social support for patients and their carers can have a positive impact on a range of outcomes, including physical health and mental wellbeing. Many patients and families who are affected by a cancer diagnosis require financial advice and support on a range of issues. To help address that, Macmillan Cancer Support has developed a benefits and financial advice service in different areas of Scotland in partnership with national health service boards, local authorities and the voluntary sector, and some 35 welfare rights officers funded through Macmillan are now operating in different areas. The Macmillan money matters project has had a significant impact. Macmillan Cancer Support in Scotland has been at the forefront of this initiative—for example, the first cancer-specific benefit advice service in the United Kingdom was launched in Lanarkshire back in 2003. Since then, the service has grown to such an extent that Macmillan, in partnership with the regional cancer advisory group and local authorities, is creating a network of cancer-aware benefit advisers across Scotland that, by the end of 2009, will provide advice and support services for cancer patients and their families in every local authority area in Scotland. The advice service in my constituency started in March 2007, as part of the Forth valley Macmillan money matters service. A partnership involving Macmillan, Falkirk Council, Stirling Council and Clackmannanshire Council, the service aims to promote and support the financial wellbeing of all patients who are living with a cancer diagnosis by providing advice and financial aid to families and carers when they need them most. It is important to note that the advice covers not only benefits but employment rights, debt, savings and borrowing, pension rights, fuel poverty and insurance. Moreover, the service helps the person through the process of applying for benefits. I am sure that all members are aware of the difficulties that constituents face when they are negotiating the very complex benefits system. During the past 17 months, the Forth valley service has helped people to claim £3.1 million in benefits, £1.65 million of which has been claimed in my constituency alone. Before the project's establishment, that money would have gone largely unclaimed. However, even with the significant progress that has been made, too many cancer sufferers still do not get the financial support to which they are entitled. Macmillan  estimates that each year in Scotland £30 million-worth of benefits to which cancer patients are entitled go unclaimed. The purpose of this debate is not only to give recognition to Macmillan's service and its significant benefits for individuals and their families but to try to ensure that all cancer patients benefit from it. At present, a patient is referred only if a member of staff, carer or the patient himself or herself knows that the service is available. Because chance still plays such a big part in getting support, far too many cancer patients are still missing out. I hope that the Minister for Public Health will be able to support my proposal that a person be given information about the service or, with their consent, are automatically referred for information and advice at the very point at which they are diagnosed with cancer. The best way of achieving that would be to embed this type of service in the forthcoming cancer strategy and to make it a part of the patient's journey. Such a move would ensure that as many patients as possible benefit from the scheme, which would, in turn, help to relieve some of the worry that goes with a cancer diagnosis. On the service that they received from money matters, a constituent said: "If it wasn't for the Money Matters team, we would never have been able to access the help we needed by ourselves. We are eternally grateful for all your assistance and advice. Keep up the good work and thanks again." Let us help to tackle cancer poverty by ensuring that people get the advice that they really need.

Like others, I welcome the committee's report. I believe that it is the first ever committee scrutiny and detailed consideration of Government policy on international development, and it makes a number of important recommendations. It is fair to keep in mind the fact that international development policy in Scotland, as the responsibility of the Scottish Executive or Government and the Scottish Parliament, is fairly new. The G8 summit in Gleneagles proved to be a major catalyst for the Scottish Executive in considering what form of international development policy it could shape and the role that the Scottish Parliament could have in that. Like Ted Brocklebank, I think that recognition should be given to the role that our Parliament's external liaison unit has undertaken in the partnership with Malawi through the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association branch in Scotland. It largely led the way on the issue, and I had the pleasure of being a member of the first delegation from the Parliament to visit Malawi in 2005. When the Scottish Executive published its international development policy and proposals, considerable criticism was thrown at it not just from this chamber but from another chamber in London. It was stated that this Parliament had no responsibility for international development, so I welcomed the comment at the time from the then Secretary of State for International Development, Hilary Benn, that international development is everyone's responsibility—Des McNulty will recall that. Jack McConnell, then First Minister, faced down the criticisms, including those from elements within his own party, because a bigger agenda had to be recognised. Some of the criticism was misconceived—the debate that we are now having demonstrates that. One of the policy's strengths is its broad base. It is not simply a pot of money but reaches into a range of areas, as the committee's report highlights. Our international development policy is not just about the Government dishing out money  to different organisations, because it involves voluntary organisations, schools, church groups, hospitals and local authorities in a range of different ways. However, SCIAF's evidence highlights one of the problems that come with such a broad-based approach to international development policy: it is a challenge to keep the policy focused on doing what it is meant to do. It would be easy for the policy to be drawn in a range of different directions, and I have no doubt that the minister is keen to continue to ensure that it is driven forward thematically to tackle particular problems in countries that are regarded as priorities. The committee highlighted the mainstreaming of international development policy, which has not been effectively addressed over the past four years in the international development policies of both Governments. I have long been of the view that it is okay for the Minister of Justice from Malawi to come over here and meet Scotland's Cabinet Secretary for Justice. However, engagement involving, and the exchange of ideas and working practices between, their ministries are not happening as effectively as they could—that could also be said about our health directorates and a range of other directorates. Engagement on education has developed quite a bit, but more could be done at Government departmental level to engage with Malawian departments to help them implement ideas and exchange a range of opportunities. I believe that a considerable amount of work could be done at a more localised level within our health boards and local authorities to engage much more with different bodies in countries such as Malawi and to implement different plans. Some hospitals, and medical teams within hospitals, have done that—for example, staff from the Simpson memorial have done quite a bit of work on child mortality and different training practices at Bottom hospital in Malawi. Such work could be rolled out across different health board areas in Scotland. Several members referred to public procurement. I was a member of the fair trade working group that Patricia Ferguson set up. Significant progress has been made in Scotland on promoting fair trade and I still hope that we can become a fair trade nation. Falkirk is now a fair trade town and, this year, will host the first fair trade Mòd, which I hope members will support. I was interested in what the committee's report said about the Dutch Government's approach to ensuring that ethical and fair trade procurement criteria were included in its contracts by 2010. That is positive. If there are problems with that under EU law, we should examine what the Dutch are doing that we cannot do and consider whether  we can learn from them and take the issue forward. If there is a problem with EU law, I urge the Government to make representations to the European Commission—in particular the European Commissioner for Trade, Peter Mandelson—to determine whether the Commission can relax some of the laws to allow us to include ethical and fair trade considerations within our public procurement criteria. As the co-convener of the cross-party group on Malawi, I welcome the £3 million that has been ring fenced for Malawian projects. We are due to hold the Commonwealth games in 2014, and I hope that the Government considers that there is an opportunity to ensure that the games in Glasgow will be fair trade games, given the nations that will participate in them. I hope that the minister will take that forward with her policy in the weeks and months to come.

Like other members, I welcome the statement, especially the cabinet secretary's comments about tackling the issue of the accuracy of the performance data. The cabinet secretary will be aware of my concerns, which I expressed in response to her statement on 4 June, about the fact that the operational research consultancy targets do not take into account the outcome of an ambulance responding to a category A call—success is measured against a stopwatch rather than according to the success or failure of treating the patient. In the future, will there be scope to consider the outcome for patients in measuring the success of our Scottish Ambulance Service in responding to patients' needs?

Will the cabinet secretary give more detail on who will own the facilities that are built under the SFT? Will he also assure members that there will be no repeat of the shameful situation whereby communities have been priced out of using facilities in PPP/PFI schools because of the commercial rates that are charged?

There is no doubt that the problem of obesity has become more widely recognised in recent years, but I am not convinced that the scale and nature of the problem and its long-term implications for our nation have been fully understood. As others have done, I welcome the action plan, which builds on the work of the previous Executive. The additional £40 million for the action  plan over the next three years will help to ensure that it is delivered effectively. What is particularly important about the action plan is that it acknowledges the balance between the dietary aspects that contribute to obesity and the role of physical activity in tackling the problem. Like Nigel Don, I think that it is important that in addition to considering the stark figures for the number of people who are obese in Scotland, we should be concerned about the trend, and the fact that the figures demonstrate that the number of obese people in Scotland is increasing. Some members have referred to the fact that Scotland is often quoted as being second only to the United States of America when it comes to obesity levels. There has been research that challenges that, but I will come back to that later. In any case, we accept that Scotland is up there among the top group of countries when it comes to obesity levels. The long-term implications for our nation are considerable. I suspect that it is hard to provide a definitive figure on the cost of obesity to the NHS and society as a whole—I have seen estimates of between £150 million to £200 million a year. What are clear, though, are the health costs of obesity: 47 per cent of cases of type 2 diabetes can be attributed to obesity, 29 per cent of cases of colonic cancer, 13 per cent of cases of ovarian cancer, 15 per cent of cases of angina, 36 per cent of cases of hypertension, 15 per cent of cases of gallstones, and 47 per cent of cases of gout can be attributed to it. That illustrates the extent of the problem. We should couple those figures with the figures that other members have mentioned on the young people coming into primary schools who are already clinically or even severely obese. We must have a strategy and an action plan to tackle the problem effectively. The action plan must not be seen in isolation, so I welcome what the minister said about that. The issue is not simply to do with health and it is not simply to do with physical activity—clear social and economic issues also arise. Plenty of research has demonstrated that the incidence of obesity is greater in areas of higher deprivation. The action plan must therefore be seen as part of an overall plan for addressing deprivation and health inequalities in society. In her closing remarks, I hope that the minister will address that in slightly more detail and show how the action plan will fit into the bigger picture. I said that we are often described as being second only to the USA when it comes to levels of obesity. However, some research challenges that view: Greece, Malta, Kuwait and the gulf states all have higher levels of clinical obesity than we have. We should concentrate on measuring the extent of  our problem against that of neighbouring countries such as Norway, Italy, France and the Netherlands. In those countries, obesity levels are on average less than 15 per cent, which must lead to the question: what exactly are they doing right that we are not? If we look behind the statistics, we might think that people in those countries must be more physically active, but research shows that people in those countries are not much more physically active than we are. A considerable body of evidence—from Mike Lean, for example—demonstrates that the problem is largely to do with what we put in our mouths. In the past, I have thought that the focus of the debate on obesity has been on physical activity. The action plan acknowledges that it has. Much of the debate has been about sedentary lifestyles being the major contributor to obesity. However, recent research from the University of Aberdeen clearly highlights the fact that the level of calories that we burn off in physical activity has not really changed in the past 20 years, although levels of obesity have continued to increase. Work by Professor John Reilly at the University of Glasgow also highlights the point that physical activity plays only a small part in tackling obesity. I hope that, in the future, the focus will be more on changing people's eating habits. Labelling has a big part to play. If someone goes into Boots and buys a sandwich, they have the traffic-light system, which is easy to understand, but Marks and Spencer does not have that system, and people can get lost in the gobbledegook as they try to work out whether something is good for them or not. We have to get a clearer message across to people on what is healthy and what is not.

The First Minister is aware of the widespread concern throughout Scotland about ever-increasing energy prices, with an increasing number of people living in fuel poverty in our energy-rich Scotland. Will he outline what his Government will do in the next year to tackle increasing fuel poverty and will he assure the Parliament that he and his Government will continue to call on Gordon Brown to ensure that the people of Scotland get a fair deal on fuel costs?

To ask the First Minister whether he will report on matters discussed at this week's meeting of the joint ministerial committee. (S3F-947)

The First Minister will be aware that the London Government has raided Scotland's lottery fund to the tune of £184 million to help to meet the spiralling costs of the London Olympics. What progress was made on securing Scotland's share of the £1.5 billion that the London Government intends to spend in the next three years on regeneration projects that are associated with the games? That money could help to offset the damage that has been caused to the many local organisations that are suffering as a result of the cut in lottery funding.

Given the importance of retaining public confidence in the way in which such matters are handled, I fully accept that the Scottish Ambulance Service has followed all the necessary procedures in this instance. However, will the cabinet secretary ensure that public bodies within her areas of responsibility that transfer data regularly audit the process that they use and that the audit covers any private company that may be contracted to carry out that work?

So far in the debate, there is consensus that Scotland needs to change its relationship with alcohol. As Shona Robison said in her opening speech, that relationship with alcohol is holding back our country. It will probably take at least a generation to change Scotland's cultural associations with alcohol—it takes a considerable time effectively to change a society's culture. We have to ask whether we are the generation that is prepared to take the action that will start that culture change and allow it to take place. The consultation document has certainly stimulated the debate that is necessary for engagement in that process. I turn to the issue that has drawn most of the media attention and has caused quite a bit of  today's debate: increase of the minimum age for purchasing alcohol from an off-licence. The cabinet secretary is aware that I raised that issue with him almost a year ago, because I support increasing the minimum age for the purchase of alcohol from an off-licence from 18 to 21. I recognise that some members oppose that idea as a matter of principle because they believe that there should be an age of civic responsibility. I can see where Christine Grahame is coming from, along with others who argue that the minimum age should not change because there should be a single universal age of civic responsibility. That would mean that we would have to consider whether we should raise the age of consent for sexual activity, to drive a car and so on. I am comfortable with the idea that we accept that people are given different responsibilities at different ages.

Mike Rumbles did not bother to come in for the earlier part of the debate, so I am certainly not going to take his intervention.

He missed three speeches, actually. I do not accept that there being different minimum ages for different responsibilities creates confusion. We have always had different ages for different things. We should also acknowledge that a number of supermarkets currently have a minimum age for purchase of 21; some in my constituency have a minimum age of 25. Those who are protesting about the possible change should be protesting outside the supermarkets, where they will see a very different reaction from the communities that support the initiatives that I am talking about and that are now being taken in my constituency. We must change the minimum age because we must tackle the antisocial behaviour that is fuelled by alcohol. We must ensure that where people are consuming alcohol, they have that experience in a supervised setting in a pub, as they can do at the age of 18, before they can do so outwith the pub.

I fully accept that point. The best bar none initiative in my constituency has several bar owners using a minimum purchasing age of 21 because of the problems that they have  experienced. We need to look at more such initiatives for tackling the problem in town centres. We have heard a lot about the Armadale experience. The public relations machine for Lothian and Borders Police must be given some credit for the way in which it has gone about pushing that pilot. The first pilot was in Larbert and Stenhousemuir in my constituency. It has been running for three months and will run for a further three months. Today, I got an e-mail from the sergeant who is running that initiative for Central Scotland Police, and he said: "I can say that there has been a reduction in Antisocial behaviour crime types and calls received concerning such matters over the 3 month period so far. Vandalism occurring between the specified times has also reduced." One of the most interesting things that he said was that none of the participating off-licences has said that it has experienced any loss of income, but they are advocating that the initiative be rolled out in other parts of the area. That evidence demonstrates that progress has already been made through that initiative. We have a responsibility to listen and act upon that evidence, rather than to ignore it, as some individuals would like to do. During the course of the consultation exercise, we must ensure that the voices of those who suffer from the problems that are associated with antisocial behaviour fuelled by alcohol are not drowned out by sophisticated campaigns that are organised by interest groups and other organisations who want their views to be heard and carried. Communities' views must be heard during the consultation. On enforcement, members will recognise the frustrations that are caused by the problems that we have with our licensing boards accepting that they have a role to play in taking robust action against those who breach the terms of their licences. It is an issue that causes frustration in communities and in the police, who, when they take complaints to the licensing boards, find that the boards are not prepared to take action. They must recognise that they have a clear responsibility to take action where it is merited.

The minister will be aware of the damage that alcohol misuse does to individuals and communities across Scotland. In launching the Government's consultation on tackling Scotland's drink culture, it is clear that targeting cheap alcohol and its availability is to be made a priority. What impact will ending deep discounting of alcohol in off-licences, particularly in supermarkets, have in tackling health inequalities?

The First Minister will be aware that, in the past eight years, not only has there been no independent element to the ministerial code, but no statement has been made on it in the chamber—given the questions that the Opposition has asked today, people may be forgiven for thinking otherwise. That has denied Parliament an opportunity to scrutinise the content and operation of the code. I ask the First Minister to ensure that any future revisions or reviews of and changes to the ministerial code result in a full statement to the Parliament, so that we can continue the good practice that has been established today—that Parliament should be given an opportunity to scrutinise such issues.

It is always a real pleasure to be called to speak at this late point in a stage 3 debate, because there are so many new and fresh ideas to be injected into the discussion. However, as I am not responsible for the timetabling of the debate, I do not feel the need to apologise for repeating some of the points that have already been raised.  Several members have said that consideration of the bill has largely been consensual, not just during today’s debate but during its consideration by the committee. Margaret Curran has just left the chamber for the moment, but I must confess that her attempt at consensual debate was very worthy. In fact, I would go so far as to say that consensual debate comes rather naturally to Margaret Curran, and I encourage her to continue in that vein in the future. During our consideration of amendments, Mary Scanlon made an important point about the support that is available to back-bench members who want to lodge amendments. I hope that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body will consider the matter. The problem arose during the first session of the Parliament, when I served on the Justice 1 Committee as a back-bench member of an Opposition party. However, I recall that the gaps between stage 1 and stage 2 and between stage 2 and stage 3 were longer, which meant that clerks had more opportunity to consider the consequential effects of amendments that were lodged. Perhaps further consideration should be given to timetabling bill stages to give clerks and others such opportunities. Technical difficulties with Opposition members’ amendments are an age-old problem. When I was in opposition I often regarded ministers’ comments about technical difficulties with amendments as a counsel of despair—I am sure that that is not the case during this debate. However, there is a genuine issue to do with ensuring that members are given appropriate support. Like other members, I welcome the bill, which will ensure that our public health legislation and regulations are fit for the 21 st century. The bill will put us in a better position to be able to tackle major public health issues that our nation will face in future. Like Ross Finnie and others, I congratulate the minister on how she conducted herself in her work with the committee on the bill. In opposition it was not always my experience that ministers were forthcoming with committees when there was disagreement or when amendments were sought. The minister demonstrated a willingness to work in partnership with the committee, in line with the original intentions about how the Parliament would operate. She took on board many concerns that the committee raised and when it was not technically possible to amend the bill she offered to address issues in guidance. Her response to the committee prior to stage 2 was extremely useful, as I said at the time. When stage 1 debates took place in the past members often had no idea what position the Executive would take. The full response that the minister provided gave us useful ideas about the Government’s approach. In the stage 1 debate, Mr Finnie expressed concern about the bill in relation to the European convention on human rights. I hope not only that he has been reassured that he need no longer be concerned but that the Parliament will acknowledge that the bill is fully ECHR compliant. The regulation of sunbeds has probably been the major focus of public and media attention. Like other members, I congratulate Ken Macintosh on his diligence and hard work in pursuing the issue during recent years. I acknowledge that the passing of the bill will present difficulties for some businesses in Scotland, particularly those that run coin-operated sunbed parlours. Some businesses might have to close. However, this is an issue on which public health takes precedence over personal difficulties. We have made progress on a number of fronts in relation to other medical conditions and I hope that the passing of the bill will demonstrate that Scotland is determined to address the growing problem of skin cancer. If the Parliament agrees to pass the bill at decision time, it will be important that subsequent regulations and guidelines address issues that the committee raised and that we ensure that local authorities effectively implement the bill’s provisions, to ensure that the public health benefits of the bill are delivered.

I was surprised by amendment 1. I understand that the British Medical Association wants to retain what it regards as the principle that GPs should be paid for the notification of notifiable diseases, but the bill will reduce the number of notifiable diseases. Mary Scanlon suggests that her approach represents an attempt to retain the support of GPs for participating in the notification scheme. I would be disappointed if the medical profession said that GPs would not be prepared to pass on information about notifiable diseases unless they were paid to do so. I would have thought that GPs and other medical practitioners would be willing to pass on such information whether or not they received a fee for doing so—never mind the suggestion that GPs would not participate in the scheme if a fee were not provided. The bill will require hospital-based doctors as well as GPs to pass on information about notifiable diseases, but amendment 1 deals only with GPs and does not say whether hospital-based doctors should also be paid for undertaking that function. I do not think that there is an appetite for providing more funding to GPs, given that the overall burden of notification will reduce. Members should not support amendment 1.

To ask the Scottish Government what assessment has been made of the impact that increasing energy charges are having on the NHS. (S3O-3603)

The cabinet secretary will acknowledge the impact that increasing energy charges are also having on individual patients who have complex health problems and are supported at home. As it stands, health boards can provide financial support to meet energy costs only when a patient uses an oxygen concentrator. Does the cabinet secretary consider that when patients require the support of important life-sustaining equipment such as a ventilator, as is the case with one of my constituents, health boards should have the flexibility to provide them with financial support to meet the energy costs that are associated with running that important equipment?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of concerns about how operational research consultancy—ORCON—targets are being applied, particularly for category A calls, which must be responded to within eight minutes. Does she acknowledge the perverse logic in how that target is applied? If the crew arrives in seven minutes and the casualty dies, that is classed as a success, whereas if the crew arrives in nine minutes and the casualty makes a full recovery, that is classed as a failure. Will she consider further how we can move towards a more outcome-based approach to assessing how the Ambulance Service responds?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that SNP-controlled Falkirk Council led the way in developing the non-profit-distributing model. This week, the council confirmed to me that at no time did it receive any support whatever from the previous Administration in making progress with the proposal. Does the cabinet secretary agree that one legacy of PFI under the previous Administration is that communities often cannot afford to access the community facilities in new local schools? How will the cabinet secretary ensure that, under the new NPD model, facilities are available to communities at an affordable price that is similar to the price that their local authorities charge for their facilities?

Like a number of members, I am conscious that  significant progress has been made since 2006. As Richard Simpson said, phase I of the action plan has resulted in the transformation of services over the past two years. Richard Simpson correctly pointed out that Keith Raffan played a significant role in highlighting hepatitis C issues during sessions 1 and 2. Brian Adam also played an important part, and I suspect that their dogged determination to ensure that hepatitis C was a recurring subject of debate in Parliament led to the development of phase I of the action plan. Their role in ensuring that the issue was addressed effectively must receive appropriate recognition. I congratulate them on the work that they have done over the past eight or nine years. I agree strongly with Ross Finnie that hepatitis C remains one of the most significant public health problems that our nation faces. It is also a significant health problem internationally—it is estimated that some 500 million people worldwide are infected with hepatitis B or hepatitis C. The fact that that is 10 times the number of people who are infected with HIV/AIDS puts into context the extent of the problem across the world. Brian Adam said that there might be concerns about the pace at which some aspects of the phase II action plan are being progressed. I do not necessarily share those concerns. From what I have heard, that is not a matter of great concern. However, given the significance of the problem that we face in Scotland alone, it is legitimate to ask why it took us so long to introduce an effective action plan for tackling hepatitis C. I do not know whether that was reflective of the difficulties of the patient group concerned, many of whom acquired the condition through drugs misuse, which leads to a chaotic lifestyle and many accompanying problems. Another factor might have been the asymptomatic nature of hepatitis C, which has led to its being described as a silent killer. Perhaps that is why effective progress was not made sooner. It is worth considering why that was the case, given that hepatitis C was a significant public health problem long before 2006. In saying that, I do not seek to lay blame on the previous Executive; I think that the reason goes wider than that. I welcome phase II of the action plan and the additional financial resources that will be provided to ensure that it is delivered effectively. Two of the main objectives must be to prevent further transmission of hepatitis C and to ensure that those people who are infected with it have access to the best quality of treatment services. In my view, how hepatitis C can be contracted continues to be surrounded by a large body of  ignorance. One of the most important aspects of the phase II action plan is the continuing education work to ensure greater understanding of contraction of the condition and higher rates of testing. We understand that a large number of people could have hepatitis C without being aware of it. The importance of education in phase II cannot be underestimated. The Scottish hepatitis support network has highlighted a number of important issues. There are notable gaps in services for hepatitis C sufferers and their families. The link between mental health services and hepatitis C services is often poor. It is commonly acknowledged that depression and mood changes can be significant side effects of treatment for hepatitis C. As phase II develops, mental health issues will be given greater prominence, and it is important that provision for those who have hepatitis C and treatment for mental health problems are linked more effectively. Additionally, there is a need to consider providing more effective support for those who are not suitable for antiviral treatment, or for whom that treatment may have been unsuccessful. Another important area is the wider support that must be provided to the families of those who suffer from hepatitis C. The requirement for that area to be addressed more effectively has been highlighted, but I am not convinced that phase II will address it as it should. The illness can affect the whole family unit, children and adults, so there is a need to ensure the provision of more effective support for the family unit, particularly for the primary carer whose direct role is to support the individual who has hepatitis C. There is a clear need for greater linkage between alcohol services and services for those with hepatitis C. The role of alcohol in accelerating liver disease is an important factor that must be recognised. I hope that, during phase II, there will be more effective linkage between those two service areas.

The minister referred in her statement to restricting advertising displays for the sale of cigarettes in shops, including supermarkets. Will she also consider the physical location of cigarette counters in many of our large supermarkets? They are designed to be the last port of call, where customers can get their cigarettes and lottery tickets on their way out the door. Even once the displays are taken away, those cigarette counters will continue to have highly prominent locations within large supermarkets. Will she consider how we can ensure that they are not in such prominent locations in such premises?

Will the member give way?

Duncan McNeil reminisced in his speech about his time on the then Health Committee, and about how Labour back benchers on the committee were prepared to ask ministers difficult questions when they came before the committee. Well, as one of the SNP back-bench members of the current Health and Sport Committee, I reassure Duncan McNeil that SNP members on the committee are prepared to ask difficult questions, as I am sure the cabinet secretary and the minister will recognise. Perhaps you should come along when you get the opportunity, so that we can show you how it should properly be done.

Would you like to come in? I will give way.

Well, Mr McNeil, you are welcome to come along and see how robust questioning should be done in an effective manner, which is certainly not your manner in committee, from what I have heard. Like many others in this debate, I welcome the latest report from Lord Sutherland because it is clear that there is a range of problems around the free personal care policy. I believe that the recommendations collectively provide a package of measures that will ensure that we can resolve many of the problems that have been associated with the policy since its introduction. I worked in care management for many years, assessing individuals who were going into long-term care or considering doing so, and my lack of enthusiasm for the financial assessments that went with the process was a constant bugbear to my team manager, particularly when I recognised that it was likely that a person would have to sell their home in order to pay for their care. Mary Scanlon made a valid point about the need to review free personal care and its associated problems. There we see the sinner repenting, because it was the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990, which her Government introduced, that resulted in the problem of people being forced to sell their homes to pay for their care. I know that many of my colleagues who continue to work in care management welcomed the Scottish Parliament's decision to introduce free personal and nursing care because it removed at a stroke a massive layer of bureaucracy around financial assessments and all the rest, which cost the council tax payer a fortune and which was required to implement the policy that the previous Conservative Government had set up. Many of the problems emanated from the failure of local authorities to have a standardised assessment and delivery process for care management. David McLetchie referred to the lack of clarity around the guidance that the previous Scottish Executive issued when free personal care was introduced, which allowed great variations in provision across the country. That said, there have always been great variations in how local  authorities have delivered care. However, such variations should never have been allowed to happen with the national policy of free personal care. They happened because there was at the start a systemic failure to address particular issues around guidance, which resulted in many elderly people being illegally charged for services for which they should never have been charged. Irene Oldfather made a worthy contribution to the debate, referring particularly to the need to ensure that we implement effectively recommendation 3, for a standardised assessment and delivery process, the lack of which Lord Sutherland sees as being one of the root problems. If we are to address overall inequalities in care, we must recognise the funding implications of free personal care. David McLetchie referred to the original royal commission under Lord Sutherland. That royal commission placed a big emphasis on equity in treatment of elderly people. However, it is also worth keeping it in mind that Tony Blair's placeperson on that royal commission, Lord Lipsey, issued a minority report that opposed many of the recommendations in the commission's report, which he said were not sustainable and did not represent the right way to go. That sentiment is the reason why Westminster decided to withdraw the attendance allowance funding of some £30 million. It did not want to go in that direction and so wanted to penalise the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive, as it was at that time, for that policy. The Labour members who were members of the Scottish Parliament at the time will recall that there was a considerable degree of reluctance on the Labour benches to go ahead with the recommendations in the royal commission's report. To their credit, it was the Liberal Democrat members of the Scottish Executive who forced the issue, along with the Tories and the SNP, all of whom supported the findings of the royal commission and were going to force the issue through Parliament. When Henry McLeish realised that he was on the losing side, he capitulated with Parliament's view. We will take no lectures from the Labour Party, which kids on that it delivered the policy. It has actually created quite a few of the problems that are associated with it, both because of how it implemented the policy in Scotland and because it has deprived Scotland of £30 million to which the Scottish people are entitled.

In the course of any debate on the efficiency and effectiveness of public services, it is easy to forget about those who will be affected by the changes that will be introduced as a result of the Government's programmes: the employees. I had 10 years' experience in public service and I know that there are many dedicated public servants who are committed to their role in our public services. That factor should be kept in mind when we make any changes and debate the issue. However, like many members, many complaints that I receive from constituents and local businessmen are about inefficiency, difficulties with public services, duplication, complications and the lack of responsiveness that they experience when they raise issues with public bodies. I even receive some complaints from those who work in public bodies about inefficiencies and the fact that their organisation is not modernising in the way that the employee believes that it could to achieve better outcomes. Anything that the Government can do to create a more efficient public service is in the interests of not only the public and the taxpayer, but public servants. People will be much more receptive to public servants when they are more effective. There is a contrast between the way in which the Scottish Government has gone about the process compared to the London Government's approach to trying to achieve more effective or more efficient public services. The approach in London on the redundancy issue appears to be about the head count—the more people that we get out the door, the more effective our public services will be—whereas the approach up here, which involves no compulsory redundancies, is one that I believe will allow us to deliver effective public services.

That comes as no surprise from a Conservative, but it is not always the best way to get the best out of our public services. The Government has made significant steps in the past year with a 25 per cent reduction in the number of quangos and a reduction in the number of national public organisations to 120. As the minister said, by 2011 that will be the lowest number since the start of devolution. We have already heard Opposition members claiming credit for some of those things, but given that the focus is on outcomes, it is clear that the current Government is focused on delivering; the previous Government might just have talked about it in the past. As we move from an output to an outcome approach that will deliver more transparent and effective public service, we must consider achieving more openness and transparency in our public services by changing their culture. When the Parliament was considering the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill, a key theme was how it would apply to public bodies. One of the issues that came up was that the biggest challenge to the effectiveness of a freedom of information regime was the culture of public bodies and the need to make them more open, engaged and transparent. One of the challenges for a Government trying to meet its efficiency targets and ensure that public services are more effective is to change the culture and behaviour of some of our public bodies. Whether it is Scottish Natural Heritage, which thinks of itself as judge and jury when it comes to certain dealings with my constituents, or Scottish Water, which thinks nothing of spending four years putting off farmers over compensation, some public bodies think that they can do what they want without effectively engaging with the public or recognising the consequences of their inaction. That is a culture issue, and changing culture must underpin our ensuring more effective public services. An example of the ineffectiveness of some public bodies is provided by what happened to a company in my constituency. In September last year it became apparent, from a bid made to the European Commission for European Social Fund moneys, that food was no longer going to be part of the ESF in Scotland. There were consequences for thousands of people employed in the bakery industry in Scotland, whose support and training were provided by ESF funding. The civil servants put up their hands and admitted that they had made a mistake when they made the application to the EU. However, since September last year, the bakery industry, which trains almost 1,000 people every year across Scotland, has had no  response from the civil servants or the department on how they are going to rectify the problem. That is not effective public service. The industry is important to our country and food policy is a priority for the Government. The civil servants have accepted that they made a mistake, but they have not engaged with the industry to find a solution and address the problem. That is an example of the type of public service inefficiency and ineffectiveness that frustrates people in industry. In the course of creating a culture change in our public services, I hope that ministers will ensure that a big part of it is about being much more engaged. I also hope that public services will recognise that they are part of the solution to some of the difficulties experienced at times by the business sector and others.

To ask the Scottish Government when the Minister for Communities and Sport last met with representatives of Labour and Conservative-led Falkirk Council. (S3O-3229)

Although the minister has not met any representatives of the Labour and Conservative administration, he will be aware that it has decided to abandon the indoor football arena that was to have been built at the Westfield stadium in Falkirk. Having secured £3 million through the national and regional sports facilities strategy, the council has chosen to tear up that £3 million cheque. Does he agree that such a facility would have been of significant benefit to the local community and to the wider area? Does the situation not demonstrate the hollowness of the claims and calls that come from the Tories and the Labour Party for more sports facilities, given that when they can deliver such facilities, they choose to tear up a £3 million cheque that would have allowed them to do so?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement. In particular, I welcome the Government's commitment to ensuring that the policy is adequately funded through the provision of an additional £40 million. Given that there appears to be growing cross-party consensus that the Westminster Government has acted in an unjust and spiteful way in holding back £30 million of attendance allowance money that belongs to Scotland, will the cabinet secretary advise members on the procedure that will be employed as the issue is taken through the joint ministerial committee? Will she ensure that, where possible, the Parliament is kept informed of the progress that is made in taking Scotland's case to London?

The passing of the bill has been described in the debate as an historic milestone. I regard it as something of a landmark that establishes the foundation for the games. One of the real strengths of Glasgow's bid was the way in which it harnessed support across the country; it was regarded as something in which everyone had a stake, and it was very much Glasgow's and Scotland's bid. Schools in Glasgow stopped to watch and cheer the television announcement that Glasgow had secured the bid for the 2014 games, but schools and children right across the country also celebrated. There is still a considerable level of good will across the country towards making the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow a success. As we move away from the post-celebration stage to the delivery stage, it is clear that we will meet a number of challenges. For example, we must ensure that the venues are in place and up to standard, that we have the team in place to be successful in 2014 and that we retain the broader picture of increasing levels of participation in sport, which was set as one of the clear objectives of securing the games for Glasgow. As Glasgow moves towards the delivery phase of the games, it is important that we ensure that we retain the broad base of support across the country that was secured when the bid was launched. Bob Doris talked about the idea of a Glasgow festival, and I wish Glasgow City Council success in developing that. However, we must ensure that we retain the important "Scotland's bid" element of the games. We do not want to find ourselves in the same situation as the organisers of the London 2012 Olympic games, whereby the games have become London-centric and have been sucking in resources from the rest of the country. We must ensure that, as the Glasgow Commonwealth games move towards the 2014 opening, they do not have an adverse effect on support for sporting organisations and facilities across the rest of the country, which will be equally important to individual local communities. I hope that the minister and the Government will do everything  that they can to ensure that we retain the broad base of support that has been there since the outset. Much of the debate so far around the games has been about their legacy. I commend the Government for moving quickly to make a considerable legacy a clear objective of the games. I believe that the games can leave such a legacy, as far as facilities and wider benefits are concerned. However, the Health and Sport Committee has received interesting evidence on the legacy of major sporting events that demonstrates that there is often a poor legacy in terms of driving up participation levels in sport. The Sydney and Athens Olympic games did not achieve greater participation levels, and neither did the Manchester Commonwealth games, although they left fantastic facilities for the benefit of communities. Similarly, I have no doubt that, with 80 per cent of the facilities for the 2014 games already in place and the additional 20 per cent to come on stream, the Glasgow games will leave fantastic facilities. I believe that a considerable amount of work must be done to ensure that we create a legacy of involving more children and adults in sporting activity. It will take a lot of work to actualise that legacy after the games end. In that context, if we need some 15,000 volunteers to help ensure that the Glasgow games are successful, we should consider the experience of the Manchester games. The volunteers for those games tended to be self-selecting and were young kids from white, middle-class families who were engaged in sporting activity. Groups of people on the west coast of Scotland, such as young females who do not engage in sporting activity, might not volunteer for the games. I hope that the Government takes from the debate the need, if we are to harness the benefits of increasing participation in sport, to target when recruiting the 15,000 volunteers people who are not engaged in sporting activity, who live in deprived communities and who are unlikely to become involved in sporting activity. If we tackle the issue in that way, I am sure that we will provide a lasting legacy.

The cabinet secretary will recognise that safety and security at the INEOS site in Grangemouth is of great importance to residents in the local area. He will be aware that the central Scotland strategic co-ordinating group has been working with INEOS to address those issues. Will he ensure that the  Government's officials continue to work closely with the co-ordinating group and that, if local services need additional specific support from central Government, that will be made available at the earliest opportunity?

I have never been a councillor—although I have given some counselling in my time.

As the minister outlined in her opening comments, it is important that Scotland has modern public health legislation that allows us more effectively to respond to potential public health challenges. For that reason, I welcome the bill, which has been supported by members of all parties so far in today's debate, and which I am sure will carry Parliament's support at 5 o'clock this evening. Before going any further, I want to acknowledge the considerable amount of hard work that was put in to enable the committee to draw together its stage 1 report. On that note, I offer particular thanks for the hard work of the committee's clerks, who had to deal with the sometimes incoherent ramblings of committee members as they tried to get a clear idea of what members intended to say in the report. I will not name those whose ramblings were incoherent. I also take this opportunity to thank the minister for her detailed response to the committee's recommendations. In the past almost nine years, it has not always been the practice for ministers to  respond in such detail to committee recommendations prior to the stage 1 debate. That has not always been helpful. In my experience, committees have usually been in the dark on exactly what the Executive intends to do at stage 2. I thank the minister for the helpful way in which she has informed today's debate by giving us a clear idea of where the Government intends to go. I hope that that practice will continue. I am conscious that one problem for anyone who makes a speech later in a stage 1 debate is that few new factors can be raised that have not already been mentioned. However, some of the issues are so important that I intend to repeat points that have been made by other members. I will reiterate those points for any members who missed them when they were originally made. The minister will be aware that section 7 of the bill will place on health boards a duty to prepare joint public health protection plans in consultation with the relevant local authority or authorities in their area. The Society of Chief Officers of Environmental Health in Scotland expressed concerns about the way in which plans will be drawn up under that provision. I note that concern was also expressed by the Scottish directors of public health group and the Faculty of Public Health. It is important to note that a key element of successful implementation of the provisions will be the relationship between local authorities and individual health boards. The minister stated that that should not be addressed in the bill. If it is to be addressed in guidance, it is important that that be done explicitly to ensure that there is an effective joint approach between health boards and local authorities. Several members mentioned public health investigation warrants and the proposed summary application procedures. I raised the issue when the minister and her officials gave evidence to the committee at stage 1. As other members have said, the proposed summary application process is, in effect, alien to the Scottish justice system. The Law Society of Scotland put it as diplomatically as it could when it stated that the provisions "do not always accurately reflect current Scottish civil procedures". As Ross Finnie said, the process has no place within Scottish law. That is not the minister's responsibility, in that it is not her fault, but when I raised the matter at stage 1 her officials were unfortunately unable to explain how we had got to the stage of having in a bill a proposal that does not fit within Scottish law. Was it because of a mistake in the drafting instructions that were sent to the draftsmen, or did the draftsmen misinterpret the instructions? We need clarification of how that fundamental mistake was allowed to occur in the  first place so that we can ensure that it is not repeated. I note, however, that staff are under a lot of pressure in drafting legislation. I do not concur with Ross Finnie's view on the bill's ECHR compliance, which he questioned. The ECHR does not state that there must be an element of appeal in every section within a bill that contains a legal provision. He should also be aware that the bill's ECHR compliance is a matter for the Presiding Officer to consider and certify. I do not think that we should question the bill's compatibility with the ECHR; instead, we should ensure that we have the best possible process. I will support the amendments that Ken Macintosh intends to lodge at stage 2. We need to consider further the enforcement of any regulations that are introduced to deal with sunbed parlours. Unfortunately, we cannot regulate the sun in Scotland, but we should regulate sunbed parlours because of the increasing problem of skin cancer. We need to consider enforcement, and ensure that any new regulations are implemented effectively.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the way in which Scottish Water is handling compensation claims from farmers. (S3O-2874)

I apologise to the chamber for my late arrival, which was due to the change in time of the business programme. Is the minister aware that it can take almost three or four years for farmers to secure compensation from Scottish Water when it causes damage to their farmland as a result of its work programme? Will he ensure that Scottish Water looks at its compensation scheme so that it  provides compensation more timeously to farmers where it accepts liability for the damage that it has caused to farm land?

I welcome the review and the fact that Lord Cullen has been appointed to undertake it. As many have said, he is an individual with great experience in this field and I wish him well in this undertaking. Although a review of the 1976 act has been due for some time, when one thinks of the time that it can take to review and reform certain elements of our justice system—when I was on the Justice 1 Committee, we sometimes amended and reformed legislation that was several hundred years old—one can see that the 1976 act is a fairly young piece of legislation. However, I welcome the fact that the growing concern about a number of its provisions that now require to be reformed has been recognised. The existing statutory grounds for FAIs—death in custody or death in the course of employment—should remain in place, regardless of any other changes or reforms that might take place. There is a possibility that further statutory grounds for an FAI will be created. I share Keith Brown's concerns about military personnel and I am somewhat surprised that that issue was not addressed earlier. It might be that, as part of the reform of the 1976 act, we should frame any changes so that future changes can be accommodated more rapidly than is the case at the moment; it appears to be a lengthy process. In particular, I hope that an accommodation can be found between the Scottish Government and the Westminster Government in the interests of addressing the concerns of the families of military personnel who have been tragically lost in overseas action. Families need clarity on the provision of FAIs and who they should turn to when they believe that they have grounds for requesting one. Sadly, in several constituents' cases, I have found some confusion about that. For those of us who have some knowledge of FAIs, it is clear that the matter lies with the Crown Office, but families may be unclear after a trial about what further action they can take to raise concerns and often have little knowledge of how they can pursue a fatal accident inquiry. I hope that Lord Cullen will consider whether to ensure that the Crown proactively informs families when a fatal accident inquiry may be an option, pending its consideration of the case. That would give families greater knowledge and understanding of when they may have the option of pressing for such an inquiry. In my experience, families turn to their elected representatives to lobby on their behalf for a fatal  accident inquiry. That does not indicate a system that is working well. Other members have suggested changes and I throw on the table an option for reform that is similar to the way in which we deal with issues of parental rights and responsibilities. In such cases, an interested party can petition the sheriff to have a matter considered. Perhaps, when an interested party thinks that they have a legitimate reason for requesting a fatal accident inquiry, they could petition the sheriff. The sheriff could consider their views and those of any other interested parties and whether there are grounds for such an inquiry. Although the Crown might not be so keen on that idea, because there is potential for a sheriff to bind the Crown to undertake an inquiry, it would give families greater clarity, as well as the option of making their case before the sheriff. I have also experienced concern in my constituency about cases that fall outwith the statutory grounds for an FAI, when the Crown can consider whether it is in the public interest for an FAI to be conducted. I have no doubt that Crown Office staff consider such matters seriously, but the public find it extremely difficult to understand what the Crown takes into account when it balances the public interest in such issues. One of the first cases that I dealt with as an MSP, more than eight years ago, was the tragic death of a young constituent, Kathleen Fitzpatrick, who was killed on Falkirk Road in Bonnybridge after leaving the school bus. She passed round the front of the bus and was, sadly, struck and killed by a heavy goods truck. There were issues, such as whether the local procurator fiscal would undertake a criminal prosecution, which in the end did not happen. The family was left with questions about how such a tragic event could have happened to a child coming home on a school bus that they thought she would be safe using. At no point did the Crown offer the possibility of a fatal accident inquiry. It was only through my representations and those of other elected members that eventually, after about a year and a half, the Crown was persuaded that there was public interest in examining the case of a child who, having come home from school on a local authority school bus, had been knocked down and killed just across from her house. There are lessons that could be learned from that.

It is, but it is an issue that a fatal accident inquiry could consider, and it may be one of its recommendations That brings me neatly to the issue of an inquiry's recommendations and the force that they have. The next stage for a family is what happens after the sheriff has conducted an inquiry and made recommendations. I welcome the fact that the standing of the recommendations will be considered. The provision of FAIs should be extended to allow a fatal accident inquiry when the body of a Scot who has died abroad is returned to Scotland. Such an FAI should not happen automatically, but only if circumstances justify one. For example, if someone dies of a heart attack while they are on holiday in France, I do not think that an FAI is required but, if there are suspicious circumstances, one may be justified. Therefore, I hope that Lord Cullen will recommend that FAI provision should be extended, with the caveat that it should be considered whether an FAI is appropriate when a body is returned to Scotland.

Although I recognise Jeremy Purvis's commitment to this cause, I am somewhat disappointed that we are revisiting the debate after just over three years. I had thought that he would recognise that there is no political, public or professional support for the introduction of euthanasia in Scotland.

There is a big difference between the public wanting to have a debate and their supporting euthanasia. The BMA's briefing is clear, so I will quote from it for Jeremy Purvis's sake. It says: "In 2005, the BMA considered the merits of allowing Parliament and society at large to decide this controversial matter and took a neutral stance. In 2006, however, BMA members voting at the annual meeting made clear that the majority oppose" the idea of introducing physician-assisted suicide. The BMA's position is clear. It has gone from a position of neutrality to one of opposing euthanasia. I believe that the direction of travel in the debate is to oppose euthanasia. The BMA has taken a firmer stance on the matter since the time of Jeremy Purvis's previous debate. The birth of life is a natural process and death should also be natural. Those who actively promote euthanasia state that it is their human right to decide when they should actively end their life. Under the European convention on human rights and considerable case law on the subject, there is no such right to die. I turn to the impact that euthanasia could have on the doctor-patient dynamic. To provide a doctor  with a licence to kill or to assist in euthanasia would give that doctor a role that does not sit comfortably with their role as a healer and carer. Such a role would fly in the face of the Hippocratic oath and would undoubtedly impair the doctor-patient relationship, which is founded on trust. The doctor-patient relationship would be seriously compromised if patients could not express their distress lest it led to the possibility of euthanasia. Doctors and nurses should not be put under any pressure to consider the possibility of assisted suicide, nor should patients have to feel under pressure to consider the same possibility should they be in a state in which they might be considered for assisted suicide. The BMA also highlighted that issue as one of the potential downsides of any change to legislation. Euthanasia is not simply about deciding whether to switch off the life-support machine; it is about deciding whether a person should die. It is a form of suicide that cuts short a person's life. The case law to which Jeremy Purvis referred has more to do with switching off life support than it has with actively promoting a person's death. I turn to the bigger picture. As a society, we could consider going down the route of allowing people to make this type of decision, with all the implications that that entails. However, if we did that, too many people would be put into the position of having to consider the value of their life. I do not believe that that is a healthy place for society to be.

I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's statement. In the spirit of consensus, I acknowledge the work that the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive did to tackle HAI. However, despite the inception of the HAI task force in 2003, patients are still being exposed to avoidable infections. The overall rate in acute hospitals remains high: the cabinet secretary stated that it is in the region of 9.5 per cent. I was interested to note that hospital-acquired infections contributed to 422 deaths in Scotland last year, which represents a 5 per cent increase compared with 2005. Some 13 per cent of deaths are now associated with infections that are acquired after surgery. There is clearly a deep-running problem in our hospitals and health service if so many people suffer from hospital-acquired infections and, tragically, so many lives continue to be lost because of them. I welcome the fact that, soon after she took up her portfolio, the cabinet secretary made it clear that tackling hospital-acquired infections was a priority not just for the Government but for her personally. In November last year, she announced £54 million to be invested in the coming three years to drive down hospital infections. Those resources underscore the Government's commitment to ensuring that preventing people from acquiring infections when they receive health care continues to be a priority in our health service. A considerable part of the cabinet secretary's speech focused on MRSA. The problems associated with MRSA in the NHS are not new; they have been around for many years. I can remember in my previous career dealing with many patients who had MRSA, which extended their period in hospital and, sadly, for some resulted in their passing away. I was interested to note that 51 deaths were attributed to MRSA in 2006, which was 38 up on the previous year. I suspect that the sudden jump is due to greater recording on death certificates. As we have already heard from Mary Scanlon and Helen Eadie, there is an issue about recording deaths caused by MRSA. Professor Hugh Pennington has stated that the real number of deaths linked to MRSA could be 10 times greater than the official statistics, which depend on recording the cause of death on the death certificate. If we are to tackle what the cabinet secretary correctly described as a stubborn problem with MRSA, we must ensure that we have the right data on which to base our judgments, which means that deaths must be properly recorded.  I welcome the delivery plan to deal with the problem more effectively, and the screening programme, which will be introduced in pilots. I am disappointed that my health board—Forth Valley NHS Board—was not selected as a pathfinder board, although I am reassured that, if the screening programme is successful and proves worth while, Forth Valley will be in a position to implement it in 2009-10. The additional funding for the pathfinder boards is welcome in trying to deal with infections. The cabinet secretary accepted that hospitals will never be sanitised, infection-free places and that control in tackling the problem is the way forward. I agree. She also highlighted the importance of hand hygiene. All the moves proposed in the delivery plan, including more auditing and ensuring compliance, are to be welcomed, but a more consistent approach is needed throughout different hospitals. In the past six months, I have been in four different hospitals, all of which have a different approach to ensuring that staff and visitors clean their hands properly when entering wards, visiting bed units or leaving. There is a need to ensure greater consistency because, as Ross Finnie said, we must get people on board—the patients and the people who visit hospital. I hope that, as part of the delivery programme, there will be greater focus on ensuring more consistency in how hospitals get the message across to people about when they should clean their hands. My final point is on the design of some of our hospitals, because it is clear that some designs contribute to the problem. For example, a patient in a single bed unit who has an intravenous drip and is being barrier nursed and who does not have a toilet in their unit must leave the unit to use the toilet outside the ward, which compromises infection control. In the long term, we will need to ensure that patients who are barrier nursed in single bed units in some of our older hospital estate buildings have integrated toilet facilities. In this day and age, it is unacceptable to expect people to use commodes when they could use toilets. Patients, the public and staff must be united in tackling the problem. I hope that, through the additional resources, we will start to drive down the number of hospital-acquired infections rather than stabilise it, as at present. By reducing such infections, we will ensure that patients have more faith that, when they go into hospital, they will not contract an infection.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to further assist families with children on renal dialysis. (S3O-2690)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will want to join me in welcoming members of the Kidney Kids Scotland organisation that is based in my constituency, which provides valuable support to children who are on renal dialysis. The minister mentioned the paediatric renal urology network, but is she aware of the difficulties that it is having in ensuring that health boards throughout the country engage effectively with it at local level? Will she consider contacting the chair of each health board to ensure that boards engage effectively with the network and that it is integrated into their regional planning processes?

No one so far has suggested that we can underestimate the importance of getting right the curriculum in our education system from age threef to age 18. Getting it right is essential because the impact of the curriculum for excellence will be generational—it will have an impact for many years to come. I very much welcome the fact that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is willing to have an open debate, in which all stakeholders will have an opportunity to contribute to the curriculum for excellence. I agree with her that our education system had become far too focused on providing children with the skills to pass exams, rather than on equipping them with the skills that they need for life. The curriculum for excellence should be about not only preparing children and equipping them with the skills for passing exams but about ensuring that they have the knowledge and skills for life and work in the future. The cabinet secretary will know that setting out the framework for the curriculum for excellence will, in itself, not deliver the types of outcomes that she would like children to achieve through our education system. The key to ensuring that the curriculum for excellence delivers what it is intended to deliver is to ensure that we have clear focused outcomes against which we can measure the process. Some members have criticised the fact that the outcomes are currently only in draft form, but I hope that they will take the opportunity to say what they would like to be added to the outcomes. Now is the time for those who are interested in outcomes to make known their views rather than criticise the fact that the outcomes are merely in draft form at the moment.

Mr O'Donnell assumed that I was giving him more time than I had intended. I recognise that, at present, some of the draft outcomes would not achieve a crystal mark. I have no doubt that the minister is waiting for the  member's submission on the outcomes, and to hear his views on that issue. Elizabeth Smith made a thoughtful contribution to the debate. I agree with her that the curriculum should value all pupils, irrespective of their academic ability. The curriculum for excellence is a major step forward in ensuring that we have a system that allows that to happen. However, I also agree that we should ensure that there is sufficient flexibility within the educational structures to ensure that they can deliver for pupils of different levels of achievement. On flexibility, unlike Rob Gibson, with his professional background, I am not an educationist, but I am conscious that the different approaches that different schools will be able to undertake, and which even different classes at the same school will be able to undertake, will present a major challenge for many people in the profession. We need to provide the right type of support, guidance and professional development to the teaching profession in order to ensure that that is effective. I have some concerns that schools that are doing well will be in close proximity to schools that are not doing well. We must ensure that that does not happen or that it does not become more marked with increasing flexibility. It is therefore important that we can measure or audit how schools are performing, and that we share experience, in order to encourage good practice throughout the sector. On an issue that Robin Harper raised, I am passionate about the role that sport and outdoor education can play in our education system. I am aware that a working group chaired by Maureen Watt is examining the greater role that outdoor education can play. If teachers are to have the flexibility and skills to shape and deliver courses to include all pupils, sport and outdoor education can play an important part, if they are used in the right way. There is a culture that is not currently in favour of outdoor education within the system. I would like more to be done on that issue, so that teachers can have the confidence to use outdoor education in delivering the curriculum for excellence. I will finish on an issue that is of personal interest to me—early years education. If parents are to understand the continuum of education from three to 18, parents of children at the early years stage need to be better informed of what the outcomes from early years education should be.

No doubt the minister is aware that the Royal National Mod this year will be hosted in Falkirk, in my constituency. I am sure that she will be pleased that it will—we hope—be the first fair trade Mod to be held. The minister will be aware that there is significant funding provision to support the Mod. However, there is little funding to assist with the Mod fringe programme, which plays an important part in the celebration and promotion of Gaelic. Will the minister ask the Scottish Arts Council to review the support and advice that it provides to organising committees of the Mod and to consider whether greater support and advice can be provided in relation to the fringe programme, in order to maximise the benefits that can be gained from hosting the Mod?

As other members do, I very much welcome the organ donation task force's report. I am particularly pleased that the Scottish Government has agreed to implement all 14 of its recommendations and to work in partnership with the London, Welsh and Northern Ireland Governments to take it forward nationally. Like other members, I was interested to note the suggestion that if all 14 of the task force's recommendations were implemented effectively, that could result in a 50 per cent increase in the number of donations over the next five years. I very much hope that that is the case. However, when the report was published, given the gathering momentum around the presumed consent debate, I was conscious that there was a danger that some people may argue that we should not implement the report's recommendations because presumed consent may be a much more effective way of dealing with the issue. I am reassured by the minister's statement that presumed consent will not be a substitute for the implementation of the task force's recommendations. That said, the task force's report raises interesting questions about presumed consent. If the implementation of all 14 recommendations was successful and increased the number of organ donations by 50 per cent, it would be reasonable to ask whether there was still a need to have a debate on presumed consent or to consider such a model. Should we wait for five years, to see whether implementation of the recommendations delivers that possible suggested increase? I do not think that we should. We should move forward now because five years is too long to wait, especially for people who are on the transplant waiting lists. Nevertheless, l believe that the Government should address such questions in the debate on presumed consent. I have no idea what being on the transplant waiting list must be like, but I have witnessed at close hand the impact that it can have on the lives of people on kidney dialysis while they wait for transplants—the impacts on personal life, work life, leisure life and life in general. At the Falkirk and district royal infirmary, in my constituency, we have an excellent renal dialysis unit that was opened several years ago and was recently extended—the cabinet secretary came to the opening of the extension. That unit has markedly improved the quality of life of my constituents who are on renal dialysis, as they can now go to their local hospital instead of having to travel to Glasgow or Edinburgh. In particular, I highlight the plight of families with children who have to go to hospital for renal  dialysis. When specialist forms of dialysis are required, children are having to travel to Yorkhill hospital in Glasgow, where that service is provided, irrespective of where in the country they live. For people in my constituency, that may not be a big burden, although it still means that such children must leave school regularly throughout the week to travel to Glasgow for dialysis. It is a bigger burden for those who have to travel from Inverness, Shetland or wherever. I know of families that have had to uproot themselves and relocate to Glasgow in order to access the service. The best thing that we could do for those children would be to increase the number of organ donations, in order to allow them to come off dialysis at some point in the future. We need to consider providing more support for families and children who are in that situation. A small charitable organisation in my constituency—Kidney Kids Scotland—provides financial and practical support to such children and their families. It does a fantastic job, and the Government should consider what further support it could give to families in that difficult situation. Like Mary Scanlon, Mike Rumbles and Ross Finnie, I have concerns around the term "presumed consent". In my view, consent is an active process, not a passive one, so there is a debate to be had around the terminology. When the debate first began, I opposed presumed consent largely on the basis of the selfish view that I, not the state, will determine what happens to my organs. However, I now believe that we should move towards a presumed consent model in Scotland. I said that I originally came to the debate thinking that presumed consent was not the way to go but I have changed my view for largely selfish reasons. If I, a member of my family or anyone else, depended upon having a transplant, then I hope and pray that it would happen for them sooner rather than later. The statistics tell the story that, for many people, it is happening too late. If a presumed consent model would help to save lives, I believe that we should do it sooner rather than later.

I welcome the First Minister's statement. He stated that energy would be a new work stream for the council when its summit takes place in Edinburgh  later in the year. What other issues will be discussed at the Edinburgh summit?

In the early years of the Scottish Parliament, some members hesitated and were reluctant to engage in making international policy, even international development policy. That view extended to the functions of both the Parliament and the Executive. That reluctance was driven by several factors, but the principal factor for some members  was the view that international development policy was reserved. However, this debate—as has been the case with other debates on international development policy—demonstrates that the Parliament has moved forward in recognising that we have a responsibility and a part to play in international development. The role played by the Scottish branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association was a significant catalyst in changing our thinking about the role of this Parliament. It also had an impact on the Government at the time. The CPA recognised early on that there was a strong desire on the part of Parliaments in other parts of the world to engage with the new Scottish Parliament and Scotland's newfound democracy, and it considered how we could build on such relationships. However, it also recognised that engagement should occur in a purposeful manner, and should not consist of a group of MSPs fleetingly visiting one country and saying, "That was great. You're doing really well. Please come and visit us some time." Instead, it should be about engaging in a meaningful and enduring way, which has been reflected in the on-going relationship between this Parliament and the Malawian Parliament. As members have done, we must acknowledge that despite the criticisms from some quarters—even within the chamber—and from that other Parliament at Westminster at the time, the then First Minister, Jack McConnell, recognised that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive had a purposeful role to play. That position was endorsed by the minister in charge of international development at the time, Hilary Benn, who made it clear that international development is everybody's business. It is important that we continue to recognise that within the Parliament. The relationship with Malawi moved on—as other members have mentioned—to the co-operation agreement that was signed in November 2005 between the two countries. It is clear that, since then, the relationship between our Governments and the Parliament has matured and strengthened to our mutual benefit. I believe that it will endure if there is the continuing will to ensure that it does so. With the on-going review of the Government's international development policy, we will no doubt see changes in the existing strategy. They may take the new Government into areas where the previous Executive did not go, but no matter what happens I am sure that they will provide new opportunities in other areas. I hope that, at the end of the review process, the relationship with Malawi that we have developed at both an institutional and political level will be retained as a key part of the policy.  I welcome the fact that, contrary to what Mike Pringle said, the Government will double the amount of money in the Scottish Government's budget that is invested in international development. I welcome the fact that the Malawian funding has been ring fenced—it is one area of ring fencing that I am happy with and would not like to be subject to an outcome agreement. I acknowledge that, as Murdo Fraser said, the money that the Scottish Government can invest in international development and the approximately £3 million investment in Malawi are modest, given the scale of the difficulties that that country faces, therefore we should focus, albeit not exclusively, on two areas: health and education. Malawi has some of the poorest health indicators in the world for a range of conditions, but significant progress can be made. I hope that during the Government's review we will consider providing more targeted support to key areas where we can improve capacity and access to services. I refer to capacity and access in that order because it is important that, before promoting greater access to health and education, we ensure that there is significant capacity to cope with it. I understand that point from my experience of visiting a school in Malawi. When the Government introduced free education provision, the school, which had 14 classrooms, saw its pupil numbers increase to 9,500 overnight. It clearly did not have the infrastructure to cope with the increasing access to the service. I hope that we will consider that point during the policy review. I hope that, at the end of the review, there will be a greater focus on the good development practice of the organisations that we support to ensure that they engage in a meaningful way at a local level and that they are open, transparent and accountable in how they operate, to ensure that they create sustainability at a local level rather than for themselves.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review existing council tax regulations. (S3O-2084)

I draw the minister's attention to the experience of two of my constituents who were notified a couple of months ago by the local assessor's office that their property, bought two years previously, should have been rebanded at the time of purchase but, due to an administrative error by the assessor's office, had not been. Now that the property has been moved up a band, the assessor's office has applied the rebanding retrospectively to the past two years and is holding my constituents financially liable, stating that there is no provision in the relevant regulations to waive the liability. Will the minister look into the issue to ensure that mistakes by the assessor's office are not held against constituents who simply did what they should have done and paid what they believed at the time to be the correct council tax?

I am pleased to see that the First Minister has taken action that eluded previous First Ministers and has lit the bonfire of the quangos. I ask the First Minister how the package of measures that he has announced compares to the efforts of the previous Executive to reduce the number of public bodies in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress the NHS is making to improve fire safety in hospitals. (S3O-1949)

I draw the minister's attention to concerns expressed by a number of organisations about NHS Forth Valley's intention not to install fire sprinklers in the new Larbert hospital. Is she aware that for more than a year now the local fire authority has asked repeatedly for such sprinklers to be installed? Does she agree with the recent comment of Her Majesty's fire service inspectorate that it would be good practice to install fire sprinklers in hospitals and, if so, does she think that NHS Forth Valley should ensure that the new Larbert hospital complies with that best practice standard?

I warmly welcome the minister's statement this afternoon, which is effectively about the abolition of sportscotland as we know it. The radical new structure—decentralisation in particular—will serve Scottish sport well. With that decentralisation in mind, I ask the minister what benefit will be gained at grass-roots level from the creation of the four hubs throughout the country.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the level of responses to its consultation on a strategic framework for freshwater fisheries. (S3O-1602)

I draw to the minister's attention the concerns of those involved in angling in Scotland, particularly those who are not members of local angling clubs or national angling groups, that the views of such organisations on protection orders might not be shared by  independent anglers. The reason for that is that many angling clubs have protection orders on portions of water that they have the rights to. Can the minister assure me that, in relation to the submissions that the Government receives on this consultation, the responses that he receives from individual anglers will be given equal weight to those of the national and local angling clubs that make representations on the operation of protection orders?

I welcome the debate, but I confess that I am somewhat surprised that the Lib Dems have the nerve to hold a debate on sport, given that they are one of the parties that have in effect ignored the need for change in Scottish sport for the past eight years. In that time, they showed that they like to talk the talk of sport but that, when it comes to delivering, they certainly do not walk the walk. The Lib Dems are trying to portray themselves as the saviours of Scottish sport, but let us look at the legacy of their period in office. The Liberal Democrats are one of the parties that left us a national sporting agency with an increasing level of bureaucracy that is consuming the money that should be going to front-line sport. They are one of the parties that were responsible, along with sportscotland, for the implementation of sport 21, in which many of the key targets were not achieved. On top of that, in some areas there was deterioration from the starting baseline. The Liberal Democrats are one of the parties that introduced a national and regional sports facilities strategy. So far, not one of those facilities has opened its doors to the public, although movement is now being made under this Government. They are one of the parties that left us with a deficit of £2.1 billion in lack of investment in our existing sports facilities—a legacy of failure. On the other side of the chamber we have the Labour Party, whose Government at Westminster wants to remove £13 million from sports lottery funding in Scotland—money that is meant to go to grass-roots sports. Labour and Liberal Democrat members have a brass neck in trying to portray themselves this morning as the saviours of sport in Scotland. For the past eight years, successive sports ministers—including you, Ms Ferguson—have hidden behind sportscotland when it has made difficult decisions. You evaded accountability on such issues and ducked out of making difficult decisions.

We have already heard from you. Patricia Ferguson was meant to establish a review of sportscotland, but she failed to do so. She ducked out of that, because she did not have the bottle or commitment to deliver on it.

As sports minister, you had years to do something, but I am afraid that you failed dreadfully. We do not need to hear any more from you. The review provides us with a real opportunity to change things for the better, because its underlying principle is to ensure that we improve on the mediocrity that we have inherited from the previous Administration and that we get the right infrastructure in place to deliver for Scottish sport. I am aware that some people in sport are anxious about the possibility of change. Whenever change comes along, it is inevitable that people are concerned about its implications. However, I could not disagree more with those who say that we should just continue with the status quo because the Commonwealth games are coming along. Now is the time to get the system right. We should not wait until 2014 before realising that we should have changed it seven years previously. We need a new approach that reduces the bureaucracy that we inherited from the previous Administration, that takes sport forward and that ensures that those who are involved in sport have a clear voice on and direct line into the policy direction that is taken. Those who oppose any change to sportscotland are settling for the mediocrity that we had for the past eight to 10 years under their Administration. We need to move forward. We should support the minister's amendment so that we can change sport in Scotland for the better and for the future.

I am no longer a member of a justice committee, so it has been some time since I have been involved in a justice debate. However, it is interesting to see that some of the familiar faces from the past eight and a half years are still involved in the debate. Yes—I am referring to Mr Aitken and Ms McNeill. One of the real benefits of the past eight years of the Scottish Parliament is that all the reforms of our criminal justice system have come about because the Scottish Parliament exists. During the first two sessions, justice legislation made for one of the largest volumes of legislation going through Parliament. That was because, for many years reform of our justice system had been ignored for practical, rather than party-political, reasons. It was at times difficult to get the required time at Westminster to ensure that the necessary reforms to the Scottish justice system were given an opportunity to be debated and considered. It is therefore fair to say that the reforms within the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 are long overdue and will help to improve the  system in order to benefit our constituents and communities. I said that the justice system has benefited from the Scottish Parliament's existence and the fact that we have been able to extend the reform programme in our justice system. That programme has been accelerated during the past eight years, and there are anxieties in certain quarters that some of the reforms have moved forward too hastily. However, that accusation would not stick in relation to the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007, given the considerable time over which it was considered. Pauline McNeill said that the process was initiated by Jim Wallace, the former Minister for Justice, but he initiated it back on 19 September 2001, when he established the McInnes committee to review summary justice in Scotland. The McInnes committee was made up of individuals who had considerable experience of the summary justice system in Scotland. They gave two and a half years of their time to examine the matter in detail before they passed the report to the justice minister for his consideration. After that, the Executive gave us a period of consultation on what the McInnes review proposed, followed by committee consideration of the bill. A considerable amount of time has been devoted to reform of our summary justice system. I am confident that the reforms have been well thought out and will make a significant difference. I will pick up in particular on court reform, which is dealt with in part 4 of the 2007 act. Some of the important changes that the act intends to make to our district court system will help to provide a more effective local justice system. I welcome the unification of the summary court system under the Scottish Court Service, which Pauline McNeill mentioned. When I have visited district courts, I have been struck by the significant variations in how they have operated and in how justices have operated. Local authorities have tried their best to operate the courts as effectively as possible, but my impression has often been that the district courts were not among their highest priorities. An issue that was often raised with me by justices on the bench in district courts was the great variation in the support that they received as they carried out their role. The McInnes report highlighted the lack of any minimum training standards or competence levels for lay justices. A number of years ago, the then District Courts Association introduced a training framework to try to achieve some consistency, but there was no statutory obligation on local authorities to continue to give their lay justices updated training or to monitor their competence. One of the benefits of a  unified system is that it offers opportunities—now that it falls under the sheriff principal—to achieve greater consistency, to ensure that competence is actively monitored, and to have a much more effective local justice system through the new justice of the peace courts. I welcome the fact that the 2007 act maintained a role for lay justices within our justice system, and that the Government is continuing with that policy. I am aware that the McInnes report was not unanimous on the issue—there was a note of dissent, and the report itself recommended that there should be a professional judiciary at all levels, including all levels of our summary justice system. I welcome the fact that the previous Executive went against that particular recommendation and that this Government is continuing that approach to ensure that people from the local community who are affected by the issues that the court will consider are involved in dispensing justice. It is in everyone's interests to ensure that there is a quick and effective justice system. It is important that we ensure that the right individuals have responsibility, which is why I welcome the fact that the clerks to the new justice of the peace courts will also come under the Scottish Court Service: the problem with their coming from the local authority side is that they can often be drawn off into other issues. I am happy to support the Government's motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the way that Scottish Gas is handling the central heating programme. (S3O-1507)

I appreciate that the minister inherited the central heating contract from  the previous Executive, but is he aware of the serious concerns about how Scottish Gas is administering the contract? In particular, I draw his attention to its withholding payments from contractors who have carried out installations on its behalf. It has not paid contractors until the very last moment, which I understand has already caused several companies to go under. I understand that an increasing number of contractors are looking to withdraw from such work as a result of that policy. In addition, I draw the minister's attention to the fact that Scottish Gas is failing to pass on work to contractors that are prepared to work for it. I know of one contractor who has a contract with Scottish Gas to install 40 systems per week, but who in the past two weeks has received only 14 requests for installations. Will the minister ensure that, as part of his review, contractors are consulted on what can be done to improve the system?

I warmly welcome the cabinet secretary's statement. She mentioned the success of the policy in Wales. Indeed, with the removal of prescription charges in Wales, the review that is being undertaken of prescription charges in Northern Ireland, and the Scottish Government's decision to abolish prescription charges, the good people of England might wish to start lobbying their politicians for a similar change. Will the cabinet secretary join me in urging members of the Opposition parties, particularly those on the Labour benches, to follow the example of their colleagues in Wales and endorse the actions of the SNP Government to end the tax on ill health, rather than coming to the chamber with pathetic, nit-picking excuses not to support the policy?

As a younger member of Parliament, I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement. She will acknowledge that it is important to ensure during a pandemic that there is sufficient surveillance of entry points into the country as possible routes in for infection. What measures will be taken to ensure that additional surveillance operations are put in place at entry points such as our seaports and airports?

Setting aside the question of the structure that might be put in place to replicate sportscotland's work, I note that Julia Bracewell, the chair of the organisation, expressed serious concern at this week's meeting of the Health and Sport Committee about the impact of the Department of Culture, Media and Sport in London's proposed £13 million cut in sports lottery funding to Scotland at both grass-roots and elite levels. Will the minister ensure that those concerns are brought fully to the department's attention? Moreover, has he taken note of the fact that, to date, DCMS has not confirmed whether the cut has been capped at £13 million or could be more? Will he make representations to ensure that if the department goes ahead with the cut it will be capped at that amount?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review the regulations for the installation of fire sprinklers. (S3O-1229)

I draw the minister's attention to the concerns expressed by the Fire Brigades Union, Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service and the Scotland Patients Association about NHS Forth Valley's reluctance to consider installing a fire sprinkler system in the new Larbert acute hospital. Does the minister agree that modern fire sprinklers are the best way to protect people and property from fire? Will he consider extending the existing regulations for the mandatory installation of fire sprinklers in new hospitals and schools, particularly given the vulnerable nature of the individuals who occupy such buildings and the disruption that would be caused should they experience a fire?

As others have done, I congratulate the bid team on securing the games and I welcome the First Minister's intention to ensure that the 2014 games is the best-ever sporting event in Scotland—although I suspect that the right result against the world champions on Saturday will be difficult to surpass. Does the First Minister agree that it is not only about having the best-ever games in Scotland, and that we should aim to have the best Scottish team competing in the Commonwealth games when they come to Glasgow? Can the First Minister assure Parliament that his Government will work with the various national sporting bodies to ensure that we develop our athletes over the next six years and have the strongest possible Scottish team competing in 2014?

I am pleased to note that the minister intends to merge two quangos into one. Every bonfire needs a little kindling. I ask the minister to reflect on the success of the National Theatre of Scotland in taking one of its productions abroad to a reaction of which all of us in the chamber can be proud. What does the minister intend to do to encourage creative Scotland and other agencies to work towards ensuring that the aspirations and ambition that have been shown by the National Theatre of Scotland, with its tour of "Black Watch", are mirrored in the aspirations and ambitions of other artistic endeavours that are funded or part-funded by the Scottish Government?

Like others, I welcome the minister's statement and the publication of the consultation document. The minister mentioned in his statement the need for a streamlined system of disclosure checks. I support that objective. I am sure that the minister is aware of the problems of those who have to go through repeated disclosure checks; I know of a case in which someone went through 10 different checks in a year as a sessional worker. Can the minister assure me not only that any change to the disclosure check system will retain the proper and necessary safety checks, but that he will look for ways to reduce the need for repeat checks? Under the present system, some individuals have to go through many checks.

To ask the Scottish Government what action it plans to take to ensure the financial sustainability of voluntary organisations. (S3O-1012)

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to the problems experienced by some voluntary organisations in my constituency, particularly the Princess Royal Trust for Carers and Advocacy Into Action. Although those organisations have three-year service agreements with the local authority, they are not being provided with any financial uplift in council funding over those three years, which means that they have to meet the gap in funding. Does the minister agree that such practice undermines the important role of voluntary organisations? What action does the Government intend to take to ensure that local organisations get the financial uplift to which they are entitled?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement, especially her announcement that the Government will proceed with the single survey. She will be well aware of the considerable costs that buyers can face in trying to buy a property. Often, first-time buyers run into double figures when instructing surveys to be carried out. How does the cabinet secretary intend to introduce the policy? Will it be phased in in relation to the cost of property, as happened down south? Can she also give us an idea of the timescale for the policy's introduction?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has any plans to review the procedure for designating sites of special scientific interest. (S3O-985)

I draw the minister's attention to the problems experienced by a constituent of mine in the Bonnybridge area. During the assessment period used by Scottish Natural Heritage to consider whether to designate part of his land as an SSSI, it used a battery of experts to put the case together to support the application. However, as an individual landowner, he had no support or advice from any experts. Does the minister agree that there is a need to ensure that there is equality of arms in dealing with such issues? Finally, can the minister confirm that a compensation system is available to farmers who lose access to part of their land?

The minister will be aware that in the first audit of audiology services, NHS Forth Valley was picked out for particular praise and was described as being at the leading edge of audiology services. I welcome the fact that those services will be included in the waiting time guarantee. Is the minister aware that one of the primary reasons why the waiting list for audiology services in the NHS Forth Valley area is so low—the lowest in the country—is the partnership approach that the local authority and the health board have taken to delivering those services? Will the cabinet secretary ensure that such good practice is spread to other health board areas, so that patients throughout the country may benefit from it?

As the minister will recognise, local initiatives such as those that exist in Dumfries and Galloway can easily be undermined when local authorities fail to follow them through, in particular those initiatives relating to the antisocial behaviour that is caused by alcohol. What action does the minister intend to take to ensure that the licensing boards of local authorities—just like in Dumfries and Galloway—take robust action against those who are involved in selling alcohol irresponsibly and engage more effectively with the communities that are affected by irresponsible sales of alcohol?

The minister will be aware of the problems in town centres that are frequently used for large gatherings of car cruisers—as is the case in Falkirk town centre, where up to 1,000 cars can gather in an evening. Many constituents who have contacted me find that their lives are being made a misery because of the modifications that have been made to many of the cars' exhaust systems, which cause considerable noise pollution in the town centre. The police tell me that they have limited powers to deal with the issue in the criminal justice system. Is the minister prepared to consider using environmental regulations to try to tackle the noise pollution problem?

I welcome the cabinet secretary to his post and I welcome his speech. During election campaigns, political parties are often keen to talk about ways of addressing criminality. People consistently raise with me not fancy new courts or organisations, but the need for more community policing. The previous Executive often said that there were record numbers of police officers, but that did not address the fact that the police have record responsibilities and that record demands are being made of them, particularly with respect to the paperwork that goes along with new legislation. I hope that the minister will increase the number of community police officers and make the existing system work more effectively, so that more officers are released on to our streets. I hope that the minister will consider several issues in trying to reduce crime. Area commanders in the Falkirk area have raised with me the need to plan new housing developments and town centre developments better, in order to try to design out crime. Individual constabularies undertake a considerable amount of work with local authority planning departments, but it is difficult for the police to keep up to speed with developments in some communities and to address the issue effectively. Some simple things could be done to make new housing estates and shopping centres much safer. I hope that the minister will consider that, and how we can improve liaison between local authorities and police departments to ensure that there is greater recognition of designing out crime. We need to ensure that young people who often get caught up in crime have access to good-quality local facilities and I know that the minister is committed to a more holistic approach to tackling criminality. In Falkirk, for example, there are five PFI schools, many of the sports facilities of which lie idle at night because the local community cannot afford to use them. Youngsters who could be making use of those facilities are locked out of them because of the associated  costs. In looking at the issue across departments, will the minister examine what his department can do to unlock those schools by ensuring that there are resources to subsidise the cost of accessing those facilities, from which the local community is barred? That is a legacy of the former Labour council in Falkirk. I recognise that the minister wants to address the issue of two-for-one promotions and that that will have some effect on underage drinking, but I want to raise three further issues with him. The first is the need for an effective proof-of-age scheme that is robust and reliable. I know that there is a range of initiatives, many of which are subject to fraud. We must have a scheme that is reliable both for licensed grocers and for the police. I hope that the minister will take on board the concerns that those in the trade have expressed and that he will ensure that such a scheme is effectively put in place. The second issue that I want to raise is the number of licences that are issued for licensed grocers in different populations. I know that under existing legislation local licensing boards should take account of the size of the local population when deciding how many off-sales should be allowed in an area. However, I get the impression that, if an application qualifies, a licence is usually issued. When we plan housing, education and health services, we should ensure that the number of licences that are issued is related to the size of the population. I understand that there is scope in legislation for that to be done. I hope that the minister will consider issuing clearer guidance to local authorities on how the legislation should be implemented, as a way of addressing the matter and of ensuring that there is greater consistency across local authorities in applying the law in this area. Thirdly, I ask the minister to consider the possibility of raising the age limit for those who may purchase alcohol from an off-licence. As things stand, the limit is 18 for both pubs and off-licences. If someone drinks alcohol in a pub, technically they are under the supervision of the bar staff and the licence holder for those premises, but when they purchase alcohol from an off-sales, their drinking is unsupervised. It is therefore reasonable to argue for the age limit for individuals who may purchase alcohol from an off-sales to be increased. I ask the minister to consider establishing a pilot in a given local authority area, to see whether raising the age limit is an effective way of tackling the problem of underage drinking. Many supermarkets have an age limit of 21 and some have raised it to 25. That may be another way of tackling the issue. I hope that, in pursuing the safer communities that he seeks in Scotland, the minister will consider the ideas that I have suggested.

I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to his post. I wish him well in the weeks, months and years ahead as he undertakes his role. Although this is not my maiden speech, it is the first opportunity that I have had to address the Parliament since I was elected as the member for Falkirk West. I pay tribute to my predecessor, Dennis Canavan, who represented the Falkirk community for some 33 years, both at Westminster and in the Scottish Parliament for eight years. Following the Labour Party's decision  in the lead-up to the 1999 election that Dennis Canavan was in some way not good enough to be a Labour candidate in that election, he stood twice as an independent in Falkirk West. On both occasions he was returned with a thumping majority—a painfully large majority, to my own personal expense. Those results illustrated the regard that the people of Falkirk West had for Dennis Canavan and the fact that they trusted him as their representative. Many members will have noticed from the press that, although Dennis Canavan has retired from the Parliament, he has not given up his zest for campaigning on popular issues. As president of the Ramblers Association Scotland, he has already started to make waves on protecting the rights of walkers in Scotland. I pay personal tribute and express my thanks to him for the work that he undertook on behalf of my constituents in Falkirk West over the past 30 or so years. I wish Dennis, his partner and young Adam every best wish for the future. [ Applause. ] I am not someone who has often been seen, in political terms, as a champion of the business sector in Scotland. However, I recognise that to ensure that we have the best health service and the best education service—in order to provide our young people with the opportunities that they need for the future—we must have a vibrant and dynamic economy that will deliver the wealth that it is necessary to invest in those essential public services. The cabinet secretary outlined clearly how he intends to ensure that we reverse the underperformance of the Scottish economy. I believe that the small business bonus scheme, which he mentioned, will benefit many small businesses throughout the country. Too often, the political debate about supporting businesses is dominated by big businesses and the CBI, so the importance of big businesses to the economy is stressed. I recognise that big businesses are important to our economy, but we should not underestimate the important value that small businesses have for our local and national economies. Small businesses are at the heart of many of our local economies. The figures that I have been provided with indicate that the Falkirk area alone will benefit from the scheme to the tune of 3,500 businesses either not paying business rates or paying a reduced level of business rates: three in every four businesses in the area will benefit from the scheme. The scheme, along with the local authority's my future's in Falkirk strategy, will benefit the local economy and ensure that we continue to grow the economy of Falkirk. I hope that we do not underestimate the value of local authorities in ensuring that we develop  dynamic local economies; the minister referred to that in his speech. I welcome the fact that dialogue has already taken place with some local authorities through the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, but I hope that there will be an on-going dialogue that continues to refresh itself and that local authorities will have an opportunity to bring to the cabinet secretary's table their ideas on how they can improve the Scottish economy. I have no doubt that the strategy will have clear economic benefits, but it will also bring wider benefits through the creation of more and better-paid employment and the regeneration of some of our poor town centres. Wider social benefits will come from this form of economic growth, and it is important that we find ways to measure the benefits that come from such investment in our economy. We must recognise that point and ensure that we have clear measures of the benefits, so that we can see how progress is being made as a result of the policy. I hope that the minister will outline in her closing speech how the Executive intends to measure the wider social benefits of this economic policy, so that we can ensure that we are creating not only a wealthier society but a fairer society.

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing the debate and declare my interest as one of the two co-conveners of the Scottish Parliament cross-party group on Malawi. I begin by underlining the importance of partnerships. It has been said that the relationship between Scotland and Malawi goes back many years—to long before the Parliament and the Executive existed. Over the years, that relationship has been kept alive largely by civic organisations in Scotland, and by churches in particular, which have taken a lead role in developing relationships. The relationship is worthy and greatly valued—I know that from personal experience as a member of the first group that went to Malawi several years ago, which met organisations there that work in partnership with organisations in Scotland, and as a result of visiting organisations in Scotland that have partners in Malawi. I was involved in the discussions about the Scotland branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association's idea of an outward visit at some point and where it should be to. I do not think that we could have imagined that we would reach a co-operation agreement between Scotland and the Malawian Government, which is testament to the views of all members of the Scottish Parliament and the value we place on looking outward to other nations, particularly those with which we have a strong relationship.  To those who criticise the idea of this type of partnership, I say that in a new century with a new Parliament and Scottish Government, it is appropriate that we should cement such partnerships at a national level as many of our civic organisations have done over the years. I recognise that, during the past 18 months to two years of the co-operation agreement, the Executive's international development policy has focused on developing partnerships and considering how they can be expanded. The phase has been worthwhile and I and my party have supported it. Like Murdo Fraser, I missed the "Frontline Scotland" report, although I have heard much about it. During the next session of Parliament there will be issues about greater parliamentary scrutiny of the co-operation agreement and how it is progressing, and about ensuring that it delivers what is intended and that it is as effective as possible. The Scotland Malawi Partnership takes a lead on co-ordinating work across the civic organisations in Scotland and working with partners in Malawi. I am more than happy to support the pledge, as is the Scottish National Party, and I urge all parties and all election candidates to sign up to it. At times, I get the feeling that no matter where I go I will come across an organisation or individual who is involved in some partnership with Malawi. Only recently, I had a meeting with the minister from Erskine parish church in Falkirk and the minister for Haggs parish church just outside Falkirk. They emphasised the importance to their parishes of the relationships that they have developed over the years. In the coming years, after the co-operation agreement has served its purpose and the relationship between the CPA branches has come to its natural conclusion, it will be the sustainable relationships between our civic organisations, churches, individuals and schools that will continue. We should encourage the next session of Parliament to continue to develop that.

The minister is well aware of the increasing use of the intermodal hub at Grangemouth, which is taking freight off our roads and putting it on to rail, and of the environmental benefits that come from that, but is he also aware that some hauliers who recently started to use the hub have to take a detour to get to the M8 because of the limited capacity of the Avon gorge road and its unsuitability for heavy goods vehicles? Is he aware that there is now a negative effect on the environment because of the extended route that hauliers have to take? Does the minister recognise  the strategic importance of the road to the economies of West Lothian and Falkirk Council? Is he prepared to act to provide the financial support, not for the acquisition of land, but to ensure that the road is upgraded?

Although I joined the Justice 2 Committee only recently and so was not present to hear a lot of evidence that the committee took, it became clear to me at an early stage that the general principles of the bill are broadly sound. However, the evidence that I heard also made it clear that the bill requires considerable amendment at stage 2 and, possibly, at stage 3 to ensure that its underlying policy objectives can be achieved. I have long been of the view that there is a need for greater transparency in our sentencing process and I supported the legislation that was scrutinised by the Justice 1 Committee, which brought in the tariff system that gives greater transparency in relation to life sentences. That is particularly beneficial to victims who now know, when they leave the court, exactly how long the prisoner will spend in prison before even being considered for release. I know, however, that it is much more complex to achieve something similar in respect of shorter-term sentences. The concerns that are raised in the Justice 2 Committee's report on the bill illustrate the nature of the difficulties that the Executive must address if we are to achieve greater transparency in sentencing while maintaining public confidence throughout the process. As David Davidson and Bill Butler briefly mentioned, the measures in the bill include a 15-day threshold. Evidence that we received highlighted the potentially perverse logic that is contained within that proposed timescale. As the bill stands, an offender who is sentenced to a  sentence of less than 15 days will be required to spend the whole period in custody, whereas an offender who is sentenced to 20 days will potentially be released within 10 days.

That is helpful, but it also raises a question about the value of locking up people for such short periods, given that there are so few of them. An interesting point is that, when the committee took evidence from the minister, the explanation that we received for why the 15-day threshold was chosen was that 15 days was considered to be the minimum period in the community that is practical for engaging with an offender. However, if an offender is given a sentence of 20 days and is released after spending 50 per cent of that time in custody, the community part of his sentence will, in effect, be 10 days—it will be shorter than the 15 days that is needed for practical engagement. Practical engagement is the key issue. It is all very well to say that we can engage with offenders during their sentences, but the question is whether such engagement will be meaningful in tackling offending behaviour. I remain concerned about whether the engagement will be practical or meaningful. The committee has made it plain that a clear rationale must be given for the 15-day threshold. I accept that the minister has given some clarification on that today, but I remain to be convinced about the way in which the Executive arrived at that threshold. A second issue of concern is the risk assessment process, which clearly has an important part to play in ensuring public confidence and protecting the public. Committee members had generally assumed that the risk assessment during the custodial part of an offender's sentence would be undertaken by Scottish Prison Service staff, but it became clear from Tony Cameron's evidence that that had not been agreed and—as we all know—what Tony Cameron says, goes. Obviously, it is important that the responsibility for leading on the risk assessments should be clear. We accept that risk assessments should involve joint working between the SPS and community social work services, but  one body must be given clear responsibility for the process. An additional issue is the quality of risk assessment that can be achieved with offenders who are in prison for short periods. The Risk Management Authority, which provides the Executive with expertise on the issue, said that a two-year period is needed to carry out a detailed and dynamic risk assessment that will be meaningful and purposeful. Therefore, we need a little reality in respect of how effectively the risk management process will play out on the ground. In conclusion, I welcome the general principles of the bill, but it clearly needs to be amended not only for technical reasons but to ensure that its policy objectives can be effectively implemented at the end of the day.

As the Scottish National Party member of the bill committee, I begin by thanking those people who assisted the committee in conducting its scrutiny. In particular, I pay tribute to the clerks for their hard work. They were always there, assisting and supporting us in undertaking our task. The Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill marked the first opportunity to try out the new truncated process for considering private bills, without the need to address all the individual complaints ourselves. I endorse the procedure, and I hope that other committees will follow it in future. Although the process took us 10 months, I suspect that it would have taken almost twice as long had we been required to consider all the complaints. A considerable amount of ground has been covered in the debate. I will pick up on two particular issues—connectivity and the football pitches at St James park. In our first evidence-taking session, it was clear to the committee that connectivity would be key to GARL's success. The committee was rightly anxious at the outset about the low patronage figures for the line that were provided by the promoter. It was clear that one factor explaining those low figures was the poor connectivity associated with the project. The line was to go from Glasgow Central through Paisley Gilmour Street, with a spur going off to the airport. Someone wishing to get a train to Glasgow airport from Cumbernauld, for example, would have had to get on at Cumbernauld, get off at Queen Street, get the bus or walk with their baggage to Glasgow Central and then get the train out to the airport. It was clear from the evidence that we received when visiting Manchester airport that, if the link is to be successful and if patronage figures are to increase, there must be greater connectivity and the journey must be made convenient for people, so that when they get on a train they know that they can remain on it until they arrive at the airport. Several members, in particular Bill Butler, raised the issue of crossrail. He is quite right about the important role that crossrail will play in making GARL even more successful. It is important to  keep in mind the type of crossrail that is set up. A shuttle simply running between the two main stations will not have the impact that a service running from Queen Street to Central and then to Glasgow airport will have. That will be much more convenient for people in choosing the train to access the airport. Crossrail is important, but it is also important to put the right type of crossrail in place to maximise the potential benefits of GARL. Wendy Alexander raised issues around St James park, although I notice that she has not stayed for this part of the debate, which is unfortunate. The committee recognised the important role that the park and its facilities play in the local community, and for that reason lodged amendments to ensure that the code of construction practice contains a clear commitment to upgrade the existing facilities, to ensure that there is access to adequate facilities while the work is continuing on the viaduct and to ensure that there is full access to both sides of St James park once the viaduct is in place, in case a ball happens to end up over on the other side during a game. I hope that members will support the recommendation of the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee to support the bill.

I draw the minister's attention to the recently published data on the "Cancer in Scotland: Action for Change" targets, in particular the target that by 2005 the maximum wait from urgent referral to treatment for people who suffer from cancer will be two months. Is the minister aware that the data that were published indicate that in the Forth Valley area fewer than 65 per cent of patients who are referred urgently are receiving the treatment that they require? That is the third-lowest compliance level for any health board in Scotland. As the minister said, people who are diagnosed as having cancer are anxious that their treatment should commence as soon as possible. Why has Forth Valley NHS Board failed so badly to meet the target? What action has the Executive taken to ensure that the board complies with it?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether funding the new Forth valley hospital at Larbert through a public-private partnership is an example of privatisation of the national health service. (S2O-10726)

It comes as no surprise that the minister should give that answer, but is he aware of the wide-ranging concern that has been expressed even by Labour members in Forth valley and by trade unions about Forth Valley NHS Board's decision to privatise the jobs of some 700 soft-furnishing staff when they move to the new hospital at the Larbert site? Is he also aware of Forth Valley NHS Board members' concern that the Executive's guidance on the financial modelling of the new hospital is heavily in favour of a private finance initiative outcome?

I join others in congratulating Dennis Canavan on his hard work on the bill. The bill has had wide support, with 75 members signing the original proposal. Some members have pointed out that we had a debate on the issue almost a year ago. In that debate, the Executive got itself into the bizarre situation of opposing the committee's unanimous stage 1 report. A year on, we must ask the question: what exactly has changed in the past year to make the Executive do such a spectacular U-turn? In the debate a year ago, Tom McCabe stated that there were two very important reasons why the bill should be rejected. The first was that "we should legislate only when it is necessary to do so" and the second was that "when we legislate, we should be able to give practical effect to that legislation." The minister then stated: "the bill does not satisfy those two important criteria."—[ Official Report, 6 October 2005; c 19875.] A year on, the bill remains exactly the same and it still does not fulfil the two criteria that the minister said were so important. Given that the minister will support the bill tonight, it is clear that those criteria were not quite as important as he made them out to be. I thought that the Executive might have changed its mind as a result of the Experian report that the committee commissioned and published. However, when the minister appeared before the committee he said that that was not the case because, although the report was generally positive, it did not provide decisive evidence in favour of having a St Andrew's day holiday. To be perfectly frank, I remain in the dark about why the Executive has made such a spectacular U-turn. I suspect that the real reason is that, in the light of his poor ratings in the opinion polls, the First Minister is becoming increasingly nervous about his prospects for next year's election and is desperate to wrap himself in the saltire. I have little doubt that true economic, social and cultural benefits will be derived from Parliament's  support for the bill and its creation of a St Andrew's day holiday as a day of national celebration. Although I welcome the fact that the Executive has agreed to support the bill at this stage, I share Stewart Maxwell's regret that the new holiday, rather than being added to the present list of holidays, will substitute for an existing local holiday. Given that Scotland's number of public holidays is one of the smallest in the European Union, a more socially progressive Executive would have been prepared to establish an additional holiday. The minister stated in his letter to the committee of 11 September that the St Andrew's day holiday should replace an existing local holiday. In the committee, I mentioned to him the existence of regional holidays. Perhaps he will clarify whether he expects a regional holiday or an existing bank holiday to be replaced. In the debate almost a year ago, the Executive's amendment stated that we should seek "to uphold the consensus across the Parliament that we should only legislate where necessary". I am delighted that the Executive has accepted that the consensus in Scotland is that we should have a national holiday to celebrate our nation and that the minister and the Executive parties will join the more enlightened members who supported the bill the first time round.

I am sure that the minister will join me in congratulating Tesco on deciding to use the intermodal hub at Grangemouth to bring many of its goods to Scotland. That decision will lead to a reduction of 13,000 lorry journeys between England and Scotland in the course of a year. When the intermodal hub was originally developed, Falkirk Council asked the Executive for financial support to provide an access road from the hub to the Laurieston bypass to ensure better links to the local motorway network. The hub is used increasingly, and there will now be 13,000 extra journeys on local roads in Falkirk Council's area, so will the Executive provide financial support for the access road? I hope that that road will encourage more companies to use the intermodal hub.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many cubic metres of packaged intermediate and low-level waste and tonnes of spent nuclear fuel are expected to be produced by Hunterston B power station if its life is extended by 10 years. (S2O-10643)

I thank the minister for his full and detailed answer. Have any discussions been held between the Scottish Executive and the London Government or the operators of Hunterston B on the possibility of extending the power station's lifespan? What criteria will the Scottish Executive use in considering whether it would support such a proposal?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to improve sporting attainment. (S2O-10562)

I am sure that the minister agrees that access to good sporting facilities has an important part to play in improving sporting attainment. Can she explain why, after seven years of the Labour-Lib Dem Executive and 10 years of a new Labour Government at Westminster, the "National Audit of Scotland's Sports Facilities" shows that 74 per cent of our football pitches, 51 per cent of our tennis courts and 57 per cent of our athletics tracks are not up to standard, and 50 per cent of our indoor facilities are worn out? What will she do to address those issues, or is the report another example of why people are running out of patience with the Executive?

As the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport said, the previous debate on this subject was unfortunately cancelled, due not to an architectural problem but to an engineering problem. I give the minister 10 out of 10 for persistence. We were long due a debate on this subject: it has been some five years since the last debate on architecture in the Parliament. If I recall correctly, that was a rather strange event: we were debating the Executive's policy on architecture before it had been published. We have made progress over the past five years, at least, in that we are now having a debate with a policy in place, and even a progress report on what has been achieved. The progress that the report indicates in a number of areas is to be welcomed. As the minister said, we as a nation have a great architectural heritage—not only our buildings but our designers and architects. We have produced some world-class architects and designers over the years—Playfair, Craig, Thomson, Mackintosh and Adam to name but a few. All of them have contributed to our nation's rich architectural heritage, which we have only to look around the city that we are in to see. Most of our towns and cities throughout the country have a building of significant architectural merit. I am sure that the minister will acknowledge that debates on architecture do not tend to set the political heather on fire. People do not tend to have a view on architecture until they come across something that they do not like. That is a pity, because architecture has an important role to play  socially, culturally, environmentally and economically. Its benefits can be derived by individuals, communities and the nation as a whole. The general apathy towards architecture was reflected in the consultation that the Executive undertook when it began to draft its policy. Of the 400-odd people who attended the nine public meetings that were held, only 10 were punters; the rest were all professionals or people with a vested interest. The old adage is that architecture is far too important to leave to the architects. It is important that we work to protect, preserve and promote our heritage for the present generation and future generations. I hope that the minister shares my concern about the buildings at risk register for 2006, which the Scottish Civic Trust published recently. It indicates that 82 per cent of our listed buildings are classed as at risk; that 112 buildings of national and international importance are at risk; and that of the more than 1,000 buildings on the register, more than half are classed as at high risk of falling down, through disrepair. If we are to build a good architectural policy for the future, we have to ensure that we preserve our architectural heritage. The national policy is much wider than being only about preserving what we have, but we have to acknowledge where we have come from by preserving significant buildings. The social benefits of architecture are key. It is ironic that a country with such a rich architectural heritage, which has produced so many world-class designers and architects, has some blooming awful examples of bad architecture, most of which were built in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s. Basil Spence might have got it right with Coventry cathedral, but he got it wrong when he was designing the Gorbals; we are still addressing the legacy of that poor design. Costs and design were often higher priorities than was meeting social needs. Many communities experience the legacy of such designs. It is important that we have a national policy on architecture, but we must ensure that the people who will be affected by architecture, directly or indirectly, play a central role in the architectural process. That is why I believe that community involvement in the design process is important. We must ensure that in modern architecture there is a greater focus on the needs of the people it serves. It is important not only to have a national policy but to encourage local authorities to develop their own architecture policies, which reflect what is in the national policy, to ensure that they carry down to communities that same standard.  As the minister said in her response to Christine Grahame, if the aim is to drive up standards in architecture, particularly locally, it is important that local policies are in place.

It is important that community councils play an increased role. I offer an example with which I have been involved: North Lanarkshire Council wants to build an ultra-new building right at the heart of Cumbernauld village, which is a conservation village. The proposal has drawn opposition from the community and from Historic Scotland, but the council intends to push ahead without recognising what the community feels or the heritage of the local area. That is why the Executive's architectural policy must be pushed down to the local level. If we can do that, we will be able to continue to build buildings for future generations. I move amendment S2M-4477.2, to leave out from both to end and insert: "our buildings have a critical role to play in maintaining and enhancing the quality of Scotland's urban and rural communities; notes the progress made to date on the Scottish Executive's policy on architecture; acknowledges the important role that local authorities have in promoting good architectural design, and believes that future national architectural policy should place greater emphasis on local authorities developing their own local architectural policy."

I am a member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee and—like other committee members—I wish to put on record my thanks to the committee's clerks for their hard work in pulling together the report and to the many individuals  and organisations that took the time to give the committee written and oral evidence, which was extremely useful. I share the view of other committee members that the support and assistance of Wolfgang Michalski, our adviser, were invaluable. The debate has been interesting. People could almost be forgiven for thinking, at points, that we have been debating an SNP report on business growth in the next 10 years. I remind members that the report's key recommendations were supported by all committee members except Shiona Baird, who had concerns. Members who have chosen to make attacks on issues that are highlighted in the committee's report and to present them as an SNP conspiracy are misguided; I am sure that people such as Christine May and Susan Deacon would have been the first to twig if any conspiracy had taken place in the committee. Alex Neil set out the importance of higher growth in the Scottish economy, primarily to achieve the greater investment that we need in order to allow investment in our key public services and to give the people of Scotland a better quality of life. He was correct to describe—as the report does time and again—progress that is being made on the Scottish economy and good things that are going on. The report focuses primarily on what more can be done to improve the Scottish economy further. The statistics on business investment that the committee used have been the subject of much debate in the media and some debate this afternoon. Some challenge the statistics in the report as inaccurate and others argue that they are accurate and that other statistics reinforce the position that the committee reached. The minister referred to the ensuing debate in the media. After the debate in the media and in the chamber, it is clear that we need to have independent and robust statistics on the state of the Scottish economy, to ensure that businesses that want to invest in Scotland understand clearly the state of the Scottish economy and that those who are politically responsible for putting in place strategies to support the Scottish economy have the right information to make the right decisions. As Jim Mather said, we need to consider having our own office for national statistics in Scotland. I look forward to hearing the outcome of the discussions that the minister's team will have with the ONS in the weeks to come. The minister highlighted several activities that are being undertaken to promote business investment in Scotland. As I said, the report refers time and again to such measures, including Scottish Enterprise's business growth fund, R and D plus and the Scottish venture fund, all of which  are of some benefit. However, the report seeks to consider the additional carrot—the additional incentive—that can be provided to ensure that we have more long-term private investment in our economy. That is why the committee highlighted the need to consider establishing a long-term private investment fund. Although the Executive might not accept the need for £8.5 billion of additional investment over the next year, it is important that it has conceded the need for greater business investment in the years to come. Susan Deacon made a very good point. She said that the debate that has been taking place outwith the Parliament and in the media has highlighted a danger that some of the valuable points that the report raises could be lost in the blizzard of statistics and the frenzy of figures. People will often get caught up in one statistic or another. She was correct to highlight the fact that there are those who will claim that the whole idea of a lack of, or limitations on, business investment in Scotland is based on the problem of having too big a public sector. I found from my visits to Finland and Sweden—two countries with a large public sector—that the key issue there is not the size of the public sector, but its efficiency. Efficiency can give leverage to greater private investment for business in those countries. One of the key issues in the report is the quality of the investment that has been made in Scotland. I was struck by the partnership in Finland and Sweden between business, academia and the public sector, which was alluded to by Jamie Stone—a triple helix of sectors working together to secure advantages in particular areas. As the report highlights, Scotland is well placed to take advantage of such an approach, given our world-class universities. However, despite the fact that 17 per cent of UK-registered patents originate in Scotland, only 5 per cent of UK patents are developed in Scotland. It is a matter of getting a critical mass here in Scotland in key areas, working together to achieve a higher level of business investment. I hope that members will look beyond some of the statistics that have been bandied around and recognise that there are some very good recommendations in the committee report, which can help improve the Scottish economy. I commend the report to Parliament.

I am delighted that this debate has been able to get to first base. The last time the minister brought a debate on an aspect of our historic environment, it had to be cancelled. It was meant to be a debate about architecture, but the roof fell in on the chamber that day. However, Rob Gibson pointed out to me that the roof fell in during his water debate; I hope that there is no association with the persons who were present when that happened. As a nation, we have a rich historic environment of which we can be proud. It ranges from specific monuments to everyday features that have developed through human history. It can include anything from architectural sites such as the Antonine wall to the ramparts of our great castles such as Edinburgh and Stirling. It could even include the beautiful terraced properties of Charlotte Square that are occupied by our very own First Minister, or the beauty of the truncated spurs, hanging valleys and corries of Glencoe. Those many attributes have served to shape our nation and are often drawn upon in order to reflect Scotland at home and internationally. The engineering brilliance of the new Falkirk wheel—the unique rotating boat lift—the fantastic engineering of the Forth road bridge, the natural beauty of the shores of Morar that were made  famous in the film "Local Hero", and the guardian of Glencoe, Buachaille Etive Mor, have all been used at different times as symbols of our nation and of what Scotland is about at home and abroad. Unfortunately, as a nation we can sometimes take for granted our fantastic historic environment. It is important to recognise its value because it is an asset in its own right. In order to make the most of that asset, we must recognise the cultural, educational, economic and social benefits that can be derived from our historic environment. The documents published by Historic Scotland acknowledge the key components that are important if we want to actualise the potential of our historic environment, although to date they have been limited in their expression of how we should go about achieving that. As a nation, we should be looking to make the most of our historic environment. We should aspire to become a country that is internationally recognised for good practice in conserving and making the best of our cultural heritage. If we are to achieve that international recognition, it is important that our historic environment policy does not sit in isolation from other policy areas. It must be fully integrated with our environmental, social and cultural policies in order to make the best of it. Although the consultation document acknowledges that, it is important that it is actualised into policy that can make a difference. Another key to making the most of our historic environment is to ensure that agencies such as Historic Scotland work in partnership with the individuals and organisations that have a role to play. Historic Scotland has an important role to play in implementing the Executive's policies, but local authorities, the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland, other voluntary organisations, and private individuals all have a role to play in the preservation and conservation of our historic environment. It is important that that preservation and conservation are about maximising access and benefit to the whole nation. A couple of examples illustrate the need for partnership working and how different agencies have a role to play. During the recent Easter recess, I had the pleasure of visiting Abbotsford House just outside Galashiels, where my colleague Christine Grahame cut the ribbon to open the Nigel Tranter exhibition, which contains a display signed by Nigel Tranter and to which I donated my copy of one of his books. Abbotsford House is an important historic building as it was the home of Sir Walter Scott. Without saying too much about it—Christine Grahame will no doubt say more, as she was involved in the campaign to  save the building—I believe that Abbotsford House is a good example of how private individuals, trustees and others need to work collectively to ensure that we properly benefit from the important historic buildings of our nation. Another example is the Antonine wall which, as the northernmost frontier of the great Roman empire, was built at a time when the Scots were not quite so hospitable to visitors. It is hoped that the wall will become a world heritage site in 2009. Given that it spans from West Dunbartonshire to Bo'ness, a wide range of local authorities and agencies will have a part to play in ensuring that world heritage status is successfully secured. Our historic environment policy must ensure that all the interested parties are brought together in collective working so that we get the best from such natural assets. I want to make a couple of specific points about SHEP 1. I welcome the general thrust of the document, but it gives only limited information on exactly how the Executive intends to pursue some of the objectives. Section 6 of the document acknowledges the need for "investment in the fabric and management of Scotland's historic environment". It is absolutely crucial that we have a grants system that helps to support the maintenance and preservation of our historic environment while ensuring that buildings remain accessible. My concern with the grants that are currently available for the maintenance of such properties is that they result in people who want to gain admission being levied with a charge for the upkeep and maintenance of the building. The danger is that prohibitive costs will prevent people from accessing such buildings. We need a grants scheme that strikes the right balance between preserving the asset and maintaining and promoting public access to it so that both current and future generations benefit from it. That leads me to the issue of accessibility and understanding, which is also dealt with in the document. To use the example that I mentioned earlier, we need to ensure that British Waterways works with those who are responsible for the Antonine wall so that visitors to the Falkirk wheel can also benefit from seeing what they can of the Antonine wall in the area. Although the different agencies involved in such matters will often say that they are working together, such collective working is not always demonstrated on the ground. We need to ensure that visitors to the sites get the best from them. As the policy moves forward after the consultation, I hope that clearer guidance will be issued on how such organisations must work more in partnership with one another.  I will draw my remarks to a close by suggesting that, if we get those issues right, the final key outcome that is outlined in part 8 of SHEP 1, "Releasing the full economic potential" of our historic environment, will be actualised at both local and national level. I look forward to the outcome of the consultation.

I begin by thanking Frank McAveety for securing the debate. Despite his ill-timed comments about Partick Thistle's fan base, I should point out to him that there are probably more Thistle fans in the chamber now than there are of his own club, Celtic. I recognise the importance of supporters and the role that they can play in the running of clubs. I recognise the particular role that Supporters Direct has in enabling fans to increase their involvement in their clubs. I welcome the recent announcement by the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport about providing greater financial support to Supporters Direct to enable it to continue the work that it undertakes. As Frank McAveety mentioned, a number of clubs throughout Scotland have embraced greater supporter involvement. It is surprising to note how few clubs had any direct supporter involvement in their operation 10, 20 or 30 years ago. I am sure that many of us who are football fans still look on some clubs' policy of resisting the idea of supporter involvement as bizarre or unexplainable. No club can survive without its supporters. The directors of a club, irrespective of their level of wealth, are merely the custodians of that club for  the period for which they are there. Many club directors come and go, but the loyal fans will support their club through thick and thin. Club directors who recognise the importance of supporters in sustaining their club should have no fear of greater supporter involvement in its running. As Frank McAveety said, we should recognise that clubs are not isolated but are an integral part of many local communities. That particularly applies to clubs in smaller towns. Greater supporter involvement in the running of a club means, by extension, greater community involvement in how it operates. Many enlightened clubs have embraced the idea of supporters getting involved, sometimes even with members of the supporters trust sitting on the board. There are groups of fans who continue to work hard to secure some form of supporter involvement in how their clubs are run. I recently had a meeting with a small group of fans of a club that members will all know, but which has unfortunately been in the media recently because it has languished at the bottom of the third division for almost three seasons now. East Stirlingshire has a small but loyal and dedicated base of fans who have struggled for many years to secure some type of supporter involvement in how the club is run. They believe that the existing major shareholder of the club appears to be more interested in the value of Firs park to a property developer than in how the club is run for the benefit of its members. That is a classic illustration of why fans should have a greater say in their club. It is important that the local community should have a role to play in how the club develops in the future. The work that the East Stirlingshire Supporters Society is doing along with Supporters Direct provides a good opportunity for fans to have their say in how their club is run not only for the benefit of the supporters but for the wider benefit of the local community. I will continue to work with the trust and with Supporters Direct to ensure that their efforts are fruitful. I recognise the important value that Supporters Direct has in enabling fans to have that greater say. I hope that it pursues its work to give fans their rightful place in the running of their clubs.

Given the fantastic success of team Scotland in the Commonwealth games, I am even more confident that a Scottish Olympic team could succeed for us and I am disappointed, although not surprised, that a unionist such as Jamie McGrigor should have such limited ambition for Scottish athletes.

Yes I do.

Yes I do.

That is rich.

Do not mislead the chamber.

This debate gives members the opportunity to congratulate our athletes as they return home from Melbourne. The 18 th Commonwealth games were, by all accounts, a triumph—for Melbourne, for the games movement and for the members of team Scotland, whose success has made our nation proud. For all 169 of our athletes, their hard work, passion and commitment to their sports have paid off. They returned with 29 medals: 11 gold, seven silver and 11 bronze. Never before have we won so many gold medals and never before has our team been so successful at an overseas games. Going strictly on the medal count, the annals of the Commonwealth games movement show that Scotland's best performance was 20 years ago at the Commonwealth games in Edinburgh, when the team delivered 33 medals. However, we should acknowledge the overall performance of team Scotland in Melbourne, which in my view was our best-ever team performance. Unfortunately, our nation must at times wait lengthy periods for success in the international sporting arena. We have waited since 1974 for a Scottish swimmer to win double gold at a games, but then three have come along at once, a bit like buses. Caitlin McClatchey set the tone for the Scottish team's performance when she brought home our first gold in the women's 200m freestyle. While the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport had the pleasure of attending the Commonwealth games and cheering on our athletes down under, I assure her that there was a roar of joy throughout the nation when Caitlin secured the first gold for team Scotland. It was a remarkable achievement for Caitlin McClatchey, David Carry and Gregor Tait all to take double gold in the pool in the back yard of one of the most competitive swimming nations in the world, and it clearly took the Australians by surprise. The depth of talent in the Scottish swimming team goes beyond those who got on to the medal podium. As well as taking 12 medals, our 19  competitors in the pool posted 27 personal bests and set three Commonwealth games records and 19 Scottish records. By any measure, that is an astonishing performance. Although our swimming team had the greatest success in Melbourne, we achieved medals in disciplines ranging from shooting, cycling, weightlifting and athletics to boxing, gymnastics, badminton and bowls. Although many of our athletes did not secure medals, many recorded personal bests, which demonstrates their passion and commitment in competing in their sport and for their nation. I have little doubt that the success of team Scotland will inspire many young Scots to push on in their sport in the hope of representing their nation in future games and that it will inspire many others to take up sport with the hope of success. Team Scotland's success in Melbourne will also serve as a timely boost to the campaign for Glasgow to secure the 2014 games. We must harness the energy and excitement that the success in Melbourne has generated to ensure that it serves as a springboard for even greater success in the years to come. In sports in which we were not as successful at the games as we would like, we must start to build now so that we are more successful in the future. In areas in which we established a new benchmark of success in Melbourne, such as in the pool, we must ensure that we build on that success so that we are even better the next time round. If we are to achieve greater sporting success, it is central that we have the right facilities for our athletes to develop. Imagine the possible scale of future Scottish swimming success if we emulated the city of Sydney, which has 88 competition-standard swimming pools for its population of 4.5 million. Our nation, with a population of 5 million, has only four such pools. As a result of our lack of facilities, too many of our top athletes must train outwith Scotland. The swimmers David Carry and Caitlin McClatchey both train at Loughborough University, while Gregor Tait is based in Wales. In cycling, Chris Hoy, Ross Edgar and Kate Cullen all train at Manchester's velodrome. The minister's amendment refers to the national and regional sports facilities strategy. Given the lack of an indoor velodrome in Scotland, perhaps she will spell out to us exactly where the proposed new velodrome will be, when it will start to be built and whether it will be completed within the timescales that were outlined when it was announced. Kate Cullen summed up the situation when she said to the Australian media: "we only have an outdoor velodrome in Scotland—I mean, how stupid is that?" Had she been training in Scotland's only velodrome instead of competing in Australia, she  would have had to shovel the snow off it before she used it. The results of sportscotland's audit of local sports facilities were supposed to be published last summer. The Executive advised the Enterprise and Culture Committee during the course of its inquiry into Scottish football that the results would be published by the end of 2005. The committee's report on the inquiry, which was published last year, called for the audit results to be published "without delay". The most recent response from sportscotland is that the results will be published by the end of May at the latest. The minister's amendment refers to the "imminent publication" of the results. I hope that that is not the same definition of "imminent" that has been used in relation to the relocation of sportscotland—a saga that has gone on for the past couple of years. To develop our future sporting stars, it is essential that we have in place the right facilities to aid their development. By ensuring that good sports facilities are available, we will give our athletes the best possible start in their sporting careers, so that they can achieve medal success for team Scotland. For that reason, I hope that the Executive will view as urgent the publication of the long-delayed audit of sports facilities. I have read the Tory amendment, but I have no idea what the purpose is of the quotation from Simon Clegg of the British Olympic Association, who is the chief architect and exponent of the proposed Great Britain football team and who is certainly no friend of Scottish sport. Mr McGrigor clearly signs up to Simon Clegg's remarks. Does he suggest that we should have a team GB for the Commonwealth games, as it might be more successful? Now that our athletes have returned home, I hope that all members will join me in congratulating team Scotland on its tremendous success in Melbourne, while recognising that that success should act as a springboard for greater success for team Scotland in the future. I move, That the Parliament congratulates Team Scotland for winning 29 medals at the 18th Commonwealth Games in Melbourne, which is the largest number of medals ever won by a Scottish team at an overseas games; recognises that this success is due to the hard work and dedication of our athletes and coaching staff; believes that Team Scotland's success in Melbourne should act as a springboard to ensure even greater success for our sportsmen and women in the international sporting arena and will also inspire many young Scots to participate in sport; recognises that access to good sporting facilities plays a significant role in the development of our nation's sporting talent, and calls on the Scottish Executive to publish sport scotland's audit of local sports facilities to ensure that the necessary facilities are in place to develop our future sporting talent.

I am sure that the minister recognises that nobody is arguing that we should not try to improve the health care service that is provided in Lanarkshire. However, is it not incumbent on the health board to show that its planned reforms will have a clear health benefit for the whole community?

I congratulate Carolyn Leckie on securing time for this important debate. Any reform of our NHS must be built on the important premise of improving services for people and thereby improving the health care that they receive. To date, Lanarkshire NHS Board has failed to demonstrate that any real health benefits will come from closing one of its accident and emergency departments. The reason why it has failed to come up with any detailed benefits for the people of Cumbernauld and Kilsyth from closing Monklands A and E is that the proposal would offer no health benefits to the people who live in that community. The reason why it has failed to demonstrate to the people of East Kilbride any benefit from closing Hairmyres A and E is that the proposal would offer no benefit to the people who live in that community. The health board is conducting a consultation exercise and proposing to close one A and E department, but it has failed to demonstrate that the community should support that proposal because it will improve the community's health. The board tells us that part of the problem is that it does not have the staff; in particular, it does not have the workforce to maintain three A and E departments. Whose fault is that? The fault lies with Government, which has a responsibility to  ensure that there is proper workforce planning for organisations such as our NHS. We have had a Labour Government for almost 10 years, but it has failed to ensure that we are planning properly. As the minister should be aware, it takes only five years to train a doctor. If we need more doctors, we should ensure that we plan for that. The health board has also failed to demonstrate the real implications that closing one of the accident and emergency departments will have for the neighbouring health boards of Greater Glasgow NHS Board and Forth Valley NHS Board. It says that it is conducting that analysis at present and has been working on the issue for six months. However, if we ask the board for details, no details appear. We are told that Glasgow will be able to absorb some of the overflow of people from Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and that people will also be able to go to the new Larbert hospital that is planned in Forth Valley. That hospital will be on stream in three years, rather than five years, as Donald Gorrie suggested. I was involved in both of the consultation exercises for the new hospital at Larbert, and at no point was the need to ensure that we planned for additional overflow from the Lanarkshire area mentioned—that did not feature in the plans. This week, I spoke to a member of Forth Valley NHS Board, who advised me that at no point was there discussion of the implications of Lanarkshire NHS Board closing one of its A and E departments and patients being moved to Forth Valley. Lanarkshire NHS Board has conducted its consultation without providing people with the information that they need to have a greater understanding of the implications of closing some of the acute facilities in the Lanarkshire area. Tonight I will not be drawn into the Dutch auction into which the health board would like us all to be drawn, playing one community off against the other: should Hairmyres A and E or Monklands A and E be closed? In my view, all three A and E departments in Lanarkshire have an important role to play in the local community. The health board has failed to put the case for closing any of them. Tonight the Parliament should say that it is united with Lanarkshire united in ensuring that we retain the three services.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that Scottish athletes succeed at international level. (S2O-9187)

I am sure that the minister will want not only to support the ministers who are heading over to the Melbourne games but our athletes, to whom we wish every success at the Melbourne games. The minister may be aware of the athlete personal award scheme, which UK Sport runs and which it describes as being "to ensure that athletes can train and perform to the highest levels" in the run-up to Olympic games. He may also be aware that, at the last winter Olympics, some 40 per cent of the athletes in the Great Britain team were Scotland-based athletes. However, is he also aware that, under a freedom of information request, UK Sport published a document this week that highlights that only 20 per cent of athlete personal awards had been made to Scottish athletes? Why is that the case, and what action does the Executive intend to take to ensure that Scottish athletes get a fair share of that funding?

Is the minister aware that the chief executive and the head of the planning department in North Lanarkshire Council refused to meet seven councillors from Cumbernauld to discuss the town centre? They are happy to meet community groups, but they are not prepared to meet elected representatives. Does the minister condone the council's position?

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate, despite the fact that I do not support the motion—although she told the Cumbernauld News & Kilsyth Chronicle otherwise. Our new towns, which were developed on the lines of Ebenezer Howard's garden-city model, have had varying degrees of success in the development of their town centres. As Cathie Craigie pointed out, over recent years Cumbernauld town centre has collected a number of national awards—unfortunately, for all the wrong reasons. The present state of the town centre has become a festering sore. The problem was recognised some time ago, when the former  CDC, having acknowledged the need to redevelop the town centre, appointed Arrowcroft consultants to produce redevelopment plans. However, following the abolition of the CDC and local government reorganisation, the plans were ditched. North Lanarkshire Council decided not to go ahead with the plans, despite the CDC having set aside money before its abolition for the work to be carried out. To date, local representatives say that they do not know where the money disappeared to in North Lanarkshire Council's budgets. Ministers should be aware that the local community has little faith that North Lanarkshire Council is truly committed to redeveloping Cumbernauld town centre as it should be developed. Ministers should also recognise that North Lanarkshire Council has produced substantial redevelopment plans for all the major shopping centres in its area, except—for some strange reason—for the shopping centre in Cumbernauld. The mindset in North Lanarkshire Council seems to be that Cumbernauld is at the periphery. Given the big development at Ravenscraig, which is to be welcomed, the suspicion is that the council's energies are being ploughed in that direction instead of towards areas such as Cumbernauld. Some progress has been made in recent years, in particular the Tesco and Asda developments. However, some argue that those developments have made it more difficult to sustain businesses in Cumbernauld town centre, as people who shop in Tesco and Asda do not need to go into the town centre. Cathie Craigie mentioned the Antonine centre, which also represents progress. However, that it is largely a retail outlet and its development raises questions about the long-term future of the mega centre. Cumbernauld town centre needs more than just a shopping centre; it needs a true town centre. Over the past nine years, North Lanarkshire Council has failed to grasp that that is what many local residents want. As Margaret Mitchell rightly said, we need to move forward. It is wrong to say that blame can be apportioned to one group or another for how the issue has or has not been taken forward. That said, Cumbernauld town centre needs a substantial redevelopment plan, such as other town centres in the North Lanarkshire area have had. An example of the good practice that North Lanarkshire Council could achieve is Falkirk Council's recent redevelopment of Stenhousemuir and Denny shopping centres. Falkirk Council brought in a number of developers and asked them to produce a range of plans. It then consulted the local communities on what they wanted in their town centres, after which the council asked developers to finalise their plans,  working with the local communities. Finally, the council invested in developing the town centres. One of the key things that North Lanarkshire Council has failed to do is to engage the local community in Cumbernauld in a wide consultation process in order to achieve that.

I accept that a community forum has been established and that that is a step in the right direction, but the council had to be dragged kicking and screaming even to get to that stage. North Lanarkshire Council has to realise that local residents should have a say in shaping their town centre. The use of the community forum is one step in that direction, but it is not sufficient in itself. The council needs to reach out to the wider community of Cumbernauld to identify exactly what people want in their town centre. If that can be achieved in other local authority areas where councils are willing to work with local residents, I see no reason why North Lanarkshire Council cannot raise its game and start to do that in Cumbernauld. Ultimately, the people who live in Cumbernauld are those who should decide what is in their town centre. North Lanarkshire Council needs to wake up to that fact.

Last week, the minister stated that she intends to make legislative provision for cultural entitlements at a local level. I am sure that the minister appreciates that, often, local authorities' cultural budgets are viewed as a soft target when budget settlements are tight. How does the minister intend to ensure that local authorities provide good-quality cultural programmes at a local level to ensure that residents in Fife communities, for example, are able to take up their new entitlements?

I thank the minister for providing an advance copy of her statement, or at least the first 19 pages of it—three pages were missing. I welcome the new resources that the minister has just announced. The Scottish National Party shares her ambition to ensure that the Scottish cultural community can flourish and develop. Clearly, there are a number of proposals in the minister's statement that are to be welcomed, in  particular the provisions around education. However, there was limited detail in the statement and I suspect that the devil will be in the detail and that it will take some time to get the detail and flesh out exactly what impact the proposals will have. I want to question the minister on two areas. First, I welcome the decision to fund the national companies directly, which the Scottish National Party proposed doing several years ago and which we also proposed in our submission to the Cultural Commission. However, there will clearly be concern within the Scottish Arts Council that the Executive has decided to remove the proportion of SAC funding that would have gone to the national companies and to return it to the Executive. When does the minister intend to implement that change? Why has she chosen to fund the national companies directly but not to leave the existing moneys for them in the SAC budget, thereby giving its budget a significant uplift that would allow it to support other community cultural activities? Secondly, on the issue of entitlements, I am sure that the minister will be aware that councils must often turn to their culture budget when funding is tight, as it is seen as a soft target. I am sure that she will agree that although she may make legislative provision for entitlement at a local level, that will not necessarily make the cultural programmes that need to develop at a local level actually happen. How does she intend to ensure that local authorities provide the right resources to ensure that good cultural programmes develop at a local level and that those programmes allow people to take up their new-found entitlements?

Is the minister aware that the biggest barrier to many young people's participation in sport is not having access to good-quality local sports facilities, particularly in the field of football? Is she aware of the growing frustration at the lack of a physical process for building the new facilities under the national and regional facilities strategy? What action will she take to expedite such a process to make sure that the facilities are actually built? Given that funding was announced this week to support the Spartans community football academy, is she prepared to take on board the Enterprise and Culture Committee's recommendation and revisit the possibility of  providing public money to help to establish football academies across the country?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent meetings have taken place between it and sportscotland in respect of promoting sport and physical education. (S2O-8147)

I thank the minister for her response. I hope that in the course of those meetings, the minister has an opportunity to mention the failure of sportscotland to meet several of its key sport 21 objectives, in some of which there has been a lack of progress, while others are in reverse. Can the minister explain why, since the introduction of sport 21, the number of children participating in sport outwith school has decreased by 7 per cent, why the number of children from deprived communities participating in sport has decreased by 6 per cent, and why, in the two years since the policy was introduced, we seem to have lost some 20,000 volunteers from delivery of sport in our communities? As the minister responsible for sport in Scotland, can she explain what action she is taking to make sure that that failure is reversed?

Spineless!

I regret the fact that the Executive has lodged an amendment to send the bill back to the committee, given the fact that, as a member of the committee that considered the bill, I am satisfied that we took sufficient evidence and that there was sufficient  scope for discussion of whether we should approve the bill at stage 1. Real benefits could come from having a bank holiday for St Andrew's day. It is wrong for some members to give the impression that the business community is in some way unified in opposition to the bill: it is not. The retail sector and the tourism sector are ambitious about what they could achieve through having a St Andrew's day bank holiday. Even some of those in the business community who are opposed to the bill are opposed to it purely on the basis that they would want a St Andrew's day holiday to replace an existing bank holiday; others just do not want another bank holiday full stop. Those who oppose the bill are divided on what they think should happen. The Executive fails to recognise the economic benefits that could flow from the bill if there was a bank holiday in November—a time of the year when business is slow for both the retail market and our tourism sector. Some people—including the Executive, as we have heard—have argued that the bill would not allow us legally to enforce a St Andrew's day holiday. If that argument is turned on its head, it is an argument to abolish all bank holidays full stop. Why bother having any of them, if they are not legally enforceable? The reality is that the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill provides the only avenue under the Scotland Act 1998 that would allow a bank holiday to be created in Scotland. I am particularly surprised at the Executive's narrow-minded attitude in failing to recognise the cultural benefits that could be gained by our having a St Andrew's day holiday. The Executive is taking its usual narrow attitude. It is frightened to have a St Andrew's day holiday because it is frightened that people will become a bit more nationalistic about Scotland and its culture. Some cultural spin-offs could come from the bill. We should consider what Ireland has achieved. It is surprising that the Executive does not seem to be able even to recognise that fact. As ever when it comes to cultural matters, the Executive is good at talking the talk, but it is appalling when it comes to walking the walk. After the Enterprise and Culture Committee considered the bill in detail and published its unanimous report, the Executive decided to kick the bill back to the committee to try to find an alternative way to celebrate St Andrew's day. What happened was clear—the committee was unanimous. The members of the Executive parties supported the idea of the bill. It is strange that the Executive does not seem able to get its head around that. The Executive wants to kick the bill back to the committee because it would not like the result. It wants to send back the bill in the hope that the  next stage 1 report will recommend that the Parliament vote down the general principles. That is typical of the control freakery that we have come to expect from the Executive. I hope that members across the Parliament will recognise that the Executive, in its amendment and by wanting to kick the bill back to the committee, is riding roughshod over the parliamentary process. I hope that that will not happen, although I suspect that it will: yet again, we will find that the Liberal Democrat spines have taken an early recess and that the Lib Dems will kowtow to their masters in the Labour Party. I hope that members will respect a decision that was arrived at following detailed consideration by the Enterprise and Culture Committee and support the bill at stage 1.

Will the member give way?

Anyone who is ambitious for sport in Scotland wants to see our competitors competing at the highest possible level on the international stage. That is why I believe that Scotland should have its own Olympic team, competing in the Olympic games alongside the other Olympic nations. A range of members across this chamber will be riddled with self-doubt over whether Scotland can have its own Olympic team and whether we have the talent to have our own Olympic team. Others will think, "Well, Scotland really shouldn't get above its station." In fact, there is nothing to stop Scotland forming its own national Olympic committee. Of the 202 national Olympic committees in the world, 13 do not have national status at the United Nations. They include two teams from the Virgin Islands, and teams from the Cayman Islands, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Andorra, to name just a few. Despite not being represented at the UN, they are ambitious for their sportsmen and women and want them to participate every four years in the biggest sporting event in the world. In the unionist alliance, there are those who would doubt those facts. Let me refer them to a quotation from the International Olympic Committee: "Although most National Olympic Committees are from nations, the IOC also recognises independent territories, commonwealths, protectorates and geographical areas." I concede that Scotland is not an independent nation—yet—but the last time that I looked at a map we were certainly a geographical area. The Olympic charter makes it clear that Scotland can have its own national Olympic committee. The criteria that are set down make that possible. There is no technical or legal reason why we should not have our own team. There are those in the chamber who would say that Scottish athletes are better off training and competing alongside the Great Britain squad for the Olympics. That is what Jamie McGrigor is trying to say in his rambling amendment, in which—despite being a die-hard unionist—he shows that he does not know the difference between a union jack and a union flag. Some say that we would be better off competing under the GB system, but that strikes me as an  argument for abolishing any form of independent representation for Scotland on the international field. Let us get rid of the Scottish football team, the Scottish rugby team, and the Scottish Commonwealth games team. If we believe the argument, those teams would all do better under the GB flag. However, I know that even the Executive is not persuaded by that argument. The Executive wants to encourage Scottish athletes to train and compete here in Scotland. Target 7 of sport 21, the Executive's sports policy, wants to make "sport experience so attractive and successful that all Scottish athletes will want to live, train, compete, work and study in Scotland". I support that view and I am sure that many others in the chamber support it too. To argue that our athletes would be better off under the GB system is contrary to the Executive's own policy. The Olympics are coming to London in 2012. I believe that that will provide Scotland with an excellent opportunity to join the Olympic family by having its own team. We have talented athletes who can compete on the international stage. At the previous two Olympic games, Scottish sportsmen and women succeeded in securing 13 medals. What we need to do, with our own Olympic team, is to build on that success and ensure that we achieve even greater success in the future. The Olympic games are not just about winning; they are about participating. A benefit of having our own Olympic team is that it would increase the opportunity for Scottish sportsmen and women to participate in the biggest sporting event in the world. At the most recent Olympic games, only 24 Scots made it into the GB team, whereas New Zealand, with only 4 million people, was able to send a team of 150. If more of our athletes can compete at the pinnacle of sporting events, that will encourage them to strive further and act as a catalyst for young people to get much more involved in sport. The key objectives in sport 21 are to ensure that we widen participation, increase physical activity and ensure that Scotland has greater representation on the international stage. Those are all Executive objectives in its existing policy, but surely they would be much more achievable if we had our own Olympic team. That would increase and widen participation, give us greater representation on the international stage, and enthuse our young people to participate in sport. Last week, an ambitious campaign was launched to establish a Scottish Olympic team. The campaign has the support of some 78 per cent of the Scottish public. They are ambitious for Scotland's athletes. There is no technical reason  why Scotland cannot have its own Olympic team. What we need is the political will to ensure that it happens. What we need is for Scotland's politicians to demonstrate that they are as ambitious as the Scottish people for our athletes to compete at the highest level. I hope that members across the chamber—even unionists—will join us in supporting the campaign to ensure that Scotland establishes its own Olympic team. By doing that, we will ensure that Scottish athletes will participate in the biggest sporting event in the world. I move, That the Parliament congratulates London on securing the 2012 Olympic Games, which will encourage many young Scots to become involved in sport; welcomes the recent launch of a campaign to establish a Scottish Olympic team; notes that 78 per cent of Scots support the establishment of such a team; recognises that the creation of a Scottish Olympic team will inspire many young Scots to achieve sporting excellence in order to represent their nation in the Olympic arena, and calls on politicians from across the political spectrum to rise up to the challenge set by the people of Scotland and work to establish a Scottish Olympic team.

I congratulate the Cultural Commission on its report. I confess that I was somewhat sceptical about whether it would be able to produce a report that was focused enough. Given that the report contains 131 recommendations, some of my scepticism was well placed. The report should have had more focus, but its lack of focus reflects the commission's broad remit. Many of the recommendations are worthy and will direct the debate on cultural policy in the months and years to come. We cannot delay making progress on many of the issues that the report addresses. One key issue is that the Executive must be clearer about what exactly it seeks to achieve with its cultural policy. The policy should serve to release the potential of the people of Scotland—which is fundamental to our national identity—and to enhance and build upon their creativity, improve the economy and make Scotland a better and more exciting place to live. A good starting point for the Executive would be to focus on some of the issues that have been highlighted in the report, particularly the possibility of legislating on cultural rights. If we are to be ambitious about what we want to achieve with our cultural policy, we should underpin the right of Scotland's citizens to achieve their full cultural and creative potential. I hope that when the minister publishes her full response later this year she will say whether a bill will be introduced to achieve that. In the course of the commission's consideration of evidence, and following publication of its report, there was quite a bit of debate about structure. The commission was correct to recognise that the Government must not just view culture as an add- on and that it should, rather, place culture in the mainstream of Government thinking in order to promote cultural awareness and creativity, which are at the core of any self-confident and healthy society. I agree with the minister that the commission went wrong with its preferred option for structural change in the sector. Its proposal that there should be two competing bodies—one dealing with funding and another dealing with priorities—is a recipe for conflict and simply would not work. If we are to widen the scope of artists' contribution to society, we require a new flexible and proactive body for the arts in Scotland that recognises the primacy of artists in the whole process. Without teachers there can be no schools, and without doctors and nurses there is no health care, so without artists there will be no art. We need a process that places greater focus on artists, not on structure for structure's sake. Only then will we enable those artists to contribute to wider society. That means that we need to be prepared to invest money in, and support, art for the sake of art. If we are to get the process correct nationally, we must first ensure that we get it right locally. Our local authorities have a responsibility to provide cultural leadership in their communities. One of the most effective ways in which we could ensure that they do so would be to ensure that cultural activity is central to the community planning process. Many people's first engagement in cultural activity takes place at local level. People must have a meaningful opportunity to participate in planning for cultural activities in their communities. Communities must feel that the process is purposeful and that it supports local artists and allows for the proper exchange of skills.

Mr Stone may be aware that the Cultural Commission's report recommends that the process should be underpinned with regulation or legislation and that the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report on its inquiry into arts in the community recommended that we ensure that cultural matters be embedded in the community planning process. I hope that the minister will make progress on those recommendations in the coming months. Another key theme that the commission identified was the importance of our education system to effective delivery of cultural policy throughout the country. Too often, Scotland is ambivalent about its indigenous culture. The study of Scottish history, music, language and literature  are often viewed as being of marginal importance. At present, of the five national priorities in education, there is no mention of culture. Although Scotland has internationally recognised writers, Scottish literature is not routinely used to form the basis of literature teaching in our schools. We must ensure that we use the creative talents that we have in Scotland as a foundation for learning in our schools. The Cultural Commission's report highlights the chronic underfunding in the cultural sector, which must be seriously addressed if we are to make progress; if it is not, the difficulties will continue. In the past six years, we have had a national strategy, two reviews and a commission, so it is understandable that the cultural community is somewhat sceptical about whether there will be any effective change now. We need decisions to be made about what will happen and we need the minister to take action and show leadership.

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing time for the debate. Although I do not have personal experience of the festival in Paisley, it is clear from those who have participated in the events that have occurred there in the past year or so that it has been worth while. These types of festivals have an important part to play in our cultural calendar. Last year, the Enterprise and Culture Committee conducted an inquiry into arts in the community and one of the clear lessons that came out is that the vast majority of people's experience of participating in a cultural event is at a local level. That is why  festivals such as the one in Paisley play an important role within communities. Such festivals can also often bring wider communities together. We have heard that choirs from different parts of Scotland will be travelling to Paisley to participate in the event there. We only have to look at the experience of other festivals in Scotland to see how they can develop and become bigger and more important within our cultural calendar. For example, for the past six years in Falkirk, there has been the big in Falkirk event, which now attracts over 100,000 people each year. The local council estimates that the events that take place over the period of the festival inject approximately £1 million into the local economy. It has got to the point at which the festival has attracted some of the major bands that are now playing in the UK, from Snow Patrol to Bob Geldof. This year, we even had Tony Christie, who very kindly gave me his autograph. The big in Falkirk event brings the community together not only through the council's involvement, but because commercial businesses are interested in getting involved in it. One of the biggest companies in the area—BP at Grangemouth—is now one of the festival's major sponsors. Alongside that, this year there was interest from France. A number of organisations and groups came across from France to participate in the various events that took place. Such festivals have an important part to play in giving people an opportunity to participate in cultural activities, and I wish the one in Paisley all the best. I hope that, as it develops as the big in Falkirk event has developed, it will continue to play an important part in our cultural calendar. It is important that events such as these festivals do not become parochial, but broaden out what they are trying to do. In doing so, they will attract more people to them, who will come along for different reasons, because they want to participate in different types of event. I hope that the festival in Paisley will seek to open up even wider, to bring in many other organisations that I am sure would like to participate in it in the years to come.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to reform Disclosure Scotland. (S2O-7329)

Is the minister aware of the problems that are encountered by individuals who work with children across a range of agencies? Such individuals have to go through a disclosure check for each organisation. I recently received representation from an outdoor instructor who has undergone nine disclosure checks this year because of the range of organisations with which he works. In addition, I learned recently that social work students, who have to undergo a disclosure check before they are accepted on their course, have to undergo further checks before they can attend placements during their training. Will the minister acknowledge that there is a need to amend the system to ensure that we reduce the undue bureaucracy that it is creating, while continuing to protect children?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to promote green space areas in urban landscapes. (S2O-7032)

Is the minister aware of Falkirk Council's innovative proposal to transform a massive section of land between Falkirk and Grangemouth into a new commercial, recreational and environmental growth area? A key part of that proposal is the development of a large eco-park. Does the minister agree that a key part of promoting such sustainable developments is recognition of the interplay between their environmental, social and economic benefits? Will he join me in congratulating Falkirk Council on pursuing the development? How will the Executive ensure that other councils promote such developments?

I congratulate Mike Watson on securing the debate.  I must make my way to Sauchiehall Street this Saturday to see how Pauline McNeill gets on. Playing fields and open spaces are more important now for our society than they have been at any time in the past. The days when kids were able to play freely in the streets with a ball have long gone. Playing fields and open spaces are now the main areas that children must use to play, for their personal safety. Only this week, in evidence to the Enterprise and Culture Committee, representatives of the Scottish Football Association, the Scottish Premier League and the Scottish Football League highlighted the fact that access to decent facilities such as playing fields and open spaces is key to driving up the number of kids who are involved in physical activities and sport. I acknowledge the work of sportscotland and the National Playing Fields Association Scotland in trying to preserve open spaces and playing fields where possible, but there is a process of continual erosion of such spaces. The Executive must address three aspects in trying to offset that on-going process. First, like Mike Watson, I believe that the default position in planning decisions should be in favour of protecting playing fields and open spaces. I hope that the forthcoming planning bill, which is to be introduced later this year, will provide an opportunity to achieve that. A report that was published in March highlighted that, in the past 10 years alone, 19 per cent of our secondary schools have lost playing grounds or sports fields because of the need for ground for development. Half of the spaces that were lost were football or sports playing grounds. As members have said, local councils are often forced into selling off open space or football and sports fields to finance school building developments. The second aspect that must be addressed is the need to ensure that existing facilities are properly maintained. I have visited many ash parks that are almost grass parks purely because of poor maintenance by the local authority. It is crucial that available facilities are suitably maintained by local authorities to ensure that clubs and individuals can use them. A complaint that I often hear from sports clubs is that the grass in the parks that are available is poorly maintained. The third aspect that must be addressed is accessibility, which several members have highlighted. I recently spoke to the manager of the Denny Rio football club, who runs a school football team. He was given a quote of more than £170 to use an all-weather football pitch at a PPP school in Falkirk, which was a cost that the team could not afford. In Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, local football clubs have been given a quote of more than £200 to hire an all-weather football pitch for  two hours at Broadwood stadium. They cannot afford to use the facility. We must protect what we have and maintain existing facilities to a proper standard so that they can continue to be used. Facilities also need to be affordable so that local sports clubs and individuals may use them when they need to.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve support for prisoners with mental health problems. (S2O-6835)

The minister will know that, in September 2004, the SPS closed most of the hospital units in its prisons. Is she aware of the growing concern among prison officers and governors about the impact that that is having on the management of prisoners with mental health problems? In particular, is she aware that, in some establishments, prisoners with mental health problems are being held in anti-ligature cells, which are inappropriate to their needs? Is she prepared to ask the SPS to consider making available mental health beds in its old hospital units to such prisoners or, at the very least, having qualified nurses on duty in prisons 24 hours a day to support and advise prison officers who are caring for prisoners?

Over the past six years in this Parliament, there has been a variety of debates on our criminal justice system, a number of which have been about our increasing prison population. In those debates, particular attention has been paid to and concern expressed about the ever-increasing female prison population. However, despite the parliamentary scrutiny of the matter in this chamber and in the justice committees, our general prison population continues to rise, and our female prison population in particular. I welcome the fact that we are having a specific debate on female offenders and women prisoners. One of the key elements in tackling the matter is ensuring that we acknowledge the specific issues that surround female offending. That is why it is important that we do not lift off the shelf the methods that we have used to tackle male offenders, but instead recognise the specific issues that surround female offending. Members throughout the chamber acknowledge that we are locking up too many women for crimes that they should not be in prison for. I recall that, when giving evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee in September 1999, the former chief inspector of prisons, Clive Fairweather, said that, in general, those who are in Cornton Vale are sad, not bad. The complexity of the situation, with people being locked up in Cornton Vale who should not be there, was clearly demonstrated in research that Dr Nancy Loucks carried out back in 1998. She demonstrated that, over a period of time, 82 per cent of women who ended up in Cornton Vale had been subject to some form of abuse in their lives. Some 46 per cent had been subject to sexual abuse and 60 per cent had been subject to physical abuse. Those statistics demonstrate that there is a real story of human misery and tragedy behind many individuals who end up in Cornton Vale for the criminal acts that they have committed. If we are to be committed to tackling the problem, we must be prepared to tackle the causes behind women committing criminal offences in the first place. Sadly, in political debates on the issue in the chamber, when a member recognises a problem in someone's background, they are sometimes accused—by the Conservatives in particular—of being soft on crime and of not recognising the crimes that are committed against victims. However, that is not the issue. The issue is about recognising the complexity of the matter and not about condoning people's criminal behaviour. We should be honest about the need to tackle the complexity that lies behind the matter. I do not for one minute question the minister's  commitment to reducing the number of female prisoners in Scotland, but the question of whether she can deliver on her commitment to address the problem remains. In his four-year period of office, the previous Minister for Justice—Jim Wallace—was clearly committed to driving down the number of female prisoners in Scotland, but he simply failed to do so. Before him, Henry McLeish, as a minister with responsibility for home affairs at the Scottish Office, stated in 1998 that he was committed to driving down the female prison population. However, seven years on, ministers have failed to address the matter.

I give way to Margaret Mitchell.

Sadly, that simplistic and naive approach continually undermines the debate. Too often, the Conservatives seek to run with the public trend of condemning people rather than to show political leadership to tackle the problem. The issue is not about letting off people who have committed serious crimes, but about recognising that we are locking up people for committing crimes for which they simply should not be in prison.

I recognise that inter-agency and departmental co-operation is needed to ensure that things work properly to tackle the issue, but we also recognise the systemic nature of the problem. Over the 10-year period between 1994 and 2003, the female prison population in Scotland increased by 68 per cent, which is four times the rate of growth of the male prison population. That clearly suggests that there is a systemic problem that must be addressed. I hope that for the strategy that the minister is pushing forward to address the issue, the Executive is realistic and ensures that resources are available to deliver the services that are necessary, because if the Executive fails to deliver  those at a prison and a community level, it will fail to address what other ministers with responsibility for justice have failed to do for the past six years.

Zikomo, Presiding Officer. That is the reply that we were often offered when we visited projects in Malawi. I add my thanks to the work of the Parliament's external liaison unit. In particular, I thank Roy Devon and Margaret Neal for their efforts while we were in South Africa and Malawi. In a country where people struggle against poverty, HIV/AIDS, corruption and malnutrition, the people of Malawi afforded us a generosity of welcome that exemplified why their country is known as the warm heart of Africa. This is an important year for the international community, for Africa and for Malawi. As members have mentioned, the millennium development goals will be reviewed this year and the commission for Africa's report has recently been published. In a year of such focus on Africa, Scotland has a clear role to play. Our visit to southern Africa could not have come at a more appropriate time. I hope that our delegation's report, which was produced on behalf of the CPA branch, will prove to be a focus for greater debate on the wider role that the Scottish Parliament and the Executive can play in international affairs. Colleagues, few people are poorer and more marginalised than the 25 million people in Africa alone who find themselves infected with HIV/AIDS and the 13 million children there who have been orphaned because of the disease. However, such statistics can never reveal the real human tragedy that is caused by the scourge of HIV/AIDS. The battle against the disease was brought home to  me during our visit to Blantyre, where the Open Arms orphanage looks after some 42 babies and toddlers. Many of the children had been placed in the orphanage because their parents either had lost the battle with AIDS or were simply unable to care for them. Two-year-old Jennifer—whose picture is on the board in the garden lobby—has been cared for in the orphanage for some time. She was born with HIV. Although she has reached the age of two, she is only now beginning the process of learning how to walk because, for the first two years of her life, her spleen was so enflamed and swollen that she was unable to stand up. She is now on antiretroviral drugs and is thriving like any baby would. However, the drugs will be provided only for three years and, as the nurse said to me, "Who will pay for her treatment after the three years of treatment have ended?" Jennifer has a right to life like any other child, but her circumstances and where she was born determine otherwise. The battle against AIDS in Africa ought to be everyone's battle. In this year of Africa, we must ensure that we use every means possible to put an end to the scourge that affects countries in Africa. I hope that the Executive will explore every possible opportunity to work with NGOs, voluntary organisations and individuals who are prepared to give their time and effort to go and work in countries such as Malawi with individuals such as Jennifer. One of my strongest memories of Malawi is of the sheer enthusiasm of the children. We visited a school with a roll of some 9,500 pupils—if we were talking about twinning schools in Malawi with schools in Scotland, that school would need an education authority to match it, because of its size—but the children were thirsty for their opportunity to learn. Dennis Canavan mentioned the limited classrooms that they have, but that school is living up to the Commonwealth's goal of creating opportunity and realising potential through education. It needs more support and assistance, and I hope that we will consider how we can support such schools through teacher exchanges and other methods. On returning, I reflected on much of the debate that has taken place in the United Kingdom about the violent terrorist threat that our nation might face. Rich nations such as ours have a right to protect their citizens and society from such a threat, but poverty, too, is violence by another name. Every year, 10,000 children die from preventable illnesses, often caused by malnutrition and unsafe drinking water. I believe that feeding the hopes and the hunger of the poor will do much more to ensure stability and security in the world, and I hope that the G8 summit will use its visit to Scotland this year to seize that opportunity.

I congratulate Robert Brown on securing the debate. We all agree that sport in schools has potential benefits for physical, mental and social well-being in our society as a whole. One of the key points about promoting sport and physical activity in schools is that, if we get people actively involved in physical pursuits—sport and otherwise—at a young age, they will, we hope, carry that activity on in later life and the health benefits that we generate in our young will continue as they get older. I disagree with Mark Ballard's view that a mini-Olympics would be an elitist event, because the Olympic ideal is inclusion and participation, which I think any type of competition should involve. However, I understand where he is coming from in his concerns that a mini-Olympics might be portrayed as an elitist event.

I understand what the member is saying, but I want to pursue the point, because the idea of a mini-Olympics is not new in Scotland. Last year, the SNP-led Falkirk Council introduced its mini-Olympics for schools in the area. Some 1,800 primary 7 school kids from across the district participated in the event at Grangemouth stadium, which included a range of events such as track and field, football and swimming. The event was highly successful and the children really enjoyed it. It was organised in conjunction with local and national businesses and the local authority. One of the things that I found particularly impressive was that the marshalling and refereeing was carried out by senior pupils from the high schools to which the primary 7 kids would move on after the summer holidays. I know that Falkirk Council is looking to roll out the event in the years to come. It was not elitist; it was very much about inclusion and participation.  The culture has existed for some time that we should try to remove competition from some of the sporting activities that take place in schools. I do not think that that is necessarily healthy; I believe that competition has an important part to play, but it should not serve to exclude children who do not wish to participate in the competitive aspects of sport. We must strike a balance. I am not necessarily convinced that we should have a biannual national mini-Olympics in Scotland. Much more important—Margo MacDonald touched on this—is engagement between community sports clubs and schools. It is unfortunate that in Scotland being a member of a sports club is fairly unusual, whereas in Scandinavian countries it is normal—on average, more than 70 per cent of Swedish kids are members of some kind of community sports club. It is important that kids be involved in community sports clubs because, once they move on from school, the clubs will give them the necessary expert advice and support if they want to compete at a higher level. One of the main difficulties that people have is access to the right type of facilities. Members have highlighted before the problems that people encounter with public-private partnership schools. Falkirk's women's hockey team had to go to Linlithgow because its members could not afford to pay the charges to use the park at Graeme High School. We must ensure that, when we provide facilities, they are affordable to community sports clubs. I hope that when children get involved with those clubs at school, they will go on to be members and to participate in sports much more effectively. That is the approach that we should take. There is a role for competition, but it should not exclude kids who do not want to participate in competitive sports.

It seems that not a day goes by now without our having a Sewel motion. Today's is on the National Lottery Bill. I acknowledge that some powers are being repatriated to Scotland under the proposals in the National Lottery Bill, but the minister will be aware of continuing concerns in the voluntary sector in Scotland over some of the bill's proposals. Under the bill, the secretary of state who is responsible for the Department for Culture, Media and Sport in London will be able to decide what portion of the lottery cake will be presented to Scotland. The secretary of state will also have powers to top-slice certain amounts of that portion of the cake. Inevitably, that will result in a smaller portion being returned to us here in Scotland. Will the minister give a commitment to the chamber this afternoon that the 11.5 per cent of the lottery budget that is currently spent here in Scotland will continue under the new arrangements in the National Lottery Bill? I ask the minister to address a further issue. At the moment, the Community Fund provides funding only to voluntary organisations. The new Big Lottery Fund will be able to allocate moneys to voluntary organisations and to public and private projects. Will she assure us that the level of funding that is provided to voluntary organisations in Scotland under the Community Fund will continue under the new Big Lottery Fund to ensure that those voluntary organisations do not lose out? Will she further ensure that we do not find that lottery money is finding its way into public projects that should properly be funded by the Executive itself? Ministers' new power will be to appoint a new Scottish committee to watch over the application of the Big Lottery Fund in Scotland. Will the minister make a commitment that appointments to the new Scottish committee will reflect Scottish society and be based on a person's ability rather  than on which political party's membership card they have in their back pocket?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve the funding of sports' national governing bodies. (S2O-5052)

Will the minister explain why, since 1999, a major national governing body such as the Scottish Rugby Union has experienced a real-terms reduction of some 25 per cent in the development grant aid that it receives from sportscotland, while equestrian sport has experienced a real-terms increase of some 71 per cent over the same timescale? Will she also explain why it is that when members ask written questions on the issue, she refuses to answer them and instead refers them to sportscotland, but when sportscotland has an announcement to make on a spending initiative, she is more than happy to make it?

As a member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I thank the clerks and the variety of organisations that provided oral and written evidence at stage 1. Like the majority of members, I welcome the decision to merge the two funding councils. Indeed, it reflects particularly well on the parliamentary process that the bill has been introduced as a result of recommendations in a previous committee report. I was impressed by the Executive's evidence that it had been able to develop from an early stage a close working relationship with the various stakeholders that had an interest in the proposed legislation. However, like many other committee  members, I was surprised to find that, despite such a close relationship, the Executive introduced a fatally flawed draft bill. Surely that raises questions about the nature and adequacy of the consultation that had been carried out. That said, the Executive took the right course of action in withdrawing the draft bill and publishing a more appropriate bill, instead of clogging up the parliamentary process by trying to amend such a flawed bill at stages 2 and 3. The bulk of the evidence that the committee received on the bill broadly supported its proposals. However, as my colleague Fiona Hyslop pointed out, people's central concerns focused on section 8. The NUS, the AUT and the University of Strathclyde students association all expressed concern that section 8 could open the door to variable top-up fees. Furthermore, the BMA was concerned about the impact of such an approach on access to medical courses and Fiona Hyslop and the NUS presented a number of different ways of addressing the matter. I welcome the fact that the minister has taken on board the BMA's concerns that a minority of students whose first degree is not in medicine might be put in a difficult situation because they will not be able to attract funding from the endowment grant scheme. I hope that the minister will make further suggestions on this matter at stage 2, as that will help us to consider the bill more fully. However, the Deputy First Minister's comments this morning suggest that ministers are intent on continuing with the existing proposals in section 8. If so, they should seriously consider amending the bill at stage 2. The minister has made it clear that the present Administration does not intend to use the powers that are set out in section 8 to vary top-up fees for courses other than medical courses. However, the wording of the section does not confine the use of the power exclusively to medical courses. Although I accept the Executive's intention at this stage, I see no reason why it does not wish to make that explicit in the bill. The minister well knows that he is not in a position to tie the hands of a future minister or Administration on this matter. As a result, it seems only reasonable that if the Executive intends to use the power to vary fees only for medical courses, it should clearly state as much in the bill. Given the level of concern that has been expressed, I hope that ministers will reconsider this matter. If they are not prepared to do so, many people in the higher and further education organisations will continue to view the bill with some suspicion.

Will the minister give way?

No one could not be moved by the scenes of devastation that were caused by the tsunami on boxing day. The waters may have receded, but the tragedy is mounting. Almost three weeks since the tsunami swept across the Indian ocean, more than 150,000 people are thought to have died and the death toll continues to rise. The UN estimates that some 500,000 people have been injured and that millions have been left homeless. Sadly, the local infrastructure of many of the areas and communities that have been affected by the disaster, which in many cases was very limited, has almost been destroyed. Many members of those communities were already living in poor conditions. As the international community strives to meet their basic needs, by providing them with safe, clean drinking water, for example, it is worth reflecting on the fact that many of them did not have safe, clean drinking water prior to the tsunami. It is clear that the tsunami was one of the worst natural disasters ever, not just because of the terrible toll in human life, but because of its unprecedented geographical scale and the  number of people who have been affected in numerous countries. The world's response to the disaster's horrors has been extraordinary. As well as offering its sympathy and prayers, the world community, including the people of Scotland, has dug into its pockets deeper than ever before to assist the aid campaign. The task now must be to ensure that that generosity counts in an enduring way. As the aid agencies move from the emergency phase of their campaign towards the rehabilitation phase, it is essential that the support and assistance that are being provided do not evaporate when the story drops out of the newspapers and the news headlines. I welcome the commitment that the First Minister made yesterday to ensuring that the Executive's support to the aid agencies will continue in the long term. The rehabilitation programme must be sustainable over many years to allow the many communities that have been affected to rebuild and develop their previously basic infrastructure. We should ensure that those areas that did not have clean, safe drinking water before the disaster have it in future. It is essential that the commitments by Governments throughout the world to provide varying amounts of aid translate into real action on the ground. It is right that the world is focusing on the disaster around the Indian ocean, but the international community must not lose sight of the other humanitarian crises that exist in the world today, especially in Africa. Last year, our headlines were dominated for a short period by the genocide that was being perpetrated in Darfur, which, sadly, it took the international community almost 18 months to wake up to. Recently, the plight of the people of Darfur has dropped out of the headlines, but the crisis continues. The UN's most recent humanitarian report highlights the fact that 1.5 million people have been affected by the conflict, 1.2 million of whom are internally displaced. In September last year, it was reported that some 1.2 million people required assistance in obtaining food and, by December, the figure had escalated to 2 million people. To meet the demands of its humanitarian campaign, the UN asked for $700 million. So far, it has received just over half that amount. The UN requires more than $150 million to deal with internally displaced people alone. So far, it has received $17 million from the international community. What are the consequences when the international community does not meet the needs of such a humanitarian crisis? Half a million displaced people in Darfur are not receiving the basic food supplies that they require. It has not been possible to provide mosquito nets, so children continue to die from malaria, which is a  preventable disease. Toilet facilities, cooking pots and basic fuel cannot be provided. Widespread malnutrition is being reported in many of the camps. Sadly, that humanitarian crisis is not in our headlines, but the international community must face up to it. We cannot respond only to natural disasters; Darfur is a man-made disaster. I sign up to and support the make poverty history campaign, but the real challenge is for the international community to deliver in making poverty history. I believe that we must be much more ambitious about tackling that challenge.

I refer members to my entry in the register of interests.  A group of emergency workers who are not included in the bill are mountain rescue teams. The Mountain Rescue Committee of Scotland is consulting teams across the country on whether they believe that they should be included in the bill. Can the minister confirm that, if the MRCS believes that the bill should cover mountain rescue team personnel, he would be sympathetic to amending the legislation by using the order-making provision in the bill?

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on securing time for the debate and I wish him well with his proposed bill on the issue. I point out to Mr Mundell that the majority of Scots favour making St Andrew's day a national public holiday. We in Scotland should use the national day to celebrate civic Scotland, our history, culture, arts and sports and a range of other parts of Scottish life. As Scots, we are proud of our heritage and society and we could use a national public holiday to embrace and celebrate modern Scotland and the Scottish way of life. We should not consider the issue in isolation. St Andrew's day provides an opportunity for our economy. We could build on the events that take place during the winter months by having a Scottish winter festival that extended from St Andrew's day right through to Burns night. The promotion of hogmanay in Edinburgh and other cities in Scotland has demonstrated the potential of turning what is in effect a one-night stand into a week-long national celebration. We need to think big about how to assist the tourism industry at a  time that is often the low season. Our identity and culture are key assets for our nation. St Andrew's day, hogmanay and Burns night are all significant days in the Scottish calendar and it is time to mobilise the benefit to the Scottish economy that could come from those days. St Andrew's day should be a day of national celebration and we can achieve that and exploit the potential only by having a national public holiday. As members have highlighted, we have a small number of public holidays in Scotland—one of the lowest in Europe. By providing an extra holiday at this time of year, we can aid shops in the build-up to Christmas. A holiday would assist staff who work in the retail sector and boost local industry. Scottish people believe that there should be a national holiday which, I believe, would have economic benefits for Scotland. St Andrew may have been a disciple who was steeped in Christianity, but he unites individuals of all faiths and those of none. He is a symbol of our Scottishness and the pride that we have for our nation. As Cardinal O'Brien said, he is a unifying figure. Let us stop looking for excuses not to have a national holiday on St Andrew's day and consider the enormous potential of such a holiday.

I apologise, because I might have to leave early due to a constituency engagement. However, I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on securing time to debate this important issue. Like other members, I have a received representations from a number of football clubs. The headline figure of £20,000 alone does not appear to be a lot of money, but the reality is that clubs in the SFL will lose money. Those are the smaller, community-based clubs in Scotland, many of which operate financially on the margins. To the SPL-member clubs, £20,000 might not be a lot of money, but to clubs such as East Stirlingshire FC, it is a considerable amount. George Craig, the managing director of Falkirk FC, put it to me that the situation has serious financial implications for his club, which is one of the largest in the SFL. It is important to emphasise the fact that the clubs that we are talking about are community based. They involve schools, local community networks and the local community in a wider sense. They play a valuable and important role in the community. I recognise that the Executive finds itself in a difficult position with respect to this matter. Technically, it is a dispute between two private organisations, so we might ask what the Executive's locus is in trying to resolve the issue. When clubs begin to get into financial difficulties, the first area that they start to cut is often their community services—the community aspect of developing local football players or local clubs. I suspect that, if there is not a suitable resolution to the matter, that is the very first area in which a number of clubs will consider cutting back their expenditure. The Executive has a role to play, because that community aspect is a key part of any strategy to try to encourage young people to get physically active, to get involved with their local football club and—I hope—to play for their nation at some point in the future. Therefore, I believe that the Executive has a locus in trying to ensure that the matter is addressed. I have real concerns about the way in which the pools companies have gone about things. I quote George Craig, managing director of Falkirk FC, who states in a letter to me: "The Pools Companies have unilaterally withdrawn payment as part of their campaign to introduce a different formula for calculating copyright fees that would significantly reduce their payments to football."  That action has been carried out by the pools companies as part of their campaign to force the hands of the poorer football clubs so that they agree to a financial settlement that does not, in fact, reflect the market value of what they are providing. It is a cynical approach, which I do not accept. I recognise that the pools companies have had financial difficulties with the introduction of the national lottery and that they have made significant financial contributions to the game of football over the years, but for them to act in such a unilateral fashion while recognising the serious implications that could be faced by smaller clubs is not acceptable. I hope that the Executive will be prepared to apply pressure to the pools companies to try to achieve some sort of compromise.

I congratulate Mr Purvis on securing time for the debate. Members will be aware that I lodged an amendment to Mr Purvis's motion and I am grateful to the 15 members who have now signed that amendment, compared with the seven members to date who supported the motion in Mr Purvis's name. Believe it or not, those who take an opposing view share some common ground with those who support the view that is expressed in Mr Purvis's motion. We all believe that someone who suffers from a terminal illness should be able to die with dignity. However, we differ in respect of how that should happen. Members should have little doubt that massive strides have been made in the capacity of palliative care to deal with many of the complicating factors that recur in terminal illnesses. I have witnessed that first hand in relatives who have suffered from terminal illness and also in my professional capacity when dealing with individuals who have suffered from such illnesses. In every case I can vouch that they have suffered very little, but have died with dignity. Therefore it is wrong to try to give individuals the impression that dying with dignity is in some way linked to their choice of how to die. Central to the argument in support of euthanasia is personal autonomy and self-determination. Diane Pretty took her case to the United Kingdom and European courts and stated that she should have the right to choose when she should die. She took her case as far as the European courts, which stated that the right to refuse treatment is far removed from the right to request assistance in dying. There is an important distinction to make in the debate: euthanasia is not about deciding whether to switch off the life-support machine; rather, it is about actively deciding whether a person should die. It is a form of assisted suicide when the person might be able to live considerably longer.  If the Executive were minded to go down the route of supporting assisted suicide or euthanasia, there would be a major cultural change in our society that would impact on professionals, nurses, doctors and on the individuals concerned. To date, the Royal College of Nursing and the British Medical Association remain opposed to the idea of assisted suicide. I refer to an e-mail that I received today from Mr Braine, a 64-year-old paraplegic in Aberdeen. He states: "It is vital that people should not think of doctors, nurses, and hospitals with fear as if" their going there at a certain stage in their lives might mean that their lives might be put to an end by others. Doctors and nurses should not have any pressure put on them to make such decisions, nor should they put pressure on patients to decide whether they should end their lives. It is important that the Executive be clear that euthanasia does not have a place in our society today, and it is important that it make that message clear at the end of this afternoon's debate.

You are a hypocrite, Mr Wallace.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to promote Scottish art. (S2O-3553)

I welcome the minister to her new portfolio, although I am not too sure how much use she will be able to make of the free kilt jacket that I believe comes with the post. I bring to the minister's attention a problem that has been encountered by some artists in Scotland who work and sell their art from home having converted a garage or spare room in their property. Some local authorities are enforcing the full rigours of the commercial planning regulations on those artists' properties, forcing them to provide extra parking and toilets for the public to use. Does the minister agree that enforcing the regulations in that fashion will undermine the commercial viability of such enterprises, many of which are in rural areas where there is already a problem of depopulation? Will the Executive do something to address the problem that I have highlighted?

I have been on justice committees for five years and, of all the legislation that has come through, this bill is probably the smallest that I have had to deal with. That said, the drafting of the stage 1 report for this bill has probably been the most difficult. That was not because of the complexity of the bill, because the bill is relatively straightforward and simple. However, the consequences of the bill made it difficult to deal with, as did the failure of the Executive to prepare the arguments explaining why the legislation is necessary. Some members have already mentioned that issue, and I will return to it. Although we are talking about the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill, it is important that the message that the Parliament sends out is that, regardless of whether someone is an emergency worker or a worker who is responding to emergency circumstances, they have a right to go about their daily work without hindrance or abuse—physical or verbal—and such hindrance or abuse will be not be tolerated. It is important that we do not focus simply on emergency workers. When I first considered the bill, my view was that we should think about a bill that was about the protection of all workers rather than just emergency workers. I have a lot of sympathy with some of the issues that Tommy Sheridan raised, but it is important that we do not start to distinguish between someone who is employed by the public sector and someone who is providing a public service. Although someone who works for  FirstBus is working for a private company, they are providing a public service. We must not go down the route of making such a distinction.

I take on board what Tommy Sheridan says, but I reiterate that it is important that we do not send out the message that we are talking only about workers who are employed by the public sector. When I considered the evidence that had been submitted to the committee, I began to support the need to address the situation of emergency workers in particular because, if they are hindered or obstructed in carrying out their work, that could have an impact on other individuals. Although most of the written evidence that the committee received was generally supportive of the bill, as Pauline McNeill mentioned, most of the oral evidence that we took was about a virtual bill—witnesses spoke about the bill that they would like to be drafted instead of focusing their comments on what was in the bill under consideration. We had to go over many matters repeatedly to tease out the issues that some of the witnesses had not been able to address in their evidence to the committee. As members have already highlighted, the bill contains a number of limitations which, as paragraphs 21 to 25 of the committee's report show, the unions have serious concerns about. The STUC would like the bill to go as far as to widen its definition to cover workers in general. There might be a need to provide greater protection to all workers at a future date and, if necessary, that should be given serious consideration. Some members have picked up on the lack of detail that the Executive and the minister have provided. I have serious concerns about the quality of the bill's policy memorandum. For example, paragraph 5 states: "This Bill provides specific protection for emergency workers similar to that provided for police officers in the Police (Scotland) Act 1967." That is factually incorrect—the bill does not do that. It provides protection only to emergency workers who are responding to emergency circumstances. The Police (Scotland) Act 1967 provides protection to police officers when they are on duty, regardless of whether they are responding to emergency circumstances. It is important that such issues are highlighted and  addressed, because people set their expectations on the basis of the arguments that the Executive puts forward. The Executive suggests that one of the key reasons for introducing the bill is so that it will act as a deterrent. I think that it will act as a deterrent to some degree, but the Executive presents no evidence to support the claim that that is what will happen. We have a huge amount of legislation on a range of issues relating to criminal behaviour. One could say that if we were to keep legislating, we would do away with criminality, but the reality is that legislation by itself will not do that. That is why it is important that the Executive regards the bill as only one element of a programme that will be rolled out to deal with violence against workers and sends out a much wider message. Paragraph 7 of the policy memorandum says: "Over the summer of 2003 the Minister for Finance and Public Services held an extensive series of consultations with trade unions and professional bodies" and so on. We then get only two paragraphs detailing exactly what came from that consultation exercise. In the policy memorandum for the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill, which was published this week, more than three pages are devoted to what came out in the consultation exercise. It is important for the Minister for Finance and Public Services to take on board the deficiencies that the committee's report highlights in how the Executive has handled the bill. I would go so far as to say that the way in which the Executive has presented the bill is disrespectful not only to members of the Justice 1 Committee but to the parliamentary process. If he is serious about legislation, the minister should at the very least marshal the proper arguments to justify the policy objectives in the bill. I hope that the minister will take those points on board and will deal with the civil servants who might be responsible for issues relating to the policy memorandum, because it is simply unacceptable to receive information in that fashion. It is precisely because of that lack of information that the legislation has been delayed so long in the committee. I hope that the minister will go further and will rectify a number of the areas that the committee has highlighted as needing to be addressed at stage 2. The Justice 1 Committee's stage 1 report is far from a ringing endorsement of the legislation. A lot of work needs to be done, which the minister should have done at an earlier stage, but I hope that members will give the bill a fair wind at this point and support its general principles.

I thank the minister for his kind remarks. He can be assured of my support on issues that the Executive are getting correct but, as I am sure he would expect, where I consider that the Executive is failing to come up to the mark, he will be challenged by Scottish National Party members. Over the summer, we have witnessed two major sporting events in Europe: the European football championships in Portugal and the Olympic games in Athens. Although our Scottish national team failed in its quest to join the rest of the footballing elite at the European football championships, our sportsmen and sportswomen have been successful in the Olympic games. The minister referred to some of them. They include Chris Hoy and Shirley Robertson, who brought back gold medals, and Katherine Grainger and Campbell Walsh, who brought back silver medals. In the past 24 hours, two Scots participating in the paralympics, Jim Anderson and Andrew Lindsay, have taken gold. In fact, that is Jim Anderson's second gold in the paralympics. Those are Scottish Olympians of whom we can be truly proud. However, when we consider the media coverage of sport in Scotland, we could be forgiven for thinking that successes in sport in Scotland are few and far between. The reality is that we are relatively successful in some fields. In the past year and a half, Scottish sportsmen and sportswomen have secured about 189 different titles in international competitions in orienteering, cycling, golf, boxing and a range of other sports. It came as something of a surprise to me, however, to find out that we have taken 24 medals in the tug-of-war world championships. However, many of the titles that Scottish sportsmen and sportswomen hold are in sports that are considered specialist and elite or that some would describe as minority sports and which often receive little direct financial support or publicity.

I wish the London Olympics bid every success, but as I am sure Rhona Brankin is aware, there is genuine concern about the bid's potential impact on sports funding in Scotland. I want to ensure that that issue is addressed, but I look forward to the possibility of the Olympics taking place in London and to a Scottish team being represented there.  We have sportspersons who compete successfully at an international level and, as the minister highlighted, it is important that we build on that success to ensure that we continue to have success in the international field. That is exactly what the Government in London has chosen to do on the back of the success at the Athens Olympics. Only last week, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport in Whitehall launched what it describes as "a new multi-million pound Government initiative ... to nurture a new generation of sporting talent." The initiative is called the talented athlete scholarship scheme—TASS—and it exists to support young athletes who are going through higher and further education to allow them to continue with their education while pursuing their sporting careers. To help the programme on its way, the Exchequer has decided to invest some £6 million in the programme over two years. As one sports coach asked me the other day, what is happening up here? Why is our Government in Scotland not demonstrating the same level of ambition as its colleagues in London? What exactly does the Executive intend to do to build on the success that we have already achieved? Can we expect the Exchequer to be as generous north of the border as it has chosen to be south of the border, to help our talented athletes to build on the success that we have created? Any sport strategy must also be about supporting sport at community level. That is to do with health, well-being and promoting sport that is fun. In its motion, the Executive has chosen to highlight activities in schools—the active schools programme—and give itself a pat on the back for what it has achieved so far. That progress should be welcomed, but as even the minister has accepted, there is still a long way to go. The minister will also be aware that the active schools programme is only one strand of the proposals that the physical activities task force made a couple of years ago. The other three strands were active homes, active workplaces and active communities, and I believe that the primary reason why the Executive has chosen to focus on active schools is that little, if any, progress has been made on the other three strands that were recommended in the task force's report. If the minister and the Scottish Government are to be taken seriously on tackling physical inactivity in Scotland, they must raise their game and ensure that they address the issue comprehensively, because we live in inactive times, in which people would rather drive than walk and rather spectate than participate in sport. Even some of my MSP colleagues would rather get a taxi from Waverley station to the new  Parliament than take the 10-minute walk, which would do them the world of good.

I will have to take Christine May's word for it. I ask members to consider the consequences of inactivity in Scotland: one male in four and one female in five are clinically obese, and on average, 42 people a week die from heart disease, which is a direct result of inactivity. Forty-two people will die this week, next week and the week after until we do something to stop the trend. Sport in itself will not address all the health problems of our society. It must be part of a balanced programme, in which sport is a key component but which also addresses issues such as diet, nutrition, poverty and education. When we get that balance right, we will start to make a real difference in the lives of people in Scotland. Over the past few months, the Executive has announced its intention to invest in sports facilities and the sports infrastructure in Scotland, and the minister stated that intention again today. That investment should, on the face of it, be welcomed, but as with any other Executive announcement about investment, it must be put in context. Over the past couple of years, the Scottish Executive has commissioned sportscotland to carry out an audit of a range of sports facilities in Scotland. The first audit was on swimming pools, and sportscotland published a report called "The Ticking Time Bomb: The Maintenance, Upgrading and Refurbishment of Scotland's Public Pools" some time ago. That report highlighted the need for some £200 million to be invested in swimming pools alone in Scotland to bring them up to the necessary standard. The second report, which is on indoor sports facilities in Scotland, has already been completed and passed to ministers, but for some reason, the Executive has chosen not to publish it to date. I suspect that that is because the report shows that a considerable amount of investment is needed in our indoor sports facilities. It has been suggested to me that, to bring our indoor sports facilities up to the required standard, billions of pounds will require to be invested. Given that our Executive is committed to providing sports facilities for all—for those of a variety of talents and abilities—perhaps the minister will explain to us what it intends to do to address the concerns that have been highlighted in the sportscotland audits.

It is interesting that the minister highlighted the need to ensure that local sports organisations are able to access local sports facilities. The experience in Falkirk is that local sports organisations cannot afford to use the good sports facilities that have been provided in the PFI schools because of the cost. Swimming pools are lying empty because the local people cannot afford to use the facility, and that is the type of problem that the Executive must address if it is serious about ensuring that people can access such sports facilities. Falkirk Council has taken the matter a step further and has chosen not to use PFI for its new schools but to go down the route of community ownership, because schools are a key part of communities. That will allow the local community not only to use but to run the local sports facility for the community's benefit. Given that the Executive is keen on democratic accountability and that we had a lecture on freedom of information yesterday evening from Tavish Scott in the debate on the Fraser inquiry, perhaps the Executive will tell us whether it intends to publish the audit report on indoor sports facilities that sportscotland has completed so that we can see exactly what level of investment in the infrastructure is required. Last week, I raised with the minister the issue of an important sports facility that we have in Scotland: the facility for indoor rock-climbing at Ratho quarry, which is probably the best in Europe, if not the world. Sadly, that world-class sports facility is in serious financial jeopardy and could be lost if the Executive does not act to ensure that it is protected. I hope that the minister will take on board the need to address that. The Executive tells us in its motion that it is ambitious about bringing major sporting events to Scotland. I hope that it can live up to that ambition. Rather than telling us that it is ambitious, how about starting to show it by joining us in supporting a solo Scottish bid to hold the 2012 European football championship? On average, sport brings £1.25 billion into the Scottish economy every year. Securing such a major championship would have tremendous spin-offs for the Scottish economy overall. If the Executive is really committed to being ambitious for sport in Scotland, it must start to raise its game. I move amendment S2M-1733.1, to leave out from "the significant" to end and insert:  "the important contribution of sport in schools, homes, workplaces and communities across Scotland; celebrates the continuing success of Scotland's sportsmen and women, particularly the medallists at the recent Olympics and those competing for medals at the Paralympics currently under way in Athens, of Andrew Murray at the US Open and most recently of Colin Montgomerie as part of the successful European team in the Ryder Cup, and acknowledges the economic importance of sport to the Scottish economy and calls on the Scottish Executive to demonstrate its ambition to hold major sporting events here in Scotland by supporting the call for a solo Scottish bid for the European Football Championships in 2012."

Does the minister agree that it is important not only to increase the level of physical education in our schools but to ensure that the physical education programme is varied? On that note, is he aware that 350 young people from 30 different countries gathered at the Adventure Centre at Ratho last weekend to participate in the world rock-climbing championships? Does he agree that education authorities across the central belt could utilise the Ratho centre to provide a varied PE programme? Given the Ratho centre's financial difficulties, what action will he take to ensure that education authorities use that world-class facility?

It is very good.

In the light of the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2004, which will see some 20 per cent of High Court work moved down  to the sheriff court system, and given that McInnes has recommended that district court work should be moved up to the summary sheriff courts, there is a danger that our summary sheriff courts may not be able to cope with the demands that are being placed upon them. Can the minister therefore give an assurance that before any of the proposed changes in McInnes are made there will be a detailed assessment of their impact on the summary sheriff court system in Scotland?

Our justice system exists to serve the interests of the people of Scotland and reforms that ensure that it is more responsive to the needs and views of the people of Scotland will be supported by Scottish National Party members. The Executive's two new proposals—the proposal to introduce a bill at an early date to protect children from internet grooming by those who would seek to abuse and exploit children and the proposal to increase the penalties for those who would send a young girl out of Scotland to undergo female genital mutilation—are worthy and will be supported by the SNP. I hope that they will attract cross-party support within Parliament. The SNP has long supported the need to review family law in Scotland to ensure that we have a legal framework that reflects the diverse and changing society in which we live today. Equally, on the proposal for licensing law, the existing laws neither reflect contemporary attitudes towards alcohol nor tackle effectively irresponsible or criminal behaviour that is linked to alcohol misuse. Therefore, the Scottish National Party believes that there is a need to introduce new legislation in both those areas and it looks forward to the publication of the bills.  However, in listening to the minister's speech this morning and in reflecting on the First Minister's statement to the chamber yesterday, one might be left with the impression that the Executive's stewardship of our justice system had been a good one. The reality would tell us another story. Let me remind members of the Labour-Lib Dem Executive's record in some areas of our justice system. The Executive stated that it was committed to tackling the problem of overcrowded prisons and that it would seek to reduce the prison population. Instead, five years on, we have record numbers of prisoners within our prison system.

Let me continue. The Executive's commitment to deal with the number of female prisoners in Scotland was made back in 1999 by Henry McLeish—remember him?—who stated that a key priority for a new Labour Government would be to reduce the female prison population in Scotland. Five years on, we have record numbers of females in Scottish prisons.

Rather than make another speech, the minister should recognise that she had the chance to deal with the issue the first time round. I wish to point out that the Labour-Lib Dem Executive has been responsible for the Scottish justice system for some five years, and her colleague two seats away—Mr Jim Wallace—was responsible for it for four years. The Executive has failed to deal with overcrowded prisons and Scotland's prisons continue to be overcrowded. Earlier this year, we witnessed the Executive's continuing obsession with privatising public services when we had the fiasco over the Reliance contract—a contract that, at one point, appeared to be more like a prisoner early-release programme than a prison escort service. One of the most recent examples of the contract fiasco was when young offenders went from Polmont young offenders institution in Falkirk, in Reliance vans, to Barlinnie prison in Glasgow. They were then transferred into a Reliance van and taken  back to Falkirk sheriff court to have their trial, and then taken back to Barlinnie in a Scottish Prison Service van. They were then transferred into a Reliance van and taken back to Polmont young offenders institution. That is an example of the sheer shambles of the contract and it provides further proof that privatising public services for private profit is a recipe for disaster. Finally, there is the proposal that ministers do not appear to like to mention by name: the single correctional agency—an issue yet again dodged by the First Minister in his statement yesterday. It is a proposal that, notionally, is meant to be about reducing reoffending—I say "notionally" because there is no clear authoritative evidence to suggest that such a major structural reform would effectively reduce reoffending. It is the responsibility of any reasonable Government to demonstrate that its policy proposals can deliver on its objectives. When it comes to the single correctional agency, the Executive has failed to deliver and it is because of that failure that, if the Executive continues to press ahead with the proposal for a single correctional agency, it will be opposed by the SNP. The Executive could have and should have done more for our justice system. To help the Executive on its way, let me give it three policy areas that I believe it should pursue over the coming term. First, there is a need in the justice system to have a system of family courts, combining civil and criminal matters, allowing issues to be dealt with in a more coherent and holistic fashion. Such a system has proven to be very successful in many other jurisdictions. Secondly, the Executive could introduce a system of unit fines, to provide greater recognition of an individual's ability to pay a fine in the first place, ensuring greater equity in the system and addressing the issue of fine defaulters. Thirdly, the Executive should consider rolling out a programme of periodic detention systems in Scotland. Such systems, which have been successful in other European countries, allow offenders to serve their sentence but maintain employment and family contact, which are two key issues that must be addressed if we are to prevent reoffending. I hope that the Executive will take on board my three proposals with the good intention with which they are made. As many members have said, the new Parliament building gives us a chance to make a fresh start and to meet head on the challenges that face Scotland. The First Minister told MSPs that it is time for us to raise our game, but it is a pity that he does not recognise that it is also time that the Executive raised its game.

To ask the Scottish Executive what training has been provided to staff employed by Reliance Custodial Services. (S2O-2721)

The minister will be aware that the Scottish Prison Service continues to provide training and support to staff within Reliance Custodial Services. Has the SPS fully accounted for the costs to the public purse of providing that training and support? If it has not done so, why not? Does she believe that any costs that are incurred by public agencies in supporting and training Reliance Custodial Services staff should be met by Reliance rather than by the public purse?

Like most members who have spoken this afternoon, I welcome the debate. It has been relatively positive, as there is little in the way of party politics on the issues, although there are some personal differences of opinion that should be fully respected. When Scott Barrie talked about students of social policy, I remembered when I was a student of social policy being taught about the various family structures. The history of families shows us that their structures have continually evolved. Over the past 20 to 30 years, that evolution has moved on considerably; therefore, it is important that our family law system recognises the changes that have taken place in family structures in today's society. In particular, it is important to ensure that we protect the interests of children in many family situations. Nicola Sturgeon was correct to point out that couples will choose to have the type of relationship that best suits their needs. It would be wrong for us to ignore that when we legislate on family law in Scotland. However, I respect fully the concerns that have been expressed about the effect that the proposed changes may have on the standing of marriage in society. I believe that marriage is the best environment in which to bring up children and that it should have a special standing in our society. Having said that, I am not convinced that the proposed changes will necessarily undermine the institution of marriage in the way in which some suggest. I suspect that 10 years after the family law reform has occurred we will find that the statistics show that the trend in the number of people getting married is largely the same as it is today. I do not believe that many people get married purely to obtain the legal benefits associated with it. There are some issues that members have raised this afternoon that must be addressed. I refer especially to the proposal to speed up the process of divorce for couples. Some members have expressed concern that that could lead to an increase in the number of couples who choose to get divorced. In reality, couples whose relationships have broken down to the point that  they are seeking a divorce do not worry about whether they will be able to divorce in a year, two years, four years or five years—they have decided to get divorced because their relationship cannot be continued. It is only proper that that is recognised and that the process is reviewed. Hopefully, speeding up the divorce process will address some of the concerns about child care matters that can arise when couples divorce. I hope that the Executive will consider being more positive in supporting marriage. In a number of American states, there are courses to assist couples to prepare for marriage, provided by a range of agencies to which couples are referred. In states in which such programmes have been implemented, the couples who participate in them have broadly welcomed them. Such couples are less likely to divorce at a later stage. Another unintended benefit of the programmes is that they identify people who are involved in abusive relationships and enable them to be counselled out of getting married for the time being. I hope that the Executive will consider providing support to programmes to assist couples who are getting married as well as married couples who may be experiencing difficulties and who need assistance to work through their problems. That would help to address some of the concerns that exist about the proposal to speed up timescales for divorce. Although members have referred to a range of legal provisions that might be made by a new piece of family law legislation, the key aspect of all provisions must be protection of the interests of children in relationships. We must ensure that we anchor at the heart of our family law the best interests of children. If we can do that, we will have made progress towards providing new, updated family law in Scotland.

Whether members support or oppose the general proposals within the Civil Partnership Bill, the fact is that by using the Sewel convention the Scottish Executive is denying members of Parliament an opportunity to consider the matter in detail. I am a member of the Justice 1 Committee. We had, in effect, one oral evidence session on the bill and very limited written evidence was submitted to us. Our ability to consider the provisions in this complex bill was severely curtailed because of the limited time that was available to us. When we were drafting the committee's report, I found that I had more questions than answers because time had been so limited. Ministers have said that they will bring the matter back to Parliament if the bill is substantially changed. That begs the question: what if it is not substantially changed? Given the bill's defects, it needs to be substantially changed—a number of areas must be addressed. However, if the minister brings it back to Parliament, what would that be for? What could we do? The bill is being dealt with at Westminster—primarily by the House of Lords. There is no point in the minister kidding on that he will bring the matter back to the Scottish Parliament and that we will start to address the issues: we have no power on the matter, so to all intents and purposes it is futile for the minister to say that he will bring the matter back to the Scottish Parliament later. Now that ministers have stated that they will bring the matter back if the bill is substantially changed at Westminster, can we accept that the new convention on dealing with all Sewel motions will be that if the bills are substantially changed later at Westminster, they will be brought back? Is that now the agreed convention throughout the Scottish Executive? That has not been the case until recent times—in the past the Executive has forced bills through and ignored what has been changed at Westminster. Margaret Smith highlighted the fact that although we have a full committee report on the matter, there is no clear mechanism for that to be fed into the Westminster system for consideration. If the Executive was serious about the issue, it would ensure that there was in place a proper procedure for that. Perhaps the Minister for Parliamentary Business will turn her attention to that.  It is simply not true to say that we must support the Sewel motion because if we do not support it we will delay consideration of the bill at Westminster and thereby delay addressing a matter that has needed to be addressed for a long time. The Sewel convention is nothing more than a simple convention. Westminster remains sovereign in legislating on the matter and can continue to proceed with the issue if it chooses to do so, whether or not the Scottish Parliament agrees to the motion. Members should not kid themselves that we have any more power than we actually have. We should not agree to the Sewel motion because we should have the right to consider the proposals and the issues in detail, rather than pass them off to Westminster.

I thank the Justice 2 Committee for its detailed and  considered report on the bill. Like other members who have spoken, I welcome the bill's general principles. As Margaret Smith said, the bill has been a long time in the making. The first paper to propose it was published in 1990 and the bill largely implements the recommendations in the report that the Scottish Law Commission published on 25 March 1998. Therefore, the bill has been some 14 years in gestation. I am sure that many tenement owners will welcome the bill's passage through Parliament now. As the minister said, this is the third and final bill to deal with property law reform. The other such pieces of legislation were the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 and the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. I had the pleasure of being a member of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and of the Justice 1 Committee when they considered that equally interesting legislation and I am delighted that my colleagues on the Justice 2 Committee are enjoying considering the Tenements (Scotland) Bill as much as we enjoyed considering those acts. My colleagues on the Justice 1 Committee and I were somewhat disappointed when the bill was passed to the Justice 2 Committee, which prevented us from participating in its consideration. The bill is largely technical but, as the minister said, it could have a considerable impact, because Scotland has 800,000 tenement flats. As most members said, the bill has two main objectives: to clarify and restate the common law and to provide a default mechanism for a statutory tenement management system. Those two objectives will combine to provide greater clarity and certainty for tenement owners in dealing with repairs and to provide a default position should problems occur. Sarah Boyack made the important point that the test of the bill will be whether it addresses many of the problems that tenement property owners experience. That has yet to be proved, but I hope that the bill will provide the redress that many people want for their present problems. Pauline McNeill expressed the important point that we should not consider law to be the only way to reform. There is good cause for examining how the system of factors and factoring operates. A good factor who deals with issues proactively can make a considerable difference. As Sarah Boyack said, the bill is technical, but it has a human face in the form of the people who suffer chronic problems because repairs have not been undertaken on their properties as a result of the failure to have proper legal provisions in place. If the Executive addresses at stage 2 or stage 3 the recommendations in the Justice 2 Committee's  report, the bill will deliver what it is meant to deliver.

Hear, hear.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to improve the system for the payment of fines. (S2O-2390)

Is the minister aware that, on average, every year during the past 10 years  some 7,000 people have had proceedings taken against them in Scottish courts because they failed to buy a television licence? Many of the people who are fined in those circumstances default on the fine and find themselves back in court, where they receive a custodial sentence or a community disposal. That process uses up valuable court resources. Does she agree that the time has come to end the criminalisation of individuals who do not have a TV licence and that the matter would be better dealt with through civil proceedings similar to those for council tax arrears? If so, will she make representations to her colleagues at Westminster and ask them to amend the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1949?

We have had a number of debates on youth justice in recent years, in the Hub and in the chamber. In the course of those debates, several members have raised concerns about how the children's hearings system operates. In one of those debates, two years ago, I asked ministers to review the children's hearings system. Therefore, I welcome the current review, despite the fact that it should have occurred at an earlier stage. Over the years, many of those who have been keen to defend how our children's hearings system operates—including ministers at various points—have said that other countries look on our system with considerable envy. However, it is worth keeping it in mind that no other country has chosen to copy our system, largely because of a lack of detailed evaluation of the system, as the minister mentioned. A system that was designed in 1971 is not necessarily fit for purpose in 2004. The review provides us with an excellent opportunity to modernise and equip our hearings system with the means and the tools necessary to make it more effective in the role that it must discharge in today's society. I wish to address some of the general perceptions of the children's hearings system—that it is an easy option, that panel members are in some way do-gooders and, if one believes the media, that many of the cases that are referred to the panel are never dealt with in the first place. First, the ethos of the hearings system is correct. It is child centred and it takes a holistic approach to dealing with the problems that a child might present before a panel. It is not an easy option; it is about taking an effective approach to dealing with a child's needs. A child who presents before a panel with a particular issue might be exhibiting behaviour that is symptomatic of a deeper, underlying problem. The model used by our hearings system aims to treat more than the symptoms displayed by a child. There are those who question the effectiveness of the children's hearings system. By and large, it is effective, and one of its key strengths is that it  draws its members from the local communities that it serves. Our hearings system is almost entirely dependent on the good will of its panel members who are all volunteers. Without their time and commitment, the hearings system would simply not operate. When I have met panel members, I have been concerned to hear that they feel undervalued in their role. Panel members are not do-gooders; they are concerned citizens who deserve our support and recognition for the role that they play in our communities. Undermining the panel system and its members serves no one's interests. If one believes the press reports that cases referred to children's panels are often discharged without any problems being addressed, one would think that the system was not operating. It is important to keep it in mind that the panels are only one part of the children's hearings system. Cases will be heard by the panel only if the reporter chooses to pass the case to the panel in the first place. Therefore, when the press reports that two thirds of cases dealt with by the hearings system are not discharged, not only are those reports inaccurate, they demonstrate a lack of understanding of how the hearings system operates. I hope that one of the functions of the review will be to heighten general awareness of the role and function of the hearings system. Equally, although we might believe that the role of the hearings system is effective, it has been highlighted in a number of reports, including one published by NCH Scotland—"Where's Kilbrandon now?"—that there is a need for systematic evaluation of the effectiveness of the system in relation to its outcomes. That type of research is not only important to demonstrate the effectiveness—or lack of it—of the system, but to inform panel members of the effectiveness or otherwise of their role and to ensure that we continue to improve the system in future, rather than having to revert to another major review 20 years down the line. However, the effectiveness of the hearings system is not purely down to the panel. Members have highlighted the need to ensure that the support services that work with the panel system must be adequately resourced. It would be wrong for the review to consider the panel in isolation from those other services. It is essential that we look at social work in this area because it has a key role to play in ensuring that the orders issued by the hearings system are implemented. Therefore, the provision of support services must be adequately considered in the course of the review. Our hearings system will be most effective when it works in partnership with other agencies. That effective partnership is dependent on the  adequate planning and resourcing of those services. It comes down to the simple question: what is the point of a panel issuing an order on a child when social work does not have the staff or resources to ensure that the order is adequately implemented? I hope that one of the conclusions to come from the review will be that we should extend the powers of the hearings system. In particular, it should be able to address parents' issues. From personal experience of sitting through panel hearings and from talking to panel members, I know that they are frustrated by their lack of power to address issues that the parents of a child might require to be addressed. If the most effective way of dealing with a child's problems is to address some of its parents' issues, that option should be made available to the panel. Whether that involves sending parents to parenting classes or dealing with an alcohol, drugs or financial problem, the panel should have the powers to allow it to address such problems. I have raised the matter previously in the Parliament and I am conscious that some members believe that, if we move down that route, we will move away from the child-centred approach that the panel presently takes. However, if we extend the powers of the panel to address some of those issues, we would preserve its ethos and allow panel members more opportunity and scope to address the child's problems more effectively. In drawing my remarks to a close, I wish to raise two final points. First, local authorities are key stakeholders in ensuring that the panel system and the children's hearings system overall works effectively. I was concerned to learn only yesterday that, to date, few if any of the local authorities have organised consultation programmes in their own communities. I am aware that the Executive has its own roadshow, which is consulting in various communities, but it is essential that local authorities take on that role and that they do not do what they have been doing in some areas—leave it to the panel members themselves to carry out that consultation exercise. Finally, I turn to remuneration for panel members, and particularly for panel chairs. I do not believe that panel members wish to be paid, or should be paid, for the role that they carry out, but I do believe that they should receive a reasonable amount of money to assist them in carrying out their duties. I hope that consideration will be given to how we can improve the system of remuneration for panel members and, in particular, for chairs of panels, who have a considerable number of duties to carry out, most of which they do in their own time and through their own good will. My understanding is that a panel chair legally has to provide a rota to the local social work department on only a monthly basis, but panel  chairs often carry out many other duties that are not recognised in the present system. I hope that that will be addressed by the Executive to ensure that panel members receive a form of remuneration that recognises the role that they play and the time and energy that they spend in doing so, while also recognising the fact that they are volunteers. We have the opportunity to ensure that we have a children's hearings system that is fit for the 21 st century. I believe that, if we get it right this time, we will have the opportunity to build on the good aspects of the system to ensure that it serves children in Scotland in future.

The minister stated that Reliance seriously underestimated the challenge of delivering its  service. Given that a number of public agencies are now having to assist Reliance in delivering its service, will the minister confirm whether Reliance will be held financially accountable for the additional resources that the public agencies are having to deploy? Will she also confirm whether the SPS has had to sanction overtime payments for prison officer staff in prisons such as Barlinnie because of the delay in the transfer of prisoners from prisons to courts and from courts back to prisons? If the SPS is having to sanction such overtime payments, will the minister ensure that Reliance is held financially accountable for that and pays up for the public purse?

Reform of our summary justice system is essential to ensure that we have a system that is fair to the victims and the accused; effective in deterring, punishing and helping to rehabilitate; and efficient in its use of time and resources. The report makes a significant contribution to ensuring that we have such a system. On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I express my thanks to Sheriff Principal McInnes and those who served on his committee for a wide-ranging and thorough report. There are many detailed proposals in the report, many of which I am sure will be debated during the consultation exercise and any legislation that flows from that, but I want to pick up on two of the major and controversial recommendations in the report. I will focus on the proposal to remove district courts from the control of local authorities and the proposal to move to an entirely professional judiciary. The report illustrates the varying standards between different local authority areas on the level of support that they give to their district courts, from the level of management and support to the very fabric of the building in which the district court sits. I recognise the concerns that have been expressed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which are contained in the report, that removing district courts from local authority control will result in loss of local control over the process. However, local authority administration of courts is an unnecessary distraction for local authorities, which they could do without. The unification of the summary criminal court system, administered by the Scottish Court Service, will take the courts out of the local authority budget and provide clearer lines of accountability. I therefore welcome the report's proposal in that regard. However, I have serious reservations about the proposal for the introduction of summary sheriffs to replace lay justices. In principle, I believe that lay justices continue to have a role to play in our  summary criminal justice system. Lay justices play an important role. Lay justice is a powerful expression of community involvement in our justice system. Several key arguments in favour of retaining the role of lay justices were submitted to the committee in its consideration of that matter. Those arguments were: the importance of the community link and the community awareness that justices of the peace bring to the process; the fact that lay members of the bench provide a worthwhile role in the community that they serve; the capacity of non-professionals to reach a balanced judgment on their peers; and the fact that lay justices are volunteers, who are less vulnerable to becoming case-hardened. All those arguments are valid, but if we are to retain lay justices in the present system, changes will have to be made. I will return to that point later. Given the severity of the problems that have been identified in our summary justice system, it is questionable whether abolishing the role of lay justices would address those problems effectively. Sheriff Principal McInnes's committee gathered evidence on 13 major problems in the system, ranging from the time that is taken for the police to report cases to the procurator fiscal to the time that is taken for cases to be started in court to the time that is taken for cases to reach a conclusion in court. The evidence demonstrates clearly that the system is struggling to cope with the demands that are placed upon it. The information in the report and the evidence that the committee gathered do not suggest that there is a groundswell of public opinion in favour of getting rid of lay justices. On the contrary, the committee's evidence demonstrates that people are not dissatisfied with the current role of judges in the summary process. The committee's survey of public opinion, to which Annabel Goldie referred, found that some 60 per cent of respondents believed that lay justices should continue to have a role; only 26 per cent of respondents preferred a wholly professional system. If lay justices are to continue to play their role in the justice system, there is a clear need to change the present way in which the system operates. As the report highlighted, we must provide greater consistency of support and management to justices in performing their role; ensure that the recruitment process is more inclusive, so that it more accurately reflects the make-up of modern society; and provide more detailed training and support to justices of the peace. At the same time, we need to examine the fabric of the estate within which the system operates. If those issues were addressed adequately, I believe that lay involvement in our justice system could continue. In considering the report, members should keep  in mind the changes that will take place in our High Court system as a result of the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, which will result in some 20 per cent of High Court cases being pushed down into the sheriff courts. When that change is combined with the introduction of the work that will come up from the district courts, there is a danger that excessive pressures will be placed on our sheriff courts and that they will not be able to cope with the demands. Fine enforcement and collection are highlighted in the report. I welcome the recommendation that a single organisation, rather than individual courts, should be responsible for the collection of fines. In particular, I welcome the recommendation that greater consideration must be given to the possibility of introducing a unit fine system. I have suggested several times in the chamber that such a system would operate more fairly and more equitably. Given that the recommendation has now come from an independent committee rather than just from me, I suggest that a unit fine system would be a smart approach to tackling the present system's problems. Although the report that the Scottish Executive commissioned has been some two years in the making, we are still none the wiser about what the Executive's views are or what changes it would like to see. We need reports that detail the problems and provide us with possible solutions, but we also need leadership in driving forward reforms. Such leadership has been lacking from the Executive. Whatever the Executive eventually gets round to doing to address the problems, its reforms must impart confidence to everyone: victims, witnesses, accused persons, court users and, above all, the communities that the system serves. I move amendment S2M-1090.1, to leave out from "considers" to end and insert: "supports the need to have a fair, effective and efficient summary criminal justice system; welcomes the recent report by Sheriff Principal McInnes; acknowledges the note of dissent within the report, and believes that future changes to the summary justice system must impart confidence to everyone: victims, witnesses, accused persons, court users and, above all, the communities they serve."

indicated disagreement.

The Justice (Northern Ireland) Bill was originally intended to give the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland the power to make orders for the compulsory transfer of prisoners to prisons in  England and Wales in order to maintain security and good order in the prisons in Northern Ireland. Only at a late stage in the consideration of the bill did the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland seek to extend its provisions to include the transfer of prisoners to prisons in Scotland. Ministers have stated that the new compulsory transfer powers are required to assist in the maintaining of good order in Northern Ireland's prison estate and to assist with the peace process. If the Parliament can play a role in assisting the peace process, we should consider that in open debate rather than railroad it through in the form of a Sewel motion. I will deal with some of the issues that were highlighted in the Justice 1 Committee's report. Clause 12 of the Justice (Northern Ireland) Bill provides for the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland to make an order for the transfer of a prisoner to Scotland. The Deputy Minister for Justice stated, in his evidence to the committee, that the Scottish Executive would retain an absolute right to veto such a transfer; the minister has restated that position this afternoon. However, the committee was correct to point out in its report that no such right is included in the bill's provisions. The minister informed the committee that the Executive would have the right to require the return of a prisoner to Northern Ireland's jurisdiction at any time; again, he has restated that position this afternoon. As the committee pointed out, that right is not expressed in the bill. The minister's explanation was that the right to veto a transfer and the right to have a prisoner transferred back to Northern Ireland are dealt with in the memorandum of understanding that accompanies the bill, which is in draft form. However, it is one thing to have a memorandum of understanding and another to have a right that is expressed in the legislation. If the Executive believes that it should hold such rights, why should they not be included in the bill? The Executive's policy memorandum states that the bill would have no financial effect, because any transferred prisoners would be managed within the existing Scottish Prison Service budget. Over recent years, the SPS has done considerable work on the average cost of a prisoner place in Scotland. The Executive's recent document on rehabilitation in the prison system stated that the average cost for a prisoner place for six months was around £15,000. Given that the prisoners from Northern Ireland will be additional to the Scottish prison population, as the committee stated in its report, it is inevitable that additional costs will arise. I hope that the minister will take on board the committee's recommendation that the situation should be monitored closely.  I return to the issue of whether the Sewel procedure is the most appropriate way of dealing with matters that fall within the competence of this Parliament. Whatever arguments the Executive makes in favour of Sewel motions, it remains the case that, when we allow Westminster to legislate on devolved matters, our opportunity to scrutinise is constrained and not as full as it would be if the Scottish Parliament were to consider the legislation in detail. Our objection is not about the substance of the bill, but about the process that is being used to present it to the Parliament. On that basis, we will not vote in favour of the Sewel motion.

Scrutiny of the bill proved to be a complex piece of work and I am grateful for the assistance that was provided by our advisers, Paul Burns and Professor Christopher Gane, in keeping us right on court procedure in Scotland's High Court. As the minister stated, the background to the bill is Lord Bonomy's review, which was thorough; the process of the review ensured that those who were stakeholders in the High Court system had an opportunity to give their input. The broad aims of the bill are welcomed. It was clear from the evidence that the committee received that the bill has the potential to reform our High Court system in a beneficial way. The principle of early disclosure is key to ensuring that the bill is effective in delivering the changes that are proposed for our High Court. The bill will introduce measures that depend on improved communication between the Crown and the defence at an early stage. A considerable body of evidence that was received by the committee emphasised the importance of early disclosure from the Crown to the defence to allow early preparation of cases. Unfortunately the bill, as drafted, does not implement Lord Bonomy's recommendation on the practice of disclosure. In giving evidence to the committee, everyone—including the Crown—acknowledged the need to improve the process of early disclosure to the defence. However, I do not believe that the Executive's approach—that the issue can be dealt with sufficiently by using a practice note—is the best way to go about ensuring that early disclosure takes place. The Law Society of Scotland was correct to point out in its evidence that early disclosure is the bill's key provision in relation to preliminary hearings, which will not be effective without it. I hope that the Executive will reconsider the possibility of ensuring that the bill will provide for early disclosure to take place, in line with Lord Bonomy's recommendations. As it is proposed in the bill, the new preliminary hearing is the centrepiece of a package of measures that will build upon the anticipated early communication and disclosure to which I have referred. Integral to the preliminary hearing is the switch from a sitting system to a system of fixed trial dates. Although switching systems might appear on the surface to be straightforward, members should not underestimate the practical implications that that would have for the daily workings of our courts. The committee and I are aware that extensive work is going on to ensure  that that can be implemented adequately. The committee has outlined its concerns in paragraphs 54 to 58 of its report. I welcome the fact that the minister is already committed to reconsidering section 83 at stage 2. It is crucial that our court administration system, those on the bench, the Crown, and the defence have the resources and systems in place to prove the preliminary hearing system to be effective. I turn to the new time limits that the bill seeks to introduce. Section 9 will amend section 65 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which contains the time limits for proceedings on indictment in the High Court and sheriff court. Prior to considering the bill, I was opposed to the creation of a new 140-day rule that would end the long-standing 110-day rule, which requires that the trial of an accused who is remanded in custody must start within 110 days of full committal. The 110-day rule has often been referred to as the jewel in the crown of the Scottish criminal justice system. The bill proposes that the 110 days should be extended to 140 days and that the preliminary hearing should take place by the 110 th day. That would provide an additional 30 days beyond the 110 days within which the court would have to fix a trial date. The Justice 1 Committee received mixed evidence on the proposed change to the 110-day rule. The Law Society of Scotland, the Scottish Human Rights Centre and the Howard League for Penal Reform in Scotland all opposed the planned change. However, as the committee took evidence, it became apparent that the 110-day rule can be a moving target. The 110 th day can move from day to day if the time limit is extended. Surprisingly, even if the 110 th day is moved forward, it is still called the 110 th day. Therefore, what is often referred to as the 110 th day is not necessarily the 110 th day after full committal for trial. The balance of the evidence that was presented to the committee was that, if we are to address effectively the delays within the High Court system, we will require a package of measures including those that deal with timescales. I continue to hold reservations about extending the timescale. The 140-day limit must be the outer limit. Every effort must be made to ensure that trials take place as early as possible. Any further extension of the timescale would be entirely inappropriate. The evidence that the committee received raised serious questions about the practicalities of the proposal to allow trials in absence of the accused. The evidence also suggested that the failure of an accused to appear for trial is not a significant problem. That view is held by both the Law Society of Scotland and prosecution practitioners.  As the Scottish Human Rights Centre highlighted, the simple problem with the proposal is that we will be unable to identify the accused in the dock because the accused will not be there. Furthermore, the Sheriffs Association believes that such a trial would be a waste of time because, once the person who had been convicted was eventually arrested, they would appeal against their conviction. The majority of the evidence that was presented to the committee—including the evidence of the Lord Justice General, Lord Cullen—was opposed to the proposal for trial in absence of the accused. I hope that the minister will reconsider the matter at stage 2. The bill contains many good things and the SNP supports the general principles of the bill at stage 1.

Of course it is in everyone's interest to ensure that we have an efficient, effective and accountable police service. In his speech, David McLetchie stated that we need the police to be more effective in tackling crime and more responsive to the local communities to which they are responsible and which they serve. I am sure that most members would agree with those objectives, but to suggest that the best way of attaining them is through allowing communities to elect the convener of a police board is just nonsense. The reality is that police boards are already served by local councillors who represent the local communities that elect them. Those local councillors are responsible for electing the police board's convener. Therefore, it is clear that those who serve on the police board are accountable to their local communities. The Conservatives have failed to address the inherent contradiction in their proposal. How would the preservation of the operational independence of the police and the role of the elected convener of the police board be married together? Police authorities have to be more effective in communicating with local communities about what they are doing to tackle crime. I believe that more effective community policing strategies are one of the best ways in which the police could go about doing that. Simply having another election will not solve the problem. Some members have already mentioned the police's apparent over-preoccupation with intelligence-based policing. Community policing is one of the most effective ways in which to gather intelligence on crimes that are occurring in communities. A number of members have also highlighted concern within local communities that the police are not tackling the types of crimes that local people want them to tackle. As Duncan McNeil said, communities feel that the police are preoccupied with serious crime and are not dealing with the ned culture.

I understand, because I hear the complaints all the time, that people are frustrated and feel as though there is not enough policing in their communities to tackle simple crimes such as someone going down the street  taking the mirrors off cars or breaking windows. Part of the reason for that is the gap between the political rhetoric and the reality of policing. Ministers tell us that we have a record number of police, but they do not mention the fact that the police also have a record level of responsibilities. The police have to comply with much more legislation, including health and safety regulations and the European working time directive, which all impact on the police's daily working. We need to ensure that the gap between the political rhetoric and the reality of policing is closed. The best way in which to do that is to provide more police officers who can work within local communities where the crimes that I have mentioned are being committed and who, in doing so, can ensure that communities feel safer. That is better than the gimmicks and political rhetoric that we hear, particularly the gimmick that we have heard from the Tories of directly electing the conveners of police boards—what will that do to protect local communities that are suffering?

I welcome the comments made by the Minister for Justice in her statement. Although I accept what she said about it being too early to say whether a fire suppressant system—such as a sprinkler system—would have prevented the tragedy from occurring and am sure that a number of other concerns will be highlighted in the course of the investigation, is the minister aware of the legislation that was recently passed by the House of Keys in the Isle of Man on the installation of residential fire sprinklers in care homes? Is she also aware of the report that was published by a House of Commons committee on 21 January, in which the committee strongly recommended the installation of residential fire sprinklers in care home establishments? Does the minister believe that we should ensure that we have fire suppressant systems, at the very least, in our care homes, particularly in new homes that are being built or established now?

I congratulate Fiona Hyslop on securing the debate. Like Alex Neil, I feel that Bristow Muldoon's suggestion that it is inappropriate to have a members' business debate on public consultation on private prisons is entirely inappropriate in itself. I do not know where Bristow Muldoon has been, but we have had a variety of debates on the prison service. I do not know whether he has bothered to contribute to any of them, but we have had lengthy debates in the chamber and the justice committees have carried out detailed inquiries into the prison system.

Bristow Muldoon might be surprised to hear that we have in the past done as he suggests. I do not know why he did not bother to contribute. Only in November we had a debate on the Justice 1 Committee's report on alternatives to custody, most of which focused on the prison service. That would have been another opportunity for Bristow Muldoon to contribute to the debate on penal reform in Scotland. Prisons play far too central a role in our criminal justice system. Too often they are looked upon as the solution to tackling the problem of crime, whereas at times they are part of the problem. We all know that we have a prisons estate of which we are not proud. Some of it needs to be refurbished, some of it needs to be improved, and some of it should be removed completely. We expect our prison population to increase by another 16 per cent over the next 10 years—that is to happen on top of our record prison population which is, on average, larger than those many other European countries' prisons. As Robin Harper correctly said, 82 per cent of our prisoners are in prison for less than six months. With 50 per cent remission, they come out within three months without having had any opportunity to address their offending behaviour. Much more work has to be done to examine how we can more effectively tackle individuals' offending behaviour. Just this week, that right-wing progressive, the Home Secretary, announced in London that he  was going to introduce weekend prisons. Periodic detention is a measure that helps to deal with offending behaviour much more effectively than just locking people up for 24 hours a day. There is also bags of evidence to demonstrate that community disposals are much more effective than prison in dealing with offending behaviour. The minister will be aware that, after the Justice 1 Committee had produced its report on the prison estates review—the report was not very complimentary of the review—the Minister for Justice at that time gave a commitment to the Parliament. He said that two prisons had to be built and that one would be private, while the public sector would have the option of bidding against the private sector for the other, and that there would be a third option at some point in the future. Now that we are at the stage at which two planning applications for prisons are going before local authorities, I would have thought that, we should at the very least know which of those prisons is likely to be a private prison. Why does a culture of secrecy continue to surround the Scottish Prison Service and the way in which it operates? Alex Neil highlighted the fact that any time someone asks a question about Kilmarnock prison, they are told that it is a matter for the prison service down there. Any time someone asks the Minister for Justice about the SPS, they are told that it is a matter for Tony Cameron. However, any time they ask him about such matters, he tries to tell them as little as he can. To have a culture of secrecy within a public agency such as the SPS is not acceptable, so the Executive must at some point take on some responsibility for changing that culture. The people in West Lothian and the people in the Low Moss area have a right to know what the SPS intends to do. I hope that ministers will show some backbone by taking on the Prison Service and telling it to change by ending the culture of secrecy.

It has been an interesting debate, if only to witness Phil Gallie being chastised by his colleague Annabel Goldie. It must be concerning to Annabel Goldie that it appears that Phil Gallie is no longer aware when he is speaking out of turn in the chamber. It has also been interesting to receive a history lesson on the Scottish legal system. As is often the case in justice debates that are of a technical nature, those of us who do not have legal backgrounds get our defence in early. Although—unlike many who have spoken before me this morning—I do not know all the technicalities of our legal system, I ask members to bear with me and I will do my best. Judging by the minister's opening speech, one could be forgiven for getting the impression that the consultation document was considered for some time, that much discussion took place and that consultation occurred with a variety of parties on what should be contained in the document. In reality, however, as several members from Annabel Goldie to Alasdair Morgan highlighted, the consultation document comes on the back of a botched reform of the House of Lords and a botched reshuffle that saw Derry Irvine getting his jotters. If the Westminster Government is having problems over the reform of the House of Lords—and I know that it does not have its problems to seek at present—I have a simple solution to suggest: abolish the House of Lords. As I have said before in the chamber, the House of Lords is probably the most expensive form of day care for the elderly in the world. If we are committed to modernising our constitution within the UK—as unionists would say—the Government should abolish the House of Lords. I support the principle in the consultation document of separating the legislative process from the executive branch of government. That point of principle seems to have been lost on Margaret Mitchell. One of the concerning matters about the consultation document is that it appears to have been written to justify the decision that has already been made to have a UK supreme court. It is not a consultation document that is intended to  generate meaningful discussion about the desirability, composition or jurisdiction of such a supreme court. If we had such a meaningful consultation process, it is likely that its outcome would be different from the proposed reforms in the consultation document. Given the proposals that are in the document, it is relevant for us to ask whether, if the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords is to be replaced by a new UK supreme court, we should continue to send civil appeals south of the border. Given that we are able to deal with appeals on criminal matters in Scotland and that we have done so successfully since 1876, as my colleague Nicola Sturgeon pointed out, why should we not be able to deal with civil appeals in Scotland? The main argument that has been put forward this morning as to why civil appeals should not be dealt with in Scotland is that referring civil appeals to a UK supreme court would expose Scots law to the experience of judges from other jurisdictions. As Alasdair Morgan pointed out, that is the same argument that was exercised when there was a proposal to establish the Scottish Parliament. It was argued that such a Parliament would be parochial and insular and not internationalist and outward looking, which is what our legal system is today. Given that as many as eight cases a year are referred to the Appellate Committee in the House of Lords, we must question what the big issue is. The second argument that has been put forward today is that a UK supreme court would provide greater consistency in considering those cases. However, as Nicola Sturgeon highlighted, it does not appear to cause a problem when criminal matters are considered under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. The reality is that the continued referral of civil appeals to the House of Lords or to any future UK supreme court is an anomaly that should end. Even the detail in the consultation document on the proposed supreme court does not clarify how it will operate. We have had the window-dressing approach from Robert Brown, who said that the supreme court could be based in Scotland and others have talked about how many members of the Scottish benches would sit on that court. Pauline McNeill said that the automatic right of appeal on civil matters, which we have at present, should continue with any new UK supreme court. However, the consultation document is entirely silent on whether that right, which has been enshrined in Scots law for many centuries, will continue under a UK supreme court. If the document is about modernising our legal system, it seems rather strange that its authors should choose to preserve the anomaly of civil matters being considered south of the border. The  Scottish Parliament has a duty to listen when the most senior legal figures in Scotland raise serious concerns about the proposals contained in the consultation document. I ask members to support the amendment in Nicola Sturgeon's name.

Does the minister agree that it is important that those people who are convicted of drunk driving remain off the road during their period of disqualification? Is he aware of the most recent statistics on motoring offences, which demonstrate that some 22 per cent of those who have been disqualified from driving—that is, some 4,500 drivers—continue to drive on our streets? Will he tell the Parliament what he intends to do to ensure that those who are disqualified from driving do not go back on the roads during their disqualification?

This has been an interesting debate, in which the ghost of Mike Russell has even been called to speak. Clearly, that was a slip on the part of the Presiding Officer. The debate has also been interesting as we have seen a coalition on Europe develop between the Conservatives and the SSP. Today, it has been announced exclusively that the Tories are not anti-European—they just do not like most of Europe.

I will give way to the man who made that exclusive announcement.

If Mr Brocklebank had taken part in the recent fisheries debate in the Parliament, he would be well aware of the SNP's view on this matter. I am surprised that he has such a problem with his short-term memory. I welcome this debate and the European and External Relations Committee's decision to hold it. I support the position of Richard Lochhead, the committee's convener, and of a number of other speakers in the debate, including Nora Radcliffe. I hope that the Executive will schedule an annual debate on the Commission's legislative programme. From the minister's opening speech, I have the impression that he is sympathetic to that suggestion. I hope that he will be able to confirm that in the future the Executive will make time available for such debates. The debate has focused largely on three key themes that were highlighted in the Commission document: the accession of 10 new member states in May; stability; and sustainable growth. On 1 May, 10 new member states will join the EU and we will have a Europe of 450 million citizens. As Keith Raffan stated in his speech, enlargement is not an event but a process, similar to that of devolution. The process of enlargement clearly  continues. Negotiations continue with Romania and Bulgaria. As several members have said, the applications of Croatia and Turkey will be further analysed in the coming year. John Home Robertson referred to stability within and outwith the European Union. He referred mainly to the Tampere agenda on the European area of freedom, security and justice. Unlike the Conservatives, Richard Lochhead made a very good speech. He highlighted the proposed external border management agency, which could have an impact on the First Minister's intention of bringing more and more people into Scotland. The Scottish Executive should take an interest in that agency, to ensure that it does not compromise our intention of bringing new people into Scotland to increase our population. A number of speakers mentioned sustainable growth and, in particular, the opportunities for Scottish businesses to expand in other European member states and in the new member states that will join in May. My colleagues Nicola Sturgeon and Linda Fabiani highlighted the two lists of priorities in the Commission's work programme, much of which deals with issues that will be exclusively within the competence of this Parliament. At times, it is difficult to understand the Executive's position on many of those issues. A number of members have highlighted the need for subject committees of the Parliament to be much more actively involved in considering what is going through the European Parliament and being dealt with by the European Commission. Alasdair Morgan and Pauline McNeill highlighted the number of regulations that are passing through at any given time. Our subject committees should be at the heart of that consideration; we should not leave it all to the European and External Relations Committee. However, to do that consideration, it would be helpful to know the Executive's position on many of the issues. The Executive should at least produce some kind of policy statement early in the consideration of such issues so that we know its position and what it intends to do in pursuing its position. We can come here today and bump our gums as much we like about scrutinising what is going on in Europe. However, not until we are a normal independent nation, joining other member states within Europe, will we have a real opportunity to play our part in Europe.

The minister will be aware that a number of organisations work in assisting prisoners to prepare for liberation so that they can gain employment once they leave prison and resettle into the community. However, only Apex Scotland has been successful in securing funding under section 10 of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 for that type of work. A number of smaller organisations that do a lot of work in the field are struggling to secure core funding. Will she therefore publish the criteria that are applied to applications for section 10 funding? Will she also consider what further assistance she can provide to organisations that work in that field so that they can secure core funding?

I will begin my speech by doing something rather unusual for me; namely, congratulating a Conservative member on her speech. Annabel Goldie deserves to be congratulated because it is the first time in a while that she has come along to a justice debate with a speech that is vaguely relevant to the topic under consideration. It is clearly an example of a new speech for a new year. As is ever the case in debates on youth justice, the variety of speeches that have been made demonstrates the issue's complexity. As a number of members outlined and highlighted, to tackle youth offending is a big challenge. It is a challenge that many of our communities want to be met effectively because of the problems that they encounter as a result of youth offending. Given the announcements that the Executive has made and the proposals in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, which is being considered now, expectations in communities are high: they expect changes to be made as a result of the Executive's proposals and the legislative changes. However, despite all the new resources and the legislative proposals, the cornerstone of our youth justice system will remain our children's hearings system. Much has been said about the merits of the system: as Scott Barrie pointed out, it is often held up as an example of the way in which things can be done and it is a system of which other countries are envious. However, as I have said in Parliament on a number of occasions, that does not mean that the system cannot be improved. That is a challenge that I believe is still to be taken up. Stewart Maxwell said that our children's hearings system is about dealing holistically with children and addressing their welfare needs in a variety of ways. Any member who has met children's panel members or who has sat through a children's hearing will have witnessed the frustration that members of a panel can have because of problems in accessing resources, whether the resource is a social worker, an appropriate programme or a place in secure accommodation. There is therefore one thing that we must ensure that our children's panel system can do. There are often times when, to deal with a child's welfare, we have to deal with that child's parents. Panel members often become frustrated because when they see sitting before them a child who has a history of offending behaviour, one of the main ways in which they could tackle the offending behaviour would be to address some of the issues that the child's parents must address. That needs to be considered.

I would like to ensure that we preserve the role of the children's hearings system, which is to deal with children's welfare. However, I also want to acknowledge that the way in which we have to address the matter is complex and might mean that we have to address it through parents. For example, one or both parents might have an alcohol problem, so we might want to address that rather than to deal with only the child. It is important that the children's hearings system be given the resources and that it be able to direct such changes. I welcome particularly the minister's announcement of new funding for restorative justice schemes, but as several members, including Nicola Sturgeon and a number of other Scottish National Party members have highlighted, the shortage of social workers who work in children and families services is a continuing problem. Social workers have a key role in delivering many of the programmes that will probably be provided under the new funding and, as Stewart Stevenson highlighted, there are areas where considerable numbers of cases remain unallocated because of the shortage of children and families social workers. I therefore hope that, when we provide new funding, which is often for local authorities to provide the new schemes, we will ensure that we match those resources with the necessary staff, whether they be social workers, community workers or youth workers. We must ensure that whoever is supposed to deliver the programmes has the resources to ensure that the staff are in place to deliver them. Rhona Brankin made a good point when she stated that a number of local authorities have staff shortages in their children and families services, but are able to continue to provide quality services. That is an example of the dedication of staff who work in those departments, and of their determination to deliver quality services, although they often operate under extreme pressure. Recently, a colleague who works in the Govan social work office pointed out that that office operates with a 50 per cent vacancy rate in its children and families division. I was told about that only a couple of weeks ago, so I presume that it is still the case. How can we expect that office to deliver what is expected of it when it operates with such a high vacancy rate? Although we welcome the new resources and the new provisions that will be made, we must recognise that they will place greater public  expectation on the local authority services that are meant to deliver the programmes. If we do not ensure that those services have the resources to do that, they will continue to struggle to meet public expectation. Bill Butler hit the nail on the head when he said that we must ensure that we have a balanced approach to the problem. Such an approach should tackle and challenge the offending behaviour of young people while recognising the social circumstances from which many of those young people come. We must not underestimate those social circumstances and the impact that they can have on an individual's behaviour in future years. If we ensure that we have a youth justice agenda that addresses the problem holistically, we will start to tackle the problem more effectively. As several members highlighted, only a small minority of our young people get involved in criminality, but there is a greater challenge that must still be faced: we must ensure that we give young people opportunities so that they do not get involved in crime in the first place. The Executive still has some way to go in addressing that challenge.

I commend Glasgow City Council for the work that it  has been undertaking to improve safety around schools. From my experience of working on a particular case with Falkirk Council, I know that it has a rolling programme of safety around schools that involves traffic calming, safer routes to school and twenty's plenty zones. All councils in Scotland should be encouraged to do whatever they can to ensure that roads around schools are as safe as possible. However, it is important that we ensure that councils have the funding to carry out the important work of promoting road safety. I will raise two issues. In September last year, Cathie Craigie secured a debate on road safety. In the course of that debate, I highlighted the tragic case of a 15-year-old girl called Kathleen Fitzpatrick, who was killed not at school, but on the way home from school. She disembarked from the school bus, went round the back of the bus, went to cross the road, was knocked down by a heavy goods truck and subsequently died as a result of her injuries. We need to address not only safety immediately around schools, but to consider the wider issues of children's safety on their way home, whether they walk or go home on school transport. I hope that the minister will consider what further measures can be taken, such as whether vehicles should not be allowed to overtake school buses while children are disembarking, as is the case in north America and some other places, which might go some way to reducing the risk to children on their way home. When I was on holiday in the Basque country this year, I was impressed by the fact that, if a vehicle that is approaching a small village or town is exceeding the speed limit, a set of traffic lights comes on automatically and stops the vehicle from entering the area, so that it is not speeding when goes into the built-up area. Perhaps something such as that would be useful in certain situations in Scotland. The second issue that I will raise with the minister diverges slightly from the debate and relates to drivers who are disqualified from driving. We can do a lot to make the roads safer for kids by introducing twenty's plenty zones and other measures to reduce traffic speed. However, I went through the Executive's statistics for drivers who are disqualified by the courts in Scotland and I noticed that, although some 23,000 drivers were disqualified in 1996, that dropped to just under 20,000 by 2000 and the percentage of disqualified drivers who were arrested for driving while disqualified rose to 22 per cent. Some 4,500 people in Scotland who have been disqualified from driving continue to drive daily. If we are to promote road safety, it is crucial that those who have been disqualified from driving because of  their driving behaviour are kept off the roads. I hope that the minister will discuss the matter with his colleagues in the justice department and consider what can be done to address the issue so that bad or dangerous drivers do not put children and other road users at risk by continuing to drive while disqualified.

In the past four and a half years or so, I have found that debates on legal aid do not tend to be  well attended. They do not tend to draw the crowds, although they tend to bring in the solicitors. The number of declarations of interest that have been made during the debate is interesting, but in case people think that there has been an oversight on my part, I have nothing to declare. I welcome the fact that a review of legal aid provision is taking place, but I hope that the review will not be blinkered and that it will not operate under the financial constraints of the legal aid budget. I hope that the review will be an open review that is concerned primarily with improving access to justice for everyone. All members and all people in Scotland have an interest in ensuring that we have an efficient, effective and fair legal aid system. Several members highlighted the fact that there have been a number of parliamentary debates on legal aid in the past couple of years. As ever when there is a recurring debate, it must be asked what has changed since the previous debate. Have things improved? There has been some progress in improving how our legal aid system works, but from what a number of members have said, it is clear that there is still a lot of work to do. That was demonstrated clearly in the examples that John Swinney, Stewart Maxwell and Margaret Jamieson gave. They spoke about civil and criminal matters in which there have been problems related to how the system operates. It is clear that considerable work must be done to ensure that the system is as fair and just as it can be. One recurring issue in the debate has been the need to consider how we can keep some matters out of court. Margaret Smith mentioned that the Justice 1 Committee recently received evidence on alternative dispute resolution. There exists the potential to reduce significantly the number of cases that must go to civil courts, especially those that involve family and possibly children's welfare issues, which could significantly improve our justice system. One of the most interesting issues that came out of that evidence was that alternative dispute resolution is often more effective and that people feel more satisfied with the process and outcomes in resolving their problems. It is clear that access to mediation services is patchy: there are areas where such access is simply not available; there are areas—such as in Edinburgh and Glasgow—where there are well-developed services; and there are areas where there is limited provision. Access to justice is not simply about the courts; it is about trying to resolve matters before they get to court, which in turn is about providing security of funding for provisions such as ADR. Margaret Smith highlighted the fact that the European Union is pushing ADR and I  believe that the Lord Chancellor's Department in England has used it for the past year on a number of areas of dispute. That department has saved itself about 120 per cent of the budget that it had spent in past years by using such a mechanism for resolving problems. There are possible benefits to be had from pursuing ADR in our system. A couple of members highlighted best practice in their constituencies and from their experience. Nicola Sturgeon highlighted her experience of the Drumchapel Law and Money Advice Centre. When we talk about providing access to justice, we are talking not only about providing access to a solicitor who can give a person legal advice, but about providing support to organisations such as community legal groups that provide the range of money, legal and welfare advice. Those organisations should not constantly have to chase the small budgets that are available from the Executive for core funding. It is important that they be provided with the money that they require to maintain them and to allow them to continue to provide such services. Improving access to justice should also be about providing money to organisations that can provide access to that type of information, rather than just about providing money through legal aid budgets. Several members highlighted problems that people have in accessing solicitors who are prepared to do legal aid work. That was a recurring theme when the previous Justice 1 Committee carried out an inquiry into legal aid several years ago. The issue has been highlighted constantly by legal practitioners: some who run their own practices say that it is impossible to recruit a trainee who is prepared to do legal aid work. Inevitably, they find that they are taking on fewer and fewer cases that are funded by legal aid. Consequently, there are no new lawyers coming through the system who have experience of working within the legal aid system. People are sometimes accused of saying that we simply have to give solicitors more money, but a number of issues must be addressed. When there is further modernisation of the system I hope that we will address on-going problems that have existed for some time. One of the interesting issues that has been raised in the debate is regulation of the legal profession. I must confess that I did not think that the issue would be raised, given the terms of the motion that we are debating. However, if we are to modernise our justice system, the current system of regulation of the legal profession is untenable. The Justice 1 Committee carried out a thorough inquiry into regulation of the legal profession. If we are to ensure that the public have confidence in the way in which our legal system operates and the way in which solicitors work  within it, we must investigate reform of the system of regulation. Unfortunately, the Law Society of Scotland did not provide the most helpful of responses to the committee's report. I hope that the Minister for Justice will acknowledge that if she is committed to an agenda of modernising our justice system, the agenda must address regulation of the legal profession. She must ensure that regulation of the profession is not lost to the reform agenda, because many things must be changed. I hope that members support the amendment in Nicola Sturgeon's name.

Over the years, we have had a number of debates on domestic violence, to which I have contributed on several occasions. As ever, the Parliament has been united in its condemnation of domestic violence against women. Like the Executive, the Parliament has a clear commitment to that agenda. As Maureen Macmillan highlighted, the first committee bill was the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill, which became the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. The intention behind the legislation was to provide greater protection to women who are subject to domestic violence. Some interesting research on the effectiveness of the act demonstrates that it has been of value, but could be of more value if it were promoted more effectively. We have to pay particular tribute to organisations such as Scottish Women's Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and Barnardo's Scotland, because they have kept domestic violence against women at the forefront of Scottish politics and our parliamentary debates, have maintained a profile in the debate and have stayed on politicians' backs to remind us that we must continue to address the issue. Most of the issues that have been raised in the debate have been covered by the provisions in the national strategy to address domestic abuse in Scotland, which, as several members have mentioned, cover the three Ps—prevention, protection and provision. A number of members have highlighted the context in which the debate on domestic abuse takes place. Nicola Sturgeon pointed out that, last year, 72,000 women approached Women's Aid to obtain some form of help. That represents a 10 per cent increase on the previous year. Annabel Goldie highlighted the fact that around 99 incidents a day were reported to the police in Scotland in 2002, which is also an increase on the 2001 figures. If we couple those figures with the research that was carried out in mid-1998 by the Zero Tolerance Trust, which showed that one in five young men and one in 10 young women think that abuse or violence against women is acceptable, we can see the context in which the debate takes place. The services that provide for and protect women who have been subject to violence face increasing demand, a growing number of cases are reported to the police and there is a prevalent attitude in society that some form of domestic violence or abuse is acceptable.  The target on the prevention of domestic violence will probably be one of the most difficult challenges that the strategy will face. The reason why I believe that the preventive aspect will be the most difficult of the three pillars in the national strategy to achieve is that it will involve addressing the structural inequality in our society. The fact that domestic violence is a manifestation of that structural inequality accounts for a key difference between domestic violence against men and domestic violence against women.

I accept that no form of violence against anyone—regardless of their gender—should be tolerated. I am saying that domestic violence against women is a manifestation of the structural inequalities in society and that, if we do not address those inequalities, the violence will continue. That situation is different from that involving violence against men. The reason why prevention is so important is that, as some members have mentioned, domestic violence is part of the culture that exists in our society. That is why prevention is the key aspect of the strategy and why it must be delivered on. I believe that we can deliver on it if we consistently demonstrate a zero-tolerance approach to domestic violence and ensure that there is adequate education of younger people on the issue. The other two main areas that have been covered in the debate are protection and provision. Maureen Macmillan highlighted the lead role that Scottish Women's Aid often plays in protecting women who have been subject to domestic violence, particularly through its refuges. However, Linda Fabiani drew attention to the problem that is faced by the Women's Aid project in East Kilbride, which has had to turn away women. The national figures demonstrate that such problems are continuing. Scottish Women's Aid's annual report shows that, although the organisation was approached by some 5,873 women last year, it could accommodate only 1,661 of them and just over 2,000 children. That means that more than 3,000 women and 4,500 children had to be turned away because Scottish Women's Aid could not provide them with the protection that they required. I acknowledge the fact that the Executive has established the refuge development fund and I welcome its extension. However, until we turn the tide and prevent people from committing acts of  domestic violence, the Executive must ensure that expectations are met on the supply of and demand for protection, so that the people who turn to Scottish Women's Aid can obtain the help that they require. Politicians, the Parliament and the Executive must ensure that Scottish Women's Aid receives sufficient funding to enable it to provide that help. It is important that we have a legal system that is sensitive and that reflects the needs of people who suffer from domestic violence. I welcome the establishment of a domestic violence court, although I would be more inclined to go down the route of a family court rather than of a court specifically for domestic violence. Nonetheless, such a court should go some way towards addressing the present problems in the legal system. As Annabel Goldie said, it is important that, when women turn to the legal system for assistance, that assistance should be delivered swiftly and efficiently. Although I believe that it is dangerous continually to go down the route of having specialist courts to deal with different types of violence, I think that a domestic violence court will go some way towards addressing domestic violence matters. In my view, the Parliament is united in condemning domestic violence. I hope that the next time we debate the subject the statistics will show that we are turning the tide. I ask members to support Nicola Sturgeon's amendment.

I congratulate the Justice 2 Committee on producing a thorough stage 1 report on the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. This has been a useful and informative debate for me, as I am not a member of that committee. A number of good speeches have been made, although we got off to a prickly start with Annabel Goldie's contribution. On hearing the exchange about dangling bait and swallowing bait, people might have thought that they had walked in on another fishing debate in the Parliament. Contributions have been made to the debate by all parties, with the exception of the Scottish Socialist Party, whose absence is rather disappointing. However, I suspect that the headlines are elsewhere today and not with the bill. I hope that the SSP members would support what is an important bill, despite their failure to take part in the debate. In the first session of Parliament, the needs of victims were highlighted to the Justice 1 Committee, of which I am still a member, as an issue that had to be addressed at an early stage. I think that I am on record congratulating the Executive on addressing a number of those issues; in the criminal justice field as a whole, the Executive has made considerable progress in addressing victims' needs. However, we should acknowledge the significant role that victims' organisations have played in pushing forward that agenda and in ensuring that the Parliament is receptive and sensitive to the issues that they have highlighted. The bill is a further step in that process. Much has been done to address the needs of victims in our criminal justice system, but it is equally important that we address the needs of vulnerable witnesses. A number of members have said that we need to strike a balance between the need to protect vulnerable witnesses and the right of the accused to a fair trial. As members are aware, all legislation that is passed by the Parliament must comply with the European convention on human rights. There  are concerns about whether the bill strikes an appropriate balance and whether a challenge might be brought under article 6 of the ECHR in future. Ministers must take all necessary action at stages 2 and 3, as a belt-and-braces approach, to ensure that there is no such challenge. As is clear from the stage 1 report and the debate, it is crucial that vulnerable witnesses are identified at the earliest stage to allow arrangements to be put in place if there is a need for special measures. I have concerns about the way in which the bill is drafted in that respect and I hope that the minister will consider amending it at stage 2 or stage 3 to take account of the Justice 2 Committee's suggestion that the police should have a statutory role in identifying vulnerable witnesses at an early stage. The bill will have a significant impact on our criminal justice system in three key ways. First, I believe that the bill serves the interests of justice as a whole. We have all heard of cases in which witnesses are reluctant to come forward because they are concerned about the process that they might have to go through. We have also heard of cases at the other end of the spectrum in which witnesses have gone through the process but have said that they would never do so again, because it was so traumatic. If witnesses become reluctant to come forward and appear before the courts, that will not serve our justice system well. That is why I believe that, by providing for special measures, the bill will serve the interests of the Scottish justice system overall. Secondly, the bill will provide a number of opportunities for additional evidence to be presented to the court in ways that might be difficult under present arrangements. It will also ensure that the quality of evidence given by vulnerable witnesses is better. That is particularly important and is in the interests of those who are defending a case as well as of those who are prosecuting it. Thirdly, the bill will give due recognition to the role that witnesses play in our criminal justice system. Not many cases would be taking place today in the courts around the Parliament if it were not for the witnesses who are prepared to appear in them and make their views known. I hope that the minister will take on board the committee's concerns about the definition of vulnerable witnesses, which a number of members, including Jackie Baillie, Nicola Sturgeon and Mike Pringle, have highlighted in the debate. I welcome the fact that the minister has taken on board what was said about a witness' right to a supporter. I hope that the Executive will ensure that there are sufficient resources to enable the early identification of vulnerable witnesses. If the minister is inclined to follow the Justice 2  Committee's recommendation about the role of the police in that process, it is important that the police are given the training and support that they need—and that they have at their disposal the necessary resources—to carry out what will be an important job in making the bill effective. It is unfortunate that, because of a shortage of time, I have not had the opportunity to consider the financial memorandum. However, I am sure that the comments of my good colleague Alasdair Morgan are worthy and will prove to be accurate; I hope that the minister will take them on board. I fully support the general principles of the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill.

Is the minister aware that the way in which the SPS calculates its key performance indicators on matters such as out-of-cell hours for prisoners—in particular, on prisoners going to prison workshops—does not reflect whether the prisoners are involved in any meaningful work? From experience, I know that many of the workshops in our prisons do not have work for prisoners to do; instead of working, the prisoners play cards. Will the minister instruct the SPS to ensure that the KPIs that it publishes are more transparent so that we can tell whether prisoners are engaged in meaningful work?

As a member of the committee that was involved in carrying out the inquiry, I welcome today's debate. I must confess that I was surprised to read today's Executive press statement, which claimed that this debate on alternatives to custody is an Executive debate, despite the fact that it was initiated by the Justice 1 Committee. I know that ministers are keen to claim credit for things, but the credit really lies with the committee. Scotland and many other countries around the world have come to treat imprisonment as more than just a possible answer; it is treated as a solution to tackling the problems of crime. In its evidence to the committee, the Scottish Consortium on Crime and Criminal Justice stated: "prison holds much too central a place in our thinking about criminal justice, when it should be a marginal part of the response." That highlights the particular problem that we face. In response to the Justice 1 Committee convener's invitation to provide a sharper insight into the rationale for the inquiry, there were two main reasons why the committee chose to undertake the inquiry. The first reason was the evidence that the committee received during its inquiry into the prison estates review. In my view, it was wrong to carry out a prison estates review without considering wider custodial policy. When one considers that our nation has the third-highest rate of locking people up in Western Europe and that our prison population is predicted to grow by 16 per cent over the next decade, it is clear that to maintain the status quo is not an option. I believe that the second reason why the committee chose to carry out the inquiry was to show leadership in pushing alternatives to custody, which is one of the routes that the Executive should take. As the report clearly demonstrates, we must ensure that we have sufficient robust community alternatives to tackle the problem of recidivism, by utilising and improving effective community disposal measures. We must first recognise the reality about short-term prison sentences as an effective solution. Overwhelming evidence was submitted to the committee by the criminal justice forum, the director of the criminal justice social work development centre for Scotland, the Sheriffs Association, academics from a number of institutions and experts in the field, all of whom acknowledged that short-term, six-month prison sentences do little to address the problem of  prisoners who are constantly in and out of prison. The evidence revealed that short-term sentences do not provide much opportunity to rehabilitate people and to work with them to prevent reoffending. From my own visits during the prison estates review, I know that short-term prisoners felt that they had little opportunity to address their offending behaviour if they had chosen to do so. The majority of the evidence that was submitted to the committee suggested that community-based sentences were much more beneficial to society and to the 82 per cent of prisoners who serve less than six months in prison. However, during the inquiry, it became clear that one of the main barriers to the promotion of alternatives to custody was the public's perception that we are going soft on crime. Sentencing policy must have an element of punishment to it, but it must also be effective in tackling the problem. That is why the committee believed that there is a need to move towards more community-based alternatives, and that conclusion had cross-party support.

The minister should have given me time to move on. We need a custodial policy that addresses the problem effectively. It is up to the minister to decide whether to use the buzzword "smart". We need an effective system and that is what I seek. The committee acknowledged that community disposals should be targeted at people such as those who default on fine repayments. I acknowledge the minister's earlier announcement on that. We have our view on the issue of unit fines in tackling that problem. I repeat my concern that supervised attendance orders place a considerable burden on criminal justice social workers, who came before the committee earlier this year and highlighted the problems with the resources that are available to them. That must be addressed. The judiciary plays a key role in implementing community disposals. We must ensure that our judiciary has the knowledge and confidence to use the available alternatives. During the committee's inquiry, the Sheriffs Association gave clear evidence that there are problems with ensuring that sheriffs have the information they need to support the programmes effectively. The committee did not have time to consider an  issue in which I have a particular interest—periodic detention or weekend prisons. They could make a significant contribution to tackling overcrowded prisons and recidivism. The proposal has worked successfully in countries such as Australia, New Zealand, Scandinavia, Canada and the United States of America, and I hope that the Executive will consider it. If we get the balance right between locking up those who should be locked up and working with those who should be in the community and should receive community disposals, we can achieve a balance in our custodial policy that will make Scotland a better place.

I begin by congratulating Karen Gillon on securing time for the debate. Despite her concerns about its being in the Thursday afternoon slot, I am sure that the attendance reflects members' concerns about health and safety. I especially welcome the fact that we are holding the debate around the time of the European week for safety and health, although it ought to be said that every week should be a health and safety week. I pay tribute to the trade unions for the efforts that they have made in pursuing the Government to implement robust workplace health and safety legislation and to ensure that employers are forced to provide their employees with the necessary protection under those health and safety regulations. Cathy Peattie illustrated the extent of the work that has still to be done to make the workplace much safer for employees. Many employers tend to try to ignore health and safety regulations if they can. It is important that procurators fiscal and the Crown Office take prosecutions on such statutory matters very seriously, and that they have the resources to carry out what can often be complex and detailed investigations in the pursuit of individual cases against employers. I hope that the minister can assure us that the Crown Office is aware of the need to pursue such matters vigorously. I wish to touch on two issues under the wider matter of health and safety regulations. My particular interest in the matter lies in the extension of health and safety regulations to the police. When that happened, the regulations were by default extended to include mountain rescue teams. As a member of a mountain rescue team, I can report that such teams have indeed had to comply with the health and safety regulations. The result is that they have had to allow for a higher turnover in their personal safety equipment and in general safety equipment for their teams. Mountain rescue teams' problem is that they are voluntary organisations that are having to raise more and more funds in order to comply with health and safety regulations. I hope that ministers will ensure that the funding that is to be provided to the police for mountain rescue purposes reflects the increasing demands that are being placed upon mountain rescue teams. Cathy Peattie mentioned the particular Scottish  dimension in health in safety. There is an issue around the accountability of the Health and Safety Executive and how it interprets regulations. Cathy Peattie and I have both been involved in the matter of the Health and Safety Executive's decision to extend the consultation zone around the Grangemouth oil refinery from roughly 1 mile to 3 miles. The zone now takes in a wide range around the refinery. No one says that we should compromise on the safety of residents living within that zone, but it is interesting to note that other countries have chosen to interpret matters differently as regards their oil refineries. Falkirk Council has highlighted the danger that the Health and Safety Executive might, in relation to the Grangemouth area, have chosen to interpret the new regulations in a way that could stifle economic development, leading to population decline and possibly causing a whole range of problems in the community. It is important that the Health and Safety Executive and the Scottish Executive recognise, despite the fact that health and safety is a reserved matter, that the concerns that have been expressed in the Scottish Parliament must be taken into account and acted upon. Also in relation to the consultation zone around Grangemouth refinery, I hope that the idea—which has attracted cross-party support—of a review of the way in which call-in procedures operate will be pursued. The likelihood is that if a 3-mile consultation zone goes ahead—indeed, it is already operating—it will cause serious problems for any development in the Grangemouth area. I believe that that would stifle development, which would be to the detriment of the area in general.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate and hope sincerely that the conference that will take place in the next three weeks proves to be successful. I am sure that the delegates will receive a warm welcome from the people of Scotland—at least in spirit if not in weather. I add my voice to the concerns that some members have expressed about the Parliament's lack of a role in the event. I hope that the minister will endeavour to ensure that that is changed. Our traditional view of the Commonwealth is of a stuffy old organisation that is a hangover from the days of the Empire. I confess that I have never been a fan of the Empire. However, one thing that distinguishes the Commonwealth today is the benefit that comes from relationships between member nations. Every nation in the Commonwealth is there on an equal footing. The relationships between nation states that have been built up over the years have allowed them to benefit from one another's skills and abilities. Over the years, Scotland has played a distinctive role in the Commonwealth. As members have said, the lead was taken largely by famous missionaries such as Robert Moffat, John Philip, David Livingstone and John Mackenzie. One of our most radical missionaries was John Philip, who was mentioned by Thabo Mbeki in the chamber and by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton this afternoon. Philip not only made a significant contribution to the development of education in the Cape of Good Hope area of South Africa but was one of the leading lights in campaigning for what was called the Cape ordinance 50, which meant that no legislation could be passed in the Cape if it discriminated against someone on the basis of their colour. Philip was obviously very forward thinking on that issue. Sadly, ordinance 50 was repealed following the establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1910, but Philip sought to prevent discrimination against individuals on the basis of colour and to ensure that education was available to all. As a number of members have indicated, the challenge that faces the Commonwealth and many of its member nations is that of providing access to education. I know from experience the benefits that access to education can give to individuals. This year I visited South Africa for the third time in  six years—I was visiting friends who were students with me at Queen Margaret College. They were black students during the apartheid era and were sponsored by the British Council to come to Scotland to study. Sadly, during that time they were not allowed to study in South Africa. From my visits over the past six years, the benefits that they have gained from the educational opportunity that they received are clear. That example illustrates the potential benefits of education for individuals. Over the years, many universities and higher education institutions in Scotland have developed strong links with other Commonwealth nations. More than 12 years ago, as a student at Queen Margaret College, I undertook my final clinical placement in a hospital in India. I am glad that the college is continuing to develop its links with hospitals in the Indian health service. Many of our higher education institutions have built up relationships with other universities and colleges in Commonwealth nations that involve exchanges of both students and staff. Links between younger pupils at primary school level are a key element of the relationships that must be developed within the Commonwealth. In June 2000 Osun Arts Foundation ran a project that was intended to develop understanding of African culture and music in primary schools in Scotland. The project was sponsored in part by the Scottish Arts Council, Falkirk Council and the Highland Council. A school in my locale, Ladeside Primary School, was active in that programme and hosted an African culture and music event. The project helped to nurture and develop understanding of other Commonwealth nations. In the future, our relationship with other Commonwealth nations will continue to develop and will naturally change. The challenge for the Parliament is to recognise the role that it can play in that process. It is significant that one of the first heads of state to address the Parliament was the President of Malawi. A couple of years ago we were also visited by Thabo Mbeki. The visits by those individuals provided clear evidence of the affinity that they feel for Scotland. The Parliament, its committees and the Executive should look to strengthen their links with other Commonwealth nations. We should examine what we can do to build up a partnership with them—through the health service, education and other services. It is important that we recognise that both we in Scotland and other Commonwealth nations have much to learn from each other. If we are able to achieve that, Scotland will have an active role to play in the Commonwealth—I hope that we will be able to take that role in the coming years.

The debate has been interesting. If anything, it has illustrated to the minister that if the legislation mirrors what is in the consultation document, it could be rather controversial.  In reforming our fire service, we must always bear in mind our record of fire deaths and fire injuries. Margaret Smith said that 103 people lost their lives to fires in 2001 and Nicola Sturgeon highlighted the fact that the rate of fire deaths in Scotland is twice that of other nations in the UK. Our record compared with western European countries is also poor. Having said that, we must bear in mind the fact that although we do not have a good record on the number of domestic fires in Scotland, that is not a reflection of a lack of professionalism within our fire service. The opposite is true; we have an extremely valuable and professional fire service. Our record has come about largely as a result of cultural matters, which are much more difficult to address; we require policies and a strategy to tackle those matters effectively. Like members throughout the chamber, we welcome the general thrust of the consultation paper and a number of the proposals. The reform of our fire service has to reflect the changing nature of the role that firefighters undertake. We particularly welcome some of the proposals on training. Yesterday, I raised with the Minister for Justice during the joint justice committees' budget consideration the fact that over the next three years the training budget, which goes towards training firefighters, is due to decrease—and yet the Executive is making proposals that will require greater training for firefighters. I hope the minister will ensure, as Alex Neil said, that if reforms and changes are being introduced, the funding is there to allow them to be delivered. As Stewart Maxwell said, we need to see more detail in relation to the proposed common fire services agency. I presume that the agency will operate in a similar way to how the common police services operate—the police are becoming increasingly reliant on common services in pooling their budgets. We will have to see the detail before we can judge how effective the proposal might be for our fire service. A number of my colleagues have highlighted their concerns on the review of the eight fire brigades. It is unclear why there is a need to reform or review those brigades. I imagine that the police constabularies will be watching the debate with interest. On page 7 of the consultation document, it is made clear that the review is taking place because the Executive has noted that the brigades are being reviewed in England. Given that we have already had a review and that we have recognised that there is no need to reform the number of brigades, I do not see why we should revisit the issue. We are doing that because the Government happens to be doing it in England; as Alex Neil said, that is not an argument for changing the brigades in Scotland.  Members have highlighted concern about a proposal for an integrated risk management approach. There is a need to consider that carefully, because the scheme is untested and, given the role that it would have in promoting fire safety in our communities, it must be tried and tested before it is introduced. Pilot projects might be a way to proceed and to ensure that the scheme delivers what it is intended to deliver. I turn to the repeal of section 19. I was interested in the contribution that was made by Sylvia Jackson, who stated that, given the arguments that were made on that, the only logical conclusion was that section 19 should be repealed. I can only assume that those of us who chose to vote against repeal are in some way illogical. It is interesting that those members included eight of Sylvia Jackson's colleagues; another two abstained. I am sure that she is not suggesting that Kate Maclean and John Farquhar Munro are illogical. Repeal of section 19 might be logical in Sylvia Jackson's mind. However, given that the Executive has decided that it will continue to have powers that require authorities to maintain and own equipment—to standards that the Executive sets—to deal with serious issues such as terrorist attacks, I think that it is logical that where there is a decision to close a fire station, which is a serious matter, the community should have a final right of appeal to ministers so that the decision can be overturned. I suspect, however, that what will happen is the same as has happened over the past 20 years. The FBU has never had to make representations on matters under section 19 and ministers have never had to intervene. In my view, the present system works effectively and I do not see why ministers should seek to change it. I am in my final minute—or rather, my final 15 seconds—so I will just say that cliff rescue, which Fergus Ewing mentioned, is an issue. I have an interest in that, as I am a member of a mountain rescue team. I am deeply disappointed at the decision not to pursue more vigorously the issue of residential fire sprinklers. Brigades across Scotland support the introduction of such sprinklers and I hope that ministers will reflect on the matter and be more sympathetic to the member's bill that I will introduce in the next couple of weeks, which will propose the introduction of residential fire sprinklers into homes that are occupied by the most vulnerable individuals in society. I hope that members will support the amendment in Nicola Sturgeon's name.

The debate has been interesting and there have been some interesting and heated exchanges across the chamber. At one point I thought that the Presiding Officer was going to have to apply for an ASBO, given the way in which some members were behaving, but I will name no names. That demonstrates some members' depth of feeling on the issue. If there is one point on which everyone in the chamber agrees, it is that antisocial behaviour is a problem in our communities that must be tackled. Many members have highlighted individual cases. We have all had constituents complaining about the issue and the way in which it has affected their lives. We also heard from some members how antisocial behaviour has affected their own personal lives. We have all witnessed in our own communities the way in which antisocial behaviour can have a corrosive effect on a community, undermining people's quality of life within their own  environment. Karen Whitefield is correct to say that people have a right to live in a safe and peaceful environment. The Parliament has a responsibility to ensure that that is possible. It is important that we put the issue of antisocial behaviour in context. Several members have recognised the fact that antisocial behaviour is perpetrated by a small minority of young people—sadly, often on a persistent basis. We must also be clear about the distinction between antisocial behaviour and criminality. Duncan McNeil talked about someone selling drugs, being involved in some other type of drug crime or smashing up someone's car. Those are criminal acts. We do not want to allow ourselves to start downgrading such acts by wrapping them all up as antisocial behaviour. Additionally, as the minister recognised, antisocial behaviour is not peculiar to young people, as adults are also involved. We must keep that in mind in devising future strategies to tackle the problem. Donald Gorrie and Colin Fox highlighted the fact that antisocial behaviour is often symptomatic of more deep-rooted problems in a community. Poverty, alcohol abuse, drug abuse and other factors are not excuses for antisocial behaviour. Nevertheless, when we are tackling antisocial behaviour, we must remember that we also have a responsibility to tackle those underlying problems of poverty, drug abuse and alcohol abuse, which lead to people becoming antisocial in their behaviour. The best way in which to tackle such behaviour—as with all illnesses in a society—is to try to prevent it. A very valuable project is being run by Falkirk Council and Barnardo's. The Cluaran project focuses on working at school with young people who are beginning to exhibit antisocial behaviour. It intervenes by working with the young people to help to maintain their education and by working with their parents to develop their parenting skills to deal with the behaviour. I am not saying that that is the solution to the whole problem; I am highlighting it as an example of a broader view that is being taken of the issue. We should ensure that we have such provision in place to tackle the problem. If we do that, we can offset the possibility of young people going down a route that may lead to crime. The debate has highlighted the need for agencies to work together in dealing with the problem. The police, social work services, community education departments, local authorities and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service all have different roles to play and must accept their responsibility. Donald Gorrie talked about the need for kids to have somewhere to go, and Sandra White mentioned the possibility of schools' being open in  the evenings. However, it is not just about providing facilities for young people to use; it is about providing facilities that they are interested in using. Many community centres lie empty while young kids hang about the streets because they do not want to use the community centres. If we are going to provide community facilities, they must be appropriate for children and young people. Organisations such as Community Learning Scotland have an important role to play in ensuring that appropriate facilities are provided to divert children and young people from hanging around the streets.

I agree entirely with Scott Barrie. It is important for communities to recognise that they have a part to play in dealing with the problem of antisocial behaviour. I have been out on patrol with the police and have witnessed situations in which kids who have gathered in a park, not causing a disturbance to anyone in particular, have been moved on by the police to a residential area. The police have then gone back, later on, to move the kids on from the residential area and they have gone back into the park. If a shelter is to be provided for local young people, it has to be done in a fashion that is sensitive to the local community's needs, but the local community also has to accept that it has a responsibility to find a place where such a facility can be provided. The issue of parental responsibilities is important and parents have a key role to play in challenging young people who get involved in antisocial behaviour. I was out with the police one night when they picked up a young, under-age lad who had been drinking too much. When they got him to the police station, they telephoned his father, who was told that his son was at the police station, had been causing problems in the community and was in no fit state to make his way home. His father's response was: "Just keep him there, he's out of control." Such attitudes are not acceptable. Parents have to accept their responsibilities. However, if we introduce a measure such as parental orders, we must not simply tell the parents to do something; we must give support to those who are having difficulty dealing with the problems. If we introduce  tagging and parental orders, we must ensure that the agencies that will bear the brunt of the work entailed in those systems have the resources to do the job that is necessary. The issue is not only to do with tagging someone to keep them away from an area; it is also about challenging their behaviour. I do not want them to be kept away for a while only so they can return to cause problems again when the tag is taken off. Last week, Glasgow City Council was still interviewing members of staff who wanted to do social work training courses at university, which start this week and next week. There had been a mix-up in the funding between the council and the Executive and the council did not know how many places it would be able to fund. The people who are starting those courses will be working with children and families—they are the people we are talking about in this debate. If the proposals that we have been discussing are introduced, we will have to ensure that local authorities have the resources to deliver what is necessary. The issue of policing has been highlighted by a number of members. Alex Fergusson and Mark Ballard talked about community policing in particular. At this week's joint meeting of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee, there was an interesting discussion about intelligence-led policing. I believe, as was stated by Douglas Keil of the Scottish Police Federation, that community policing is intelligence-led policing. The police work with the local community and can pick up on problems at an early stage. Sadly, however, community constables are often used for other duties. We have heard about the record number of police officers, but we never hear about the extra responsibilities that the police have. Those responsibilities mean that, when people phone the police about antisocial behaviour, there is a delay in the police response or a lack of the resources that the police need to ensure that they can go to the areas in which problems are occurring. The Executive has created high expectations that it will tackle the problem of antisocial behaviour and that it has the solutions to it. There are those who think that the SNP is opposed to the Executive's proposals, but what we are doing is scrutinising the Executive in the normal democratic fashion and probing the proposals to determine whether they will deliver the changes that communities are expecting. As a responsible Opposition party, the SNP has a duty to ensure that the Executive is properly scrutinised. We must get our approach to this matter right because our young people are our future.

That point relates to the amount that the offender repays. It is about a proportionate fine for the individual. A millionaire should pay more than a pensioner if they are found guilty of the same crime, and we do not have that facility in the system.

Does Margaret Mitchell agree that it would be more appropriate to have a fines system that ensured that fines are in proportion to people's income, than it is to penalise people who are in poverty? A £200 fine to a pensioner means a lot, but a £200 fine to someone on Margaret Mitchell's wages is very  little. It is a question of establishing a system that is more sensitive to people's circumstances. What she proposes does not recognise that.

If you zero the clock halfway through my speech, Presiding Officer, maybe I will get eight minutes like Hugh Henry did. There is widespread recognition that our justice system has a number of problems. However, in reflecting on the Conservative motion, I agree with the minister that the sentencing commission is best placed to examine the issue of early release; indeed, that has been an SNP policy for some time. It is irresponsible of the Tories to suggest that we should abandon early release when our prison system cannot cope with the current number of prisoners. We must examine the issue not in isolation but as part of the bigger picture of the justice system.

No—I have very limited time. On the speech on justice that the First Minister made last week, I must confess that I found the parts of it that I read to be rather confused. I noticed that he did not mention the privatisation of police cells and those who man them, which now appears to be Executive policy. The SNP will oppose that measure, although the Executive might be able to form a right-wing alliance with the Conservative party to push it through. In his speech, the First Minister set out his platform for regaining public confidence in the justice system. For example, he said that the blame culture in the system had to stop; its different components must stop blaming one another for the system's problems. He then proceeded to blame those who work within the justice system for causing those problems. Any attempt to end the blame culture must start at the top; the First Minister should take the lead. In this short debate, I will touch on two main areas of concern—policing and prosecution. As we have heard today, ministers often rattle on about the fact that there are record police numbers. However, they do not tell us about the  extra burdens and duties that have been placed on the police because of sex offenders legislation, the establishment of surveillance units under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000 and compliance with recent health and safety directives and the new European Union working time directive. As anyone in the police force in Scotland will point out, the effect of any additional officers—however modest that number might be—is automatically neutralised because of those extra burdens. I understand why constituents complain constantly that we do not have enough police officers in our communities and that, when the police are contacted, they say that there will be a delay in responding to the call because of a shortage of manpower. That type of response undermines people's confidence in the justice system. As a result, if we are trying to regain the public's confidence and trust, we should be honest with them. It is okay to say that there are record numbers of police; however, we also have to make it clear that those numbers do not address the current level of demand. I will turn briefly to the issue of prosecution services. In its manifesto for the previous Scottish Parliament elections, new Labour stated that it had "delivered ... the highest ... clear-up rates since the Second World War". That is correct. However, we have not been told that since 1997 the number of prosecutions has collapsed by almost one sixth. Since 1997-98, the number of cases marked "no proceedings" rose from 12.5 per cent to 17 per cent last year. I understand why people wonder about the point of reporting incidents when they are told that there will be a delay when they contact the police and when they find out that more cases are marked "no proceedings" when they are referred to the procurator fiscal. Even the police wonder about the point of referring cases to the procurator fiscal. If we are to change the way in which our justice system is run, we must have more honesty and we must ensure that we deliver the necessary resources. From the comments of constituents who have spoken to me, it is clear that their combined experience of the police and prosecution services has undermined their trust and confidence in the system. It is time to support the staff who are doing a difficult job within the system and ensure that they have the resources to do the job properly. I move amendment S2M-380.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the First Minister's recent recognition of the problems within the justice system; notes that public confidence in our justice system is undermined by  insufficient resourcing of our police and prosecution service, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to ensure that future funding of the justice system reflects the demands being placed upon it."

I begin by thanking the minister for providing me with an advance copy of her statement. Her statement is very much welcomed by members of my party, as for some time we have been calling for reform of charity law, and her proposals sit well with our policy. I seek clarification on several points in the minister's statement. First, she stated that there will be a new definition of charitable purpose, which will be consistent with the approach taken by the UK Government. I note the reasons why the minister has stated that. She went on to say that she does not expect a new definition to lead to any significant changes in respect of existing charities. Can she give us some idea of the sort of changes that she expects may be required? Secondly, I note that the bill will transform the office of the Scottish charity regulator into an independent statutory organisation. If a charity is operating in two regulated areas, which regulator will have lead responsibility for actively monitoring and regulating that charity? Finally, if there is a public register for all charities operating in Scotland, will charities that are registered in England also be required to register here in Scotland, and will they also be required to submit regular information to the Scottish regulator?

Like others, I believe that we have had a useful debate. Gordon Nicholson and his committee are to be congratulated on the thoughtful and detailed report that they have produced. The minister summed it up when she described it as a "balanced report". There have been a number of interesting speeches. I was not sure whether my colleague Christine Grahame was suggesting that the Rovers Return and the Queen Vic should be banished from our television screens. However, she touched on an important issue about the drinking culture in northern European countries, particularly the further north one goes. It reminded me of an experience I had when I took myself off to Norway to go climbing with a couple of colleagues. The stove that we used was a Trangia stove, which runs on methylated spirit. Unbeknown to us, the airline did not allow methylated spirit to be taken on board, so we had to leave it behind. We decided to purchase some when we arrived in Norway, only to find out that methylated spirit had been banned some years before because too many people were drinking it. However, it is amazing what one can burn in a Trangia stove when one is desperate for something to eat. We recognise that the current Scots licensing provisions require revision and change. It is some 30 years since they were last reviewed, with the Clayson report. The provisions do not reflect contemporary Scotland and the problems that exist in some localities with the misuse of alcohol and irresponsible behaviour. It is clear from the Nicholson committee's report that the guiding principles that it established are sound and sensible. The real challenge after the debate and after the consultation period will be to frame legislation in such a fashion as to encapsulate the proposals that the committee arrived at on the basis of its objectives and guiding principles. I do not agree with Donald Gorrie's suggestion that we should just go ahead and implement the whole Nicholson report and what it proposes. The debate has signalled a number of areas of  concern, and it is our responsibility to ensure that those areas are scrutinised thoroughly so as to establish whether there is a better way to address the problems that have been highlighted. Several members highlighted the extent of the problem of alcohol misuse, on which various statistics are kicking around. One in five of all violent crimes takes place in or around public houses, clubs or licensed premises. Alcohol is a factor in about 40 per cent of all domestic violence incidents. Alcohol misuse is attributed to one in 10 attendees at accident and emergency departments. Whether we look at crime or health statistics, it is clear that alcohol is an underlying issue in Scottish culture, which has to be addressed. Broadly speaking, the Nicholson report's detailed proposals are non-contentious and have been widely welcomed by members on all sides. In particular, I welcome the idea of introducing a personal-and-premises license. More than once, I have heard the police complain about a licensee losing their licence for a particular off-sales, but then passing the business into another family's name. A member of that family might then apply for a licence and, hey presto, the off-sales opens up again and the problems continue. Johann Lamont highlighted the need to deal with such issues in relation to the problems that are caused in the wider locale. Often, the problem is not just the fact that premises are selling alcohol to under-age individuals; problems start to develop around that establishment. That is why I welcome the introduction of personal-and-premises licences.

Mike Rumbles's point was important. It might be appropriate to allow such arrangements in some situations, but we must ensure that any decision on such licences is taken on the basis of local circumstances. If it is appropriate to grant such a licence, the licensing provision must have the flexibility to allow that. I hope that any future legislation will achieve that. Mike Pringle spoke as an experienced former member of a licensing board here in Edinburgh. He said that he had never received any training for carrying out that important function. Before any new legislation is implemented—and given that we are to devolve more powers to local licensing boards—we must ensure that the board members are given the training and support that they require to discharge their functions and duties appropriately. It goes the other way, too. Licence holders might have a right to sell alcohol on the  basis of their licence, but they also have a responsibility to ensure that they do so in a responsible manner. That is why we should ensure that there is also sufficient training provision for those who work in the licensed trade. I have concerns about the proposed introduction of a national proof-of-age card. I understand the underlying principle behind the Nicholson committee's trying to establish such a card, but I am concerned that it might be a progression towards some type of national identity card for young people, and then for the rest of society. We would oppose that. A range of proof-of-age cards is available and the police are always saying that the cards are easy to forge. Someone just has to go on to the internet and buy one; there is no checking of their date of birth. If a system is to be introduced, we have to have more detail on how it will be introduced and an assurance that we are not moving towards a national ID-card system. A number of members have said that the Nicholson committee report is a step in the right direction. The key is to ensure that we frame legislation that achieves the committee's overall aims, once we have considered the areas of potential difficulty. We must also address the underlying unhealthy culture around alcohol in society. That will take more than a simple piece of legislation. I hope that members will support the amendment in Nicola Sturgeon's name.

Like most members who have contributed to this afternoon's debate, I welcome the general thrust of the white paper on reforming the High Court. I also welcome some of the other initiatives that the Executive has rolled out or plans to roll out, such as the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill and the proposals for a sentencing review commission and a human rights commission—which are long-standing SNP policies. I hope that the minister will acknowledge the problem that Mike Pringle highlighted—that of someone being fined for not having a television licence. That is a good example of an area for reform. Not having a television licence should be a civil offence rather than a criminal offence. There is no point in criminalising people for such a small misdemeanour. It may be that, through a simple measure, the minister will be able to ensure reform in that area of our law. In her opening remarks, the minister correctly pointed out that modernisation is not a one-off event and is not an end in itself. It is in everyone's interest to ensure that our justice system works effectively, efficiently and fairly. In modernising the system, it will also be important to have mechanisms in place to highlight problems sufficiently early that we do not find ourselves having to modernise much more radically at a later stage. We must continue the momentum of change so that we can deal with problems as they arise. Nicola Sturgeon, Annabel Goldie and a number of other members have stressed that we must view the justice system as a whole and not as a series of unrelated parts. It is important that our police have the resources to do their job effectively; that the prosecution service has the resources to do its job effectively; and that the courts have the resources to meet the demands that are placed on them. Interestingly, the minister omitted to say that the prison service, too, must have the resources to do its job effectively. Once people are sent to prison, their behaviour must be addressed.  We must ensure that the system is much more holistic. We must have adequate provision of alternatives to custody and adequate provision of early-intervention programmes to head people off from getting into trouble with the prosecution service, the police or the courts. If we can do that, and get everything working together, we will have modernised the justice system so that it works as it has never worked before. My party has highlighted a number of concerns, one of which is to do with the proposed change to the 110-day rule in the High Court. As other members have said, it is an important principle of our justice system—and I made this point to the minister last Thursday at question time—that the system protects victims and the accused to ensure that justice is served quickly. A number of reasons have been suggested as to why we have to extend the 110-day rule to 140 days. One reason suggested in the consultation document is that, between 1995 and 2001, there was a 23 per cent increase in the number of indictments to the High Court. However, by extending the sentencing powers of sheriffs from three years to five years, we can reduce the level of indictments to the High Court by 20 per cent. That leads to an obvious question: is there really still the demand to extend the period to 140 days? Likewise, if a preliminary hearing is introduced, that will improve efficiency in the system and ensure that there are no moves to get cases adjourned earlier. If the Crown Office is to have the resources that it needs to do its job, I would hope that the defence would not, on the ground that it had not had time to prepare, have to go to the High Court to ask for an adjournment. Very often, the basis of such a request is that the Crown has not passed on information in good time. Annabel Goldie asked Margaret Smith about the possibility that someone who was acquitted after eventually going to trial might have to spend an extra 30 days in prison as a result of the proposed change to the 110-day rule. Margaret Smith's response was that, although that was an issue of concern, some safeguards were necessary. The point is that the 110-day rule acts as the safeguard—that is why it was introduced in the first place.

I take note of the member's comments. If the rule were extended to 140 days, it is likely that people would work to the 140-day time limit, which would not service justice properly. The white paper does not mention what effect the proposed change could have on our remand population and on the prison service. We must take that into account before proposing any further changes. I want to discuss resources in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. As Stewart Stevenson mentioned, the way in which the staff of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service discharge their duties and their dedication to public service give us much to be proud of. However, we have only to consider some of the events that have taken place to realise that they are struggling to cope with the demands that have been placed on them. In the nine months to the end of 2002, one in every 20 cases was lost because of delays in the system. The main reasons that were given were resources and problems with information technology. I am sure that all members acknowledge that if we are to modernise our justice system, the police service and the Crown Office must have modern IT systems and must interface effectively with each other. Modernisation should not have meant that the number of cases that were lost because of reporting delays went up from about 2,500 between 1998 and 1999 to more than 14,500 in the first 10 months of last year. That is inefficiency, not modernisation; it suggests that changes are having a detrimental effect on our system. That is why it is important that reforms are carried out in a managed way, so that they ensure that we have a fairer and more efficient and effective justice system. I share the concerns that Margo MacDonald and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton expressed about the new supreme court. I hope that the minister will be able to confirm that the Parliament will have a part to play in the consideration of that matter and that the Parliament's justice committees will be able to examine the proposal in detail. It is important that we protect the integrity of our justice system if we are to ensure that it modernises for the benefit of all the people of Scotland.

Does the minister agree that the 110-day rule is an important principle of the Scottish criminal justice system and that it is in the interests of victims and accused persons? Does she agree that the way to tackle the Crown Office's current problem in meeting the deadline of 110 days is to ensure that it has the resources to do its job more efficiently, rather than to try to extend the time scale which could, ironically, slow down justice rather than speed it up?

As the European Union goes through major changes, Scotland will, as ever, be left on the sidelines. We have a new European constitution. It carries many good points, one of which is a legally binding fundamental charter of rights. I know that Phil Gallie is not very keen on that, but it will cover labour law and social policies and it is likely to be rather progressive. The Tories do not often like giving rights to people. There are areas of concern in the new constitution, however, in particular fishing. As Nicola Sturgeon said, the draft constitution omits any question of the right of representation beyond the level of nation state, thus ensuring that Scotland is consigned to be treated as a region, rather than as a nation. Next year, there will be 10 new members of the European Union, seven of which will have a population smaller than that of Scotland. Representatives of Latvia, Cyprus, Malta and Estonia, for example, will be sitting round the top table, deciding on matters that will have a direct influence on the daily lives of the people of Scotland, yet we will not be there, working with them to ensure that we represent the Scottish interest. Our unionist colleagues often point out to us—Phil Gallie said it today—that that is what our Westminster colleagues are for: they represent us at the EU. Irene Oldfather said that we have "the best of both worlds" because UK ministers represent us on the Council of Ministers. The fishermen do not reckon that we have the best of both worlds. When ministers represent our interests at the EU, they often do so behind closed doors. At this reforming time for the EU, it is essential that there be greater transparency, accountability and democracy at the heart of the decision-making process. I welcome the fact that Jack McConnell has a pal in the convention, who put a word in for him  and said that we want more transparency and accountability in the new constitution. However, the real power base lies in the Council of Ministers, and that is where we should be arguing for those changes. We should not just be a bit player on the convention. Would it not be nice to see some more open proceedings of the Council of Ministers, so that when UK ministers are there, apparently representing our interests, we could hear what they were saying and see what they were doing for us? If they are so confident about how they are representing us, they should be pushing for more open proceedings for the Council of Ministers, so that they can show off what they are doing on our behalf.

It is important that the EU be more transparent. If the public of Europe—not just politicians such as ourselves—are to have faith in the process, it must be made more transparent and the EU must be more accountable to the people. Justice and home affairs in the European Union are, increasingly, issues of co-operation between member states. The Scottish Executive could play a key part in the development of European Union policy in that area. During the Danish presidency, 184 meetings on justice and home affairs were held. How often did the Scottish Executive send a representative to those meetings to discuss such matters as co-operation on criminal issues and police co-operation? We were there seven times out of 184. Our Executive could have been there to ensure that the Scottish justice system was promoted and that its integrity was protected, but it fails to rise to the game and to ensure that we take part in that process. With the enlargement of the EU and the draft constitution, the only way in which Scotland's interests in the EU will be properly protected is if Scotland is a normal, independent nation such as Cyprus, Malta, Estonia or Latvia, and if we are sitting at the top table.

I believe in the sovereignty of the people of Scotland and therefore take the oath under protest.  The following members took the oath:  Michael Matheson (Central Scotland) (SNP) Christine May (Central Fife) (Lab)  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Jim Mather (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)

I congratulate David McLetchie on the way in which he has handled the bill and taken it through its stages. I congratulate him particularly on the way in which he has co-operated with the Justice 1 Committee in considering the bill's provisions. The bill has the SNP's support; as David McLetchie said, one of the bill's co-sponsors is Roseanna Cunningham, who unfortunately cannot participate in the debate because of her mother's ill health. Having witnessed the conduct of the Law Society's council meetings at first hand, I can say that delegation to its committees will assist the council in undertaking its programmes of work and will make the system more transparent and accountable. I welcome the fact that the Law Society has taken on board many of the Justice 1 Committee's recommendations, which shows a commitment from the society to work in partnership with the Parliament and to strengthen the bill further. In the stage 1 debate, I said that I hoped that the bill would be the first step in making the way in which the Law Society handles complaints against  its members more transparent and public. The bill is in line with the recommendations in the Justice 1 Committee's report on the regulation of the legal profession. It is a first step, but the Law Society's response to the committee's report has been somewhat unhelpful. It is sad that the Law Society chose not to accept several important recommendations from the committee. Many members of the public clearly continue to hold the view that the Law Society must be more transparent in and accountable for its actions. The Justice 1 Committee's report into the regulation of the legal profession reflected that in its recommendations. I hope that the Law Society will reflect again on those recommendations and will consider what further changes it can make to make its system even better. I am sure that that is an issue to which a future justice committee will wish to turn following the election. The bill has the SNP's support and is a step in the right direction.

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on securing time for this important debate. Sadly, our national game is not in a healthy state. First, I believe that the current structure of the SPL is wrong. We should have a 16-team premier division, as that would be more competitive and interesting, and would allow more provincial clubs in Scotland to be involved in it. Secondly, it is now self-evident that the so-called  split in the Premier League has become something of a joke and should be ended. The extent of the problems that we face in Scottish football is demonstrated starkly by the fact that the first division champions may not be allowed to be promoted to the Premier League. Lex Gold has provided a helpful background briefing on the position of the SPL. We all recognise that safety must be at the top of the agenda, to ensure that people do not come into harm's way when attending a football match. However, I believe that the SPL has to address two points. First, with Falkirk having a ground-sharing arrangement in place with the Airdrie United ground owners, I see no reason why the SPL will not accept the idea. As several speakers have pointed out, that has occurred in the past with Celtic sharing with Queen's Park at Hampden and it has occurred with some of Europe's major clubs. Falkirk should be allowed to be promoted and have a ground-sharing arrangement in place, not just for the sake of the club but for the sake of the fans who have supported the club throughout the season and who follow it match after match to ensure that it can obtain victory. I am confident that Falkirk will secure the first division championship. People in other clubs question the commitment of Falkirk to investing in its own ground. There should be no doubt that the new stadium—Falkirk's field of dreams—will happen. The first sod was cut on Sunday. Both Falkirk Council and the club have worked hard over the past two years to ensure that the new ground became a reality. The second point that the SPL must address is the 10,000-seat criterion for entry to the Premier League. It is evident that clubs such as Partick Thistle, which was promoted last season, and St Mirren, which was promoted the season before, do not fill the 10,000-seat capacity even for old firm matches; at best they get 8,000 to 8,500 fans for old firm matches. It is clear that the minimum capacity does not have to be so high. I believe that the SPL must address that issue. What is the point in making clubs invest in seats when they could be investing in players, as they know that the seats will not be used? I would have hoped that the SPL would recognise that by allowing clubs to invest in players and player development, rather than making them buy seats that will remain empty, we would get better football and improve our national game. I believe that Falkirk Football Club will go on to win the first division this year. I hope that the SPL will allow common sense to prevail and that Falkirk will be promoted with the ground-sharing arrangement in place.

I welcome the bill; especially part 2, which will apply to Scotland. That part contains provisions to reduce the time scale for several notification requirements for sex offenders. In some cases, the time scale will be reduced significantly from 14 days to three days. The proposals will promote public safety. I also welcome the intention to amend schedule 2 to allow judges to decide whether an offence has a significant sexual element and whether the offender should be subject to the notification requirements. I note from the Justice 2 Committee's deliberations on the bill that it expressed concerns; for example, it questioned whether the provisions were required and whether common law could deal with the matter. However, having read the minister's response to the committee's concerns, I believe that amendment of schedule 2 is appropriate, which is why the SNP will support the Sewel motion. However, I am concerned about the Sewel motion's handling and the use of the Sewel convention. The bill entered the House of Lords on 28 January and received its second reading there on 13 February. When the Justice 2 Committee considered the Sewel motion, it expressed concerns that the motion was being brought before the Scottish Parliament after the second reading had taken place. I remind members of Lord Sewel's comments in the House of Lords in July 1998. He stated: "we would expect a convention to be established that Westminster would not normally legislate with regard to devolved matters in Scotland without the consent of the Scottish parliament."—[ Official Report , House of Lords , 21 July 1998; Vol 592, c 791.] The minister is well aware of the Scottish National Party's concerns about the idea of the Sewel convention. However, if we are to have a convention, motions should at the very least be placed before the Scottish Parliament before the House of Lords or the House of Commons has started to proceed on a bill. Unless we address that issue, some of the concerns that the Justice 2  Committee has highlighted will not be addressed. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Justice will assure us that any Sewel motions that are lodged in future will be lodged at an early stage in the parliamentary proceedings of the House of Commons or the House of Lords.

We do not all have a Porsche.

I was interested by Richard Simpson's suggestion that the new bridge should be called the Clackmannanshire bridge. As it starts in Fife and ends in Falkirk, I imagine that the question of what the bridge should be called will give rise to some competition when it is completed. I will focus my comments on issues related to the new hospital site at RSNH. This is the second debate in which members have highlighted concerns about Forth Valley NHS Board's decision to make the RSNH site its preferred option for a new hospital in the area. The need to improve transport links across the Forth is not a new issue; indeed, if I remember correctly, our own Deputy Presiding Officer produced a document five years ago entitled "Connecting Clackmannanshire", which highlighted the fact that Clackmannan might be central to Scotland, but does not have the transport infrastructure to capitalise on that. I  recognise—and have recognised for some time—that there are economic reasons why transport links to Clackmannanshire must be improved. I also understand the concerns that have been expressed by people in Clackmannanshire and the Stirling area about the proposal to build the new hospital at the RSNH site in Larbert. I also acknowledge that a second bridge across the Forth would certainly help to enhance transport links for constituents in Clackmannanshire who want to make their way to Larbert. However, it would be wrong to give the impression that the Larbert site is somehow beset by transport problems; it already has very good transport links. Dennis Canavan referred to the four criteria that the health board set when it was considering sites for the new hospital. One criterion was that 90 per cent of residents within the Forth Valley area should be able to access the new site by car within 30 minutes.

I am sorry; I have a lot to cover. The accessibility analysis that was undertaken by Forth Valley NHS Board last August suggested that, according to that criterion, 93.43 per cent of residents could access the RSNH site. Furthermore, 63 per cent of residents in the Forth valley area live within a 15-minute car journey of the RSNH site.

I want to finish this point. I find it bizarre that Sylvia Jackson is able to suggest that the Pirnhall site does not have the same access problems that the Larbert site seems to have. For example, the Pirnhall site does not have a rail transport link, whereas the Larbert site is near a major train station. We must also bear in mind various socioeconomic factors in that regard. Many people who have health problems do not own a car and depend on public transport. As a result, good public transport links are essential, and are already in place at the RSNH site. We must not attack the RSNH site at Larbert because it has some problems with its transport links. Instead, we must maximise the site's potential. The new bridge at Kincardine would help us to do that. After all, a strategic plan has already been introduced in Falkirk to ensure that two new subways are provided at Glenbervie, and the council has already provided funding for them. The site is accessible and can be enhanced, and I hope that the minister will consider ways of bringing forward the timetable for constructing the new bridge to ensure that it coincides with the building of the new hospital.

I welcome the debate and the minister's opening speech. I confess that I have become a little cynical about special awareness days and weeks and their potential to create change. However, when this year is seen alongside the Madrid declaration, there is a real chance to make it one that delivers real change for disabled people and for it not to be yet another example of tokenism. We do not want the year to heighten awareness but deliver little by way of change. Its success is largely dependent on everyone—MSPs, non-MSPs and the Government—taking a role in ensuring that we promote the needs of disabled people. If there is one thing that I hope happens as a result of the year, it is that we end the talk of "special provision". There is no need for special provision for disabled people. Disabled people are different because of their disability. Being different, however, is normal; it does not mean that someone should be marginalised within our society. Too often, our debates about disabled people focus on their limitations rather than on the faults in our society. Why should some 37 million people across Europe find themselves dependent upon special provision in order to lead their lives? The real challenge for us and for our society this year  is to live up to the standards that have been set down by the United Nations in article 1 of the universal declaration on human rights: "All human beings are born free and equal in right and dignity." We are talking about an issue that affects the human rights of 37 million people across Europe. It would be a mistake for us to allow the year to become one that focuses upon the physical barriers that disabled people often experience or the problems that they have with the present systems that support them as disabled people. In saying that, I mean no disrespect to members who highlighted problems with the benefits system. However, I hope that the year will focus more on the need to ensure that disabled people have control over their own lives. I am talking about providing opportunities for employment and education. If someone is disabled, they are twice as likely to be unemployed and less likely to have a qualification. If we give disabled people an opportunity to receive education, attain qualifications and so gain the right to employment, they will be able to take control of their lives. That would mean that they would no longer have to be dependent on special provision or on the benefits system, which creates so many problems for them. I am sure that it is not lost on members that not only is this year the European year of disabled people but it is also an election year. I am sure that the irony is not lost on members that we are espousing warm words in the chamber about the needs of disabled people when many of them have difficulty in participating in our electoral process. I hope that the May elections do not act as a repeat of the previous election in which some 60 per cent of our polling stations presented difficulties for disabled people who wanted to participate. In the European year of disabled people, we need to ensure that we set the benchmarks that will ensure that disabled people can participate effectively in the electoral process. I know that a considerable amount of work is being done on that issue by the vote2003 project, which is being run by Capability Scotland with the involvement of the Executive. Unfortunately, I suspect that disabled people will continue to have their human rights infringed in the election, as they will not be able to access polling stations on an equal footing or without considerable difficulty. The real challenge for us this year is to ensure that this is the last time that that happens. We must also ensure that we do not infringe the human rights of disabled people in future. We need to allow disabled people to participate effectively and on an equal footing with everyone else in our democratic system.

I will be brief. The bill proved to be one of the most complex pieces of legislation that we have dealt with in my three and a half years on the Justice 1 Committee and its predecessor committee, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. I am particularly grateful that my colleague Roseanna Cunningham gave me the opportunity to take responsibility for the bill on behalf of the Scottish National Party. I have thoroughly enjoyed monitoring its progress through the committee stages and in the chamber today. I agree with the minister that the bill is a complex piece of legislation that will have a significant impact on property law in Scotland. To those who say that the bills that the Parliament passes do not affect them in their daily lives, I say that this is a bill that will affect the many people who purchase property throughout Scotland. I, too, place on record my gratitude to the clerks to the committee, who, as ever, have been first class in preparing papers for members. I give particular recognition to Scott Wortley, who was special adviser on the bill to the committee. He has considerable expertise in the field and I am amazed that he can be so enthusiastic about such a complex subject. His support, assistance and guidance to committee members, where appropriate, were invaluable.  As the Deputy First Minister stated, along with the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000, the bill is one in a series of pieces of legislation to reform property law. A number of changes were made to the bill at stage 2, as well as this afternoon—I mention in particular changes to the provisions for sheltered and retired accommodation, which enhance the bill considerably. The bill is a good illustration of the process. Organisations made representations to the Justice 1 Committee and to members directly, and the Executive was prepared to listen, acted accordingly and changed the bill, which was to organisations' benefit. I warmly welcome that action. Members might be interested to note that, if we pass the bill this afternoon, we will repeal several enactments. One of those is the Registrations Act 1617. It will be repealed only in part, but the Redemptions Act 1661 will be repealed completely. Those must have been some pieces of legislation, because they have lasted so long, but one would expect that, coming as they did from a time when Scotland was formulating acts as an independent nation. I am sure that none of us will be around to find out whether the bill lasts as long as those two acts have. I hope that members will support the Executive and pass the bill this afternoon.

I have some sympathy with Dennis Canavan's amendments 186 and 188. The minister will be aware that the committee considered the issue carefully at stages 1 and 2 and acknowledged that the threshold of 75 per cent, which the bill as drafted set, was too high. However, I acknowledge that core burdens play a fundamental part in the service that is provided within sheltered and retirement accommodation. The committee received evidence from SHOC, which detailed a case in which a complex had been able to achieve, with considerable effort, a majority of 74 per cent in favour of change. That example illustrated clearly that the threshold of 75 per cent was too high. If my recollection is correct, at stage 2, Kenneth Macintosh lodged an amendment that sought to reduce the threshold to 60 per cent, whereas I lodged an amendment to reduce the threshold for changing core burdens to a two-thirds majority. The Lord Advocate, who represented the Executive that day, accepted my amendment. I believe that the two-thirds majority strikes the right balance, given that core burdens affect fundamental services within an establishment. Those burdens are different from other burdens that have been referred to. The two-thirds majority is in line with what the committee broadly recommended at stage 1 and I hope members continue to support that position.

I welcome the amendments, because concern was expressed at stage 2 about the process for consulting all owners in a sheltered housing complex or retirement home accommodation. The  amendments will provide for consultation before a deed is granted under section 32. That is to be welcomed because it will give residents notice that variation or discharge of a community burden is being sought. In combination with amendment 147, which outlines the form of the notice that will be provided to residents, amendment 86 will enhance the bill and will ensure that those who have an interest are notified when a request to change, vary or discharge a community burden has been made.

I particularly welcome amendment 18, which introduces the term "retirement". The minister will be aware that, at stage 1, the Justice 1 Committee was persuaded by the Executive's argument that the term "sheltered housing" would suffice to ensure that retirement accommodation was included. However, at stage 2 it became clear that concern remained about whether there was a possible loophole to be addressed. There was always the possibility that unscrupulous property managers or developers might try to use the term "sheltered housing" as a loophole, by saying that the bill did not apply to retirement accommodation. Amendment 18 closes the loophole and reduces the possibility of someone exploiting it.

I welcome the amendments. I have one question for clarification. Will the minister outline how he intends to compile the list of prescribed bodies that will be entitled to create rural housing burdens? Will those organisations have to apply to ministers directly, or will ministers send out some type of notification to interested parties so that they can flag up whether they wish to be on the order that the minister plans to lay at a later date?

Can the Deputy Presiding Officer tell us why on this occasion—because members have previously presented misleading information in the chamber—the Presiding Officer has decided to look into the matter?

Bill Aitken might recall that it was the Conservative party, under the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, that extended the powers of sheriffs to be able to sentence up to six months in summary procedures. It is clear that the Conservatives think that there should be a further extension, but I am not sure whether that is the best way to tackle the problems in the criminal justice system. The member will be aware that the McInnes review is considering the whole issue of sheriff courts. I would have thought that it would be more appropriate to wait for the outcome of that review and to see what should be implemented from it before we start to make changes. Why Bill Aitken has decided to pick out serious offences such as personal violence and dishonesty is unclear. It could be argued that other serious offences—such as drugs trafficking or collecting child pornography—could equally be included.

I welcome the Executive's decision to accept amendments 91 and 92. If a person was sentenced prior to 1 April 1997 the Executive has the power, but is not required, to provide information to the victim on the convicted person's date of release, death, transfer out of Scotland or temporary release. Amendment 91 will require that the Executive's provides the  information even if the offence was committed before 1 April 1997. I note the concerns that have been expressed by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton on behalf of the Conservative party. However, I remind him that the victim must intimate their wish for information, so tracking them down should not represent a particular difficulty. I welcome the Executive's willingness to accept amendment 92. The purpose of the amendment is to require the Executive, in addition to providing information to victims on the date of release, death, transfer out of Scotland or temporary release of the convicted person, to tell the victim if the convicted person escapes or absconds from custody. That seems reasonable.

I congratulate Brian Monteith on securing time for this afternoon's important debate. As Brian Monteith mentioned in his opening  remarks, this consultation exercise is not the first to have been carried out into how the health service should be configured within the local communities that are served by Forth Valley NHS Board. However, no one can be in any doubt that the consultation exercise on the new single-site option has proven to be effective and fair. We need only look at the figures for those who participated in the consultation exercise. Some 5,626 responses were received from across the whole of the Forth valley. If we compare that against the number of people who were involved in the previous consultation exercise, we can see that the most recent consultation was fair and that it was effective in engaging and involving people. The consultation exercise was also fair because it was extended to allow Stirling Council time to propose other sites that it wished to be considered in the consultation process. Those sites were also measured against criteria that were fair and that were established by the health board. No one disputes how the health board should have evaluated the individual sites. The RSNH site is the only one that meets all the criteria that the health board laid down. At more than 82 hectares, the RSNH site is of sufficient size to allow the hospital to be configured in the way that is most appropriate for offices, labs and parking. I believe that the site offers the greatest flexibility for building a new hospital within the Forth valley. I understand the many concerns that people have—in particular, those in west Stirlingshire and in some parts of Clackmannanshire—about the possibility that there may be problems in accessing any new hospital that might be built on the RSNH site. However, the site is closest to the majority of people within the Forth valley, given the fact that 63 per cent of the residents of the Forth valley are within a 15-minute drive of the site. As transport links improve, that proportion is likely to increase yet further. In addition, the accessibility analysis that was undertaken by Forth Valley NHS Board last August highlighted that 93.43 per cent of the population are within a 30-minute drive of the site. The RSNH site also addresses the socioeconomic aspects of accessing a hospital. A major rail link is within 10 minutes' walk of the hospital site. That will allow those who do not have a car to gain access. There are also plans to improve access within the area. I believe that now is the time to make the business case to ministers to ensure that the new hospital is built on the RSNH site. If additional factors must be taken into consideration in addressing transport links, I am sure that ministers will be prepared to work alongside the health board to ensure that those are addressed. We  need to ensure that the people of Forth valley get the state-of-the-art hospital that they require as part of the best possible health service.

The First Minister will be aware that the 100-year rule has been applied to a number of documents relating to the Dunblane incident, some of which make absolutely no reference to children. Will the First Minister confirm today that the Lord Advocate's review will include all documents that have had the 100-year rule applied to them? Will he also explain to the chamber the procedure and tell us who is responsible for deciding whether the 100-year rule will be overturned?

I congratulate the members of the Justice 2 Committee on the report. I am aware that when carrying out a committee inquiry over a year and half it is difficult to remain focused while having several pieces of heavy legislation on the agenda as well—as the Justice 1 Committee also experienced. All credit should go to the Justice 2 Committee for completing its thorough inquiry. One of the constant themes of the report is the dedication of the prosecution service staff, who are prepared to work late into the evening and over the weekend to fulfil their duties. A heavy responsibility is placed on their shoulders because they make crucial decisions that affect individuals' lives. Several members have referred to particular constituency cases in which such decisions have had an impact on individuals' lives. The service is under considerable pressure, but it has many dedicated staff. However, for several reasons, they clearly enjoy only limited public esteem. We should expect the staff of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service to be dedicated, but we must also be prepared to provide them with the necessary resourcing and management to deliver the required service. I cannot help but feel that the report highlights the fact that the service has been running on the good will of its staff for far too long. Resourcing is an important issue. The Lord Advocate said that the prosecution service has often been a cinderella public service. However, the service not only requires additional financial resources; the way in which it operates must be reformed and modernised. Additional financial resources are welcome, but the report highlights that there is a need to ensure that staff are provided with the training and support that will allow them to do their job properly. If we provide extra resources to our Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, we must be prepared to ensure that there is effective monitoring of how the service is operating to ensure that the resources are being targeted to the right areas to deliver the necessary change. The report highlights the management culture that exists in the service. It says that there is a lack of trust and support in the current management system, and that there are managers who have a great deal of legal expertise but limited management expertise. As Roseanna Cunningham said, if we are to create the change that is necessary in the service, we must be prepared to tackle the management culture. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton noted, there are elements of secrecy in the system—the Lord Advocate will be aware of my particular interest in matters relating to secrecy.  Paragraph 30 of the report states: "We also noted that, although there was a category of 'PF staff shortage' as a reason for 'no proceedings' this was virtually never used. This appears very odd and it has since been suggested to us informally that staff are discouraged from using this category." To say that a case cannot be proceeded with because of staff shortage is not to admit to a weakness on the part of a member of staff but to draw attention to a weakness in the system. The culture must change in order to address the problems that exist. We have identified a number of problems in the service, but the real challenge is to deal with them effectively to ensure that we have a Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service of which we can be proud. The report is the start of that process. I commend it to the Parliament and I urge the Executive to take forward the recommendations that it contains.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it correct for a member to make allegations without providing evidence for them? Will you ask Dr Simpson to withdraw his wholly inaccurate remarks?

I feel a bit unusual in this debate, because I have nothing to declare. Just about all the members who have spoken so far have had something to declare in their opening remarks. However, like most members who have contributed to the debate, I very much welcome the bill. As David McLetchie said, the bill is not controversial and, as Roseanna Cunningham said, it has cross-party support. Like Donald Gorrie and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, I had the pleasure of sitting in on a council meeting of the Law Society of Scotland, as well as on a complaints committee meeting. I was impressed by the way in which complaints are handled and rigorously investigated. I was particularly impressed by the role that is played by the lay members who take part in the process. There is a general view that the lay members are there, to some extent, as a token gesture. However, in my experience, the lay members were probably the most outspoken and were driving the process more than the legally qualified members of the complaints committee were. I was somewhat reassured by being able to witness that process taking place. When I attended the council meeting, I was struck by the fact that the process is extremely bureaucratic. There seems to be paperwork galore, and cases are referred to constantly, with members having limited time to consider the papers in great detail. Like Donald Gorrie, I was concerned about the way in which the council of the Law Society is able, in effect, to overturn a recommendation of the complaints committee of the Law Society, which has often examined an issue in considerable detail and discussed for some time the decision that has been arrived at. In the course of a half-hour meeting of the council of the Law Society, a complaints committee recommendation can be overturned because  someone is there to make representation on behalf of the solicitor or practice against which the complaint was made. I welcome the fact that the Law Society has decided to accept the majority of the Justice 1 Committee's recommendations on the bill. I believe that that will enhance some of the bill's provisions. Like some of my fellow members of the Justice 1 Committee, I would welcome the opportunity to consider the implementation plan at the earliest possible stage, so that we can consider how it would work in practice. A number of members have highlighted how the bill will probably speed up the process of handling complaints against solicitors. One of the most common complaints that I receive from constituents is about the time that it takes to deal with a complaint about a specific solicitor. Enhancing the system to shorten the time in which complaints are dealt with is something that I would welcome. As Tavish Scott, Helen Eadie, Maureen Macmillan and Donald Gorrie have said, the bill by itself will not address the wider public concern about the way in which self-regulation of the legal profession operates, particularly when it comes to dealing with complaints. When the Justice 1 Committee started its inquiry into the regulation of the legal profession, my personal view was that I would like to end self-regulation of the legal profession. In the course of considering the evidence that we received, I was reassured that self-regulation actually has merits and should remain. That is why the committee was able to make the unanimous recommendation that self-regulation should continue, but that there should be an improvement in the role of the ombudsman. The ombudsman should be given greater powers to examine the way in which complaints are handled and, if necessary, to deal with the complaints. There is little doubt that there will continue to be concern and a public perception that the Law Society is, to some extent, a law unto itself and a closed shop that will not investigate complaints against its members properly until it accepts further reform. As members have said, the bill is the start of the process. Given the Law Society's willingness to accept into the bill the recommendations of the Justice 1 Committee, I hope that the society will see fit to accept a number of the recommendations in the committee's report on the regulation of the legal profession. I believe that that would enhance the professional reputation of lawyers in Scotland, if that is possible. It would also be an important step in signifying that the Law Society is prepared to reform yet further to ensure that the clients whom its members serve are properly protected and that  their complaints will be investigated rigorously I welcome the bill. Like all the members who have spoken so far, I will support its general principles.

I congratulate Bristow Muldoon on securing time for this debate on an important topic. I also congratulate the BMA on the work that it has done in leading the campaign to highlight the influence that drugs might have on someone's driving ability. I know that the BMA has provided information on its website for people to find out more about how legal and illegal drugs might influence their ability when they are behind the wheel. In the past 10 years or so, there has been a considerable cultural change in the way in which society perceives drink-driving, which people now think is socially unacceptable. That change has been achieved through public education and by making people aware of the amount that they can drink before getting behind the wheel. There has also been better enforcement by the police, who have run campaigns to make people more aware of the issue, particularly at the festive times of Christmas and new year. More recently, we have seen the police trying to encourage people to report people whom they suspect of drink-driving so that action may be taken. We have now moved the whole campaign on to trying to inform people that if they have had a lot to drink the night before, they should not drive the next morning. To a large extent, the influence of illegal drugs and medication has been left behind. There has not been the same level of education about the impact that they might have on people's ability to drive and about how their functioning might be impaired. The BMA provides statistics that highlight the number of people who are on normal medication that can be bought over the counter at a pharmacy but which will probably impair their ability to drive because it has a sedative effect. Many people are unaware of the issue and, although a label might say, "This mixture may make you drowsy," will not equate that with its influencing their ability to drive. When those statistics are coupled with the number of people who have been taking illegal drugs, which the BMA has highlighted, we can see the extent of the problem. I suspect that a large number of the public are ignorant of the influence that legal and illegal drugs might have on their ability. I hope that, in tackling the problem, we take on the BMA's two suggestions. First, there should be greater public information about the effect that legal and illegal drugs might have on people's functioning. We could also provide a mechanism that the police could use at roadside checks to detect more effectively those who might have drugs in their system. Secondly, the pharmaceutical companies are stakeholders, and we should try to engage them in the issue with regard to legal drugs. In recent  years, there have been changes in the information provided to those who purchase medicines over the counter. An attempt has been made to make such information more explicit and simple to understand. Saying that a mixture might make someone drowsy does not equate with an instruction not to drive. Perhaps the information on medicines should be much more explicit. We should encourage pharmaceutical companies to take a much more responsible role in educating the public about the dangers of legal drugs that might have an effect on their driving. I hope that the minister will address some of those issues. He will have cross-party support for doing so. A number of practical measures to improve public education and to bring in the pharmaceutical companies could be taken in the short term. In the medium term, we should address the issue through a device that the police could use for better detection.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its strategy is with regard to improving the infrastructure of canals. (S1O-6108)

I am sure that, like me, the minister welcomes the fact that Scotland's lowland canals have reopened after some 70 years. What action is the Executive taking to ensure that we maximise the potential economic benefits of the reopening of canals? Will the minister join me in congratulating Falkirk Council on establishing, with British Waterways, a response squad to ensure that canals are maintained to a high level and remain a tourist attraction? Will he encourage other councils through whose areas canals run to establish similar teams?

I congratulate my colleague Fergus Ewing on securing the debate. I know that this is a subject in which he has been interested for some time. He has pursued it diligently by the various  parliamentary routes, which have culminated in today's debate. Fergus Ewing has presented the facts of osteoporosis in our society. One in three women and one in 12 men can expect to suffer from osteoporosis. The commonly held view is that osteoporosis is an illness of the old. However, the National Osteoporosis Society's booklet tells the story of Anna Richmond, a 15-year-old girl who suffered from anorexia. After a four-year battle with that condition, she found herself suffering from osteoporosis. She had lost some 2in in height before she had even reached the age of 20. That illustrates the fact that young people can also suffer from this condition, which can be very debilitating for them. For Anna, things got better following effective treatment and she has gone on to become a doctor. She now works closely with the National Osteoporosis Society, which shows that, with effective treatment, people who suffer from the condition can lead an almost normal life. Fergus Ewing said that the condition cannot be cured, but it can be prevented. It can also be treated, but I shall focus on prevention. We should, where possible, ensure that future generations are taught about the potential dangers of osteoporosis if they fail to have a suitable diet and to take adequate exercise. I agree with the arguments for providing free milk in schools. I always enjoyed my free milk when I was at school. Winnie Ewing has also pointed out to me that fish is very good for the bones. However, I do not want to encroach on that territory in case Stewart Stevenson intends to cover it later in the debate. It is important that young people have the opportunity to have a healthy diet to head off the potential development of osteoporosis in later life. Sport also plays an important role in ensuring that young people develop healthy bones through regular physical exercise. We know from the statistics that fewer of our young people—especially young women—are participating in sporting activities. We are already seeing the warning signs of that in increasing levels of juvenile diabetes and obesity among young people. If we do not ensure that young people have a healthy diet and participate more in physical activities, the possibility of their developing osteoporosis in later life will be much greater. Fergus Ewing mentioned the potential impact on our health service. It is essential that the services that are available for those who suffer from osteoporosis are the best that they can receive. Those people should have ready access to the necessary medical treatment and the diagnostic procedures that they have to undergo if they are considered to be possibly suffering from the condition. Alongside that, there must be regular  monitoring of those who have been diagnosed as having osteoporosis, where possible, to ensure that their condition is being kept in check. The only way to achieve that is for GPs to be aware of the condition, and the SIGN guidelines will help to address that. We must also ensure that the acute hospitals sector has the resources to provide the continuing monitoring that is required. I hope that, in his closing remarks, the minister will be able to take a broader approach to the issue, rather than a purely medical approach, and address ways in which we can improve the health of our young people to head off the problem in the future.

We have already been asked to pass a Sewel motion on a House of Commons bill, although Westminster is pressing ahead with it. Now we are being asked to pass a Sewel motion for a House of Lords bill. That great democratic institution is dealing with the bill that we debate today. At least the House of Commons, unlike the House of Lords, has democratic legitimacy and accountability to some extent. The bill is a result of EU legislation and I turn to the issue of EU legislation in the area of justice and home affairs. Scotland's problem is that European legislation on international crime is decided in secret by the Council of Ministers with the European Parliament playing no more than a consultative role. As Scotland is not represented on the Council of Ministers, we have no opportunity to affect the development of the European law that we will subsequently be  required to implement. We would have that opportunity, however, if Scotland were a member of the Council of Ministers as an independent nation. Although we might not be able to affect the development of EU legislation, we have an important role to play in its implementation. The Executive's memorandum on the bill states "The purpose of this Bill is to implement binding international obligations. There would therefore be little or no scope for the Scottish Parliament to legislate in a way which was significantly different to the provisions contained in this Bill." That is not entirely correct. Framework decisions are binding on member states in terms of what they should achieve, but they leave member states or national authorities to choose the means by which they pursue that objective. That is contained in article 34(2)(b) of the Maastricht treaty, which I am sure all members have brought with them today. The Parliament therefore has a role to play in the implementation of such international obligations.

The important thing is that we are given the opportunity to decide how European decisions are implemented in Scotland. I shall give an example. The Home Office produced a document on the implementation of the protocol to the convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters. Hugh Henry referred to that protocol, and the bill will introduce that protocol. The Home Office document contained three different options as to how the protocol could be implemented. It chose an option that would, according to the Government, reduce the burden on banks, and the minister referred specifically to banking transactions. We have a choice as to how we pursue EU legislation that has an effect on our jurisdiction and we should exercise that choice. It is an opportunity that we, as a Parliament, should recognise allows us to ensure that Scottish interests are properly served. I wish that ministers would take a more active role in Europe, and I would like to spend a moment looking at their record on pursuing justice and home affairs matters in Europe. Over the first five months of the Danish presidency, the Scottish Executive has sent officials to seven meetings or working groups on justice and home affairs issues.  The Danish presidency's website shows that there have been 184 such meetings. The Executive has not sent officials to any working party on the Schengen agreement, on substantive criminal law, on criminal civil protection or on terrorism, or to the multi-disciplinary group on organised crime. It has missed most of the working parties on co-operation in criminal matters and on police co-operation. Given the amount of EU legislation that the bill will introduce, I hope that the minister will explain exactly what role the Executive is playing in the framing of that legislation. He should also tell us whether the Executive is meeting officials and ministers at Westminster, to ensure that whatever decisions are reached at Westminster as to how that legislation is introduced are the best options for Scotland. I would like the minister to clarify several points in the bill. In clause 7, why is it open to both the prosecuting authority and the judicial authority to request assistance from overseas authorities? What protection is there to ensure that evidence obtained under clause 6 is fairly obtained? Will Scottish courts be able to review the actions of foreign authorities when gathering such evidence? I would also like him to clarify the role that the information commissioner in Scotland will have in accessing the Schengen information system database. I understand that that system will be used by the information commissioner in London, but it is not clear whether the commissioner here in Scotland will have the same opportunity. Scotland is disadvantaged as a nation, not only by not being able to be at the top table in developing European legislation, but by the Executive's track record on being represented at meetings relating to justice and home affairs. That record makes it clear that the Executive either chooses to leave it to Westminster or does not even bother turning up to make its voice heard.

Will the Liberal Democrat spokesperson be following his Westminster colleagues who voted against the bill last night?

The minister will be well aware of the Scottish National Party's concerns about the use of Sewel motions. Although it was intended that the  mechanism would be used on the odd occasion, the Executive now appears to use it frequently. Four Sewel motions have been moved in three weeks. Today's Sewel motion seeks to obtain the Parliament's agreement that Westminster should legislate on devolved matters. It is interesting to note that the second reading of the Criminal Justice Bill has already taken place in Westminster—it was voted on last night. Before the Scottish Parliament has had an opportunity to debate the issue, Westminster is proceeding with its consideration of the bill. Another matter for concern is that the issues pertaining to the Criminal Justice Bill have never been discussed in the four meetings that Scottish Executive ministers have had with Home Office ministers over the past couple of years. I wonder why that is the case.

It may be true that there is still an opportunity to amend the bill, but this Parliament should at least be allowed the courtesy of coming to an agreement on the issue before Westminster decides to move ahead with it. Ministers seem to have decided to leave the matter to Westminster. The Executive's memorandum on the bill states: "The Bill itself is concerned with changes to the criminal justice system in England and Wales, and there are no substantive changes to Scots law." That may be true, but that is not to say that the bill will not have a substantial impact on Scots law. I will pick up on a couple of the issues, which I hope that the minister will be able to clarify. Schedule 20 to the bill contains provisions to increase the sentence for a number of offences in connection with category C drugs from five years to 14 years. All members would recognise the need to take a tough stance in tackling drug dealing within our communities, but will the minister clarify how section 1(3)(d) is to be applied? The bill will make it an offence for property owners knowingly to permit or suffer the use of controlled drugs within their properties. Does that mean that someone who runs a hostel for the homeless and suffers the use of cannabis on their premises could face a 14-year jail sentence? Might parents face a similar jail term if they suffer the use of cannabis by their 19-year-old in their room upstairs? Some prison governors have said to me off the record that drugs are a  necessary evil within our prison system. Will the bill mean that some prison governors could face a jail sentence? I hope that the minister will clarify exactly how that provision will be implemented. The bill will also introduce reporting restrictions that have drawn considerable concern from a number of parties. The restrictions that the bill proposes are draconian and go well beyond those that have previously been imposed in Scotland. The National Union of Journalists in Scotland has expressed concern that the proposals lack clarity and could cause uncertainty. The bill suggests that the procedure for the reporting restrictions on prosecution appeals and retrials will apply to England and Wales but not to Scotland, although the reporting restrictions for a case in England and Wales would also apply in Scotland. How will that work? A national Scottish paper that has an office in England will be under the jurisdiction of the English courts. However, if a Scottish paper or magazine that does not have a base anywhere in England were to choose to report the case, it would be outwith the jurisdiction of the English courts. Would it therefore be for the Scottish courts to implement such an order if it were granted by an English court? I hope that the minister will take the opportunity to explain exactly how that provision will apply. The provisions on reporting restrictions need to be read in conjunction with section 60(10), which states that the proceedings can be instituted, in England and Wales, only by or with the consent of the Attorney General or, in Northern Ireland, by or with the consent of the Attorney General for Northern Ireland. What provision is there for the Solicitor General for Scotland or the Lord Advocate to be involved in deciding whether a case should be instituted? There appears to be no suggestion that any such safeguard will be provided for in Scotland. The minister will be aware that the Contempt of Court Act 1981 already provides a number of measures that provide restrictions on reporting where that is necessary. We should listen to Scotland's leading judge, Lord Rodger, who is the Lord Justice General and President of the Court of Session. He has stated that such orders under the 1981 act should be "no wider than necessary". However, the bill appears to intend that a blanket ban will be applied through the reporting restrictions that it will introduce. I hope that the minister will clarify how the restrictions on the media are to be applied. In conclusion, if ministers or other members are under any illusion that Scots MPs in Westminster are dealing with the issue effectively, they should know that, during the bill's second reading yesterday, only two such Labour MPs attended the debate for half an hour. No Scots Lib Dem MPs  bothered to turn up for the debate, nor did the Scots Tory MP. The only Scots MP to contribute to the debate on the Criminal Justice Bill was an SNP member, Annabel Ewing. As we know, the only people who are interested in protecting the interests of the Scottish justice system are SNP members.

I shall refrain from following the example set by my colleague Stewart Stevenson in disclosing that he is a recovering addict, which was followed by Donald Gorrie, for fear that, if we all start getting up to disclose our addictions, the public may think that they have come in to watch some kind of counselling meeting. However, it was interesting that Donald Gorrie's stated addiction is stirring things up. His track record suggests that he has a serious addiction problem, but given the level of entertainment that he provides us with, I hope that he will not undertake counselling. If one thing has come from today's debate, it is that the debate has helped to crystallise which parties in the chamber are serious about tackling Scotland's drugs problem and which are more interested in political rhetoric. During the course of the debate, the extent of the drugs problem in Scotland has been highlighted. Bill Aitken mentioned the £300 million that the problem costs Glasgow. Roseanna Cunningham mentioned how one in 50 people may be using drugs. Keith Raffan mentioned the fact that there are over 55,000 people who have some type of drugs problem in Scotland. The problem is massive and requires to be tackled. In his opening remarks, Bill Aitken mentioned that the Parliament has had several debates on Scotland's drugs problem. A key theme that has run through all those debates is that there is no simple solution to the problem. We must be prepared to try new ideas if we are to tackle the problem effectively. It is sad that the Tories appear to be unable to accept that.  Bill Aitken was happy to quantify the extent of drugs misuse in Scotland, but he went on to state that, instead of the present approach, we require "a hard-nosed but compassionate approach". I am at a loss as to exactly what that might mean. He obviously included the bit about compassion to gain the favour of Iain Duncan Smith. Who knows what the phrase means in respect of drugs users—perhaps it means that we should bang them up with a smile? That does not strike me as being a serious approach to tackling Scotland's drugs problem. We require a realistic approach to dealing with drugs in our communities. Keith Raffan put it well, when he said that we need to tackle reoffending. One of the most effective ways of dealing with those who commit crimes as a result of their drugs habit is to tackle their drugs habit, so that we can break that cycle in which people continue to commit crimes because they need to feed that habit. Helping people to tackle their drugs habit is exactly what the drugs courts are intended to do. Mention was also made of the problems within our prisons. Having visited a number of prisons this year, along with Donald Gorrie and a few other members of the Justice 1 Committee, I know that there is a serious problem about the level of resources within our Prison Service to tackle those who go into prison with a drugs problem. That process started with the Cranstoun projects. Let us be under no illusion; we must continue to tackle the problem, but we must be realistic in how we tackle it. The Tory contributions to the debate have been ill thought out. Now is not the time to start criticising the drugs courts. Now is the time to highlight the problems in the pilot project and to ask the minister to ensure that resources are provided so that the drugs courts can be successful and we can deal realistically with drugs abuse and with those who have a drugs problem in Scotland. We do not need to hear the political rhetoric that we have heard from the Tories today.

The SLF is a radical organisation.

I always thought that the bill would catch the imagination of members. Having served on first the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and then the Justice 1 Committee for some three or more years, I can say that the bill has proved to be one of the more complex, if not the most complex, pieces of legislation with which we have dealt. Solicitor colleagues inform me that, while they were studying for their law degrees, lectures in conveyancing law were often those that had the poorest attendance. I now fully appreciate why that was the case. [ Interruption. ] Fergus Ewing says, "You can buy the notes." I want to place on record my gratitude for the work of the clerks to the Justice 1 Committee in pulling together our report on an area that is new and complex to them as well. As always, they have done an excellent job. I also thank the committee's adviser, Scott Wortley, who has proven to be very enthusiastic about the bill and who has considerable knowledge of the area with  which the bill deals. His assistance has been first class. As the minister stated, the bill is one of a number of pieces of legislation that seek to reform property and conveyancing law in Scotland. Given that there were two years between consideration of the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 and consideration of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill, it could be argued that it would have been better management to have run the two bills in tandem, or at least in closer proximity. However, I welcome the fact that the minister was able to announce that the appointed day has been agreed. One of the issues that the committee highlighted is acquiescence. Acquiescence was a new topic for me and, I am sure, for a number of my committee colleagues. There are probably thousands of properties across Scotland in relation to which burdens have been breached without the benefited proprietor being aware of that. An expert in the field who gave evidence to the committee even admitted that he had breached his burdens without the benefited proprietor knowing and that he had no intention of advising the benefited proprietor of it. I welcome the fact that the bill will provide some guidance on the time scale for benefited proprietors to object to such a breach. I welcome in particular the fact that the minister has taken on board the committee's recommendation that the time scale for that process should be extended from eight weeks to 12 weeks. It was conceivable that, after visiting their auntie in Australia or New Zealand for a month or two, someone might have come back to find that something had been taking place in a neighbouring property but that they could do nothing about it. The 12-week period will be more effective in helping to ensure that such scenarios do not arise. The sunset rule caught the imagination of Maureen Macmillan to such an extent that I am tempted to call it the Maureen rule. However, that could be misconstrued. I am sure that some members will be unaware of the many burdens that might apply to their property. They might have an inclination to keep chickens, pigs and other forms of livestock, for example, but they might have a burden that prevents them from doing so. Although such burdens might have been appropriate at certain times in the past, it is clear that they are no longer required for many properties nowadays. I welcome the fact that the bill introduces a sunset rule that will allow the serving of notices of termination in relation to such burdens. I am sure that that will help to reduce the clogging up of titles by unnecessary burdens. Core burdens have proved to be one of the bill's more contentious aspects. The committee  received considerable representation on the issue, particularly in relation to burdens that regulate and manage facilities for elderly people. The minister will acknowledge, as committee members did, that the rules that apply to normal community burdens do not apply in the case of core burdens. Core burdens cannot be varied or discharged without agreement by a 75 per cent majority of those affected by the burdens. I welcome the minister's announcement that he intends to lodge an amendment that will reduce the necessary majority to about two thirds of those affected. When the minister appeared before the committee, he indicated that he was sympathetic to such a reduction. In evidence, we heard about the interesting example of residents in the Eastwood area who had been trying to change a burden and had managed to achieve a vote of about 73 per cent in favour of the change, which is a significant majority. If he speaks in the debate, I am sure that Ken Macintosh will refer to that example. I think that the 75 per cent rule would have played into the hands of managers of such developments and of management companies rather than being of benefit to the residents. The target of a two-thirds majority is probably much more achievable. The minister referred to the right to buy and mixed tenure estates. The committee heard evidence that further clarification on that issue was needed. Members will be aware that, since the introduction of the right-to-buy legislation in 1980, local authorities have made use of title conditions to regulate the use and upkeep of properties that have been sold. The Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 will remove the feudal superior provisions, which will create problems for local authorities, although the bill will allow local authorities to save burdens by registering notice. Professor Paisley—an expert in the field—expressed concern about the interface between the bill and the Conveyancing (Scotland) Act 1874, with which members will be familiar. Professor Paisley was keen that the matter be addressed to ensure that acts interrelate effectively. I hope that the minister will take the opportunity between now and stage 2 to ensure that there is no room for confusion in that area. If necessary, an appropriate amendment should be lodged at stage 2, to which the committee would be sympathetic. I welcome the minister's announcement that a development management scheme will be introduced at stage 2. That is an important and significant step, as considerable concern was expressed about the matter in the committee. I congratulate the minister on trying to improve the bill further by introducing such a scheme. As someone who does not have a legal background, I found the Title Conditions  (Scotland) Bill rather difficult. I am convinced by the committee evidence and by colleagues who have experience of conveyancing law that the bill will be an important piece of legislation and another piece of the jigsaw in the reform of property law in Scotland. I hope that members will be generous and agree to the committee's recommendation to support the general principles of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill.

Although the motion is in Roseanna Cunningham's name, she is unwell and unable to be with us this morning. As we approach the end of the Scottish Parliament's first session, it is a good time to consider the Scottish Executive's record on our justice system. There is little doubt that Scotland's criminal justice system is creaking under the pressure that it is having to sustain. Why, after three-and-a-half years of this Government, do we have so many problems with our justice system? Even if the Lord Advocate were to tell us this morning that the Executive has identified all the problems and is committed to addressing them, I would have little confidence in the ability of this Government to address all the problems that exist in the system and to effect the change that is necessary to deliver the type of justice system that we require. We have only to look at the Executive's handling of the issue of secure accommodation places for young people to see why I hold that view. First, the Executive admits that there is a requirement for 25 new places, then it says that the places will probably be filled almost immediately, but, two months after that announcement was made, we have no idea when or where those places will be provided. That is hardly what I would call strategic planning. To create a change and deliver an effective and efficient criminal justice system, we must be prepared to tackle the overall management of our justice system.

I would like to make some progress first. We appear to have a court system in which delays are endemic, which is symptomatic of a system that is struggling to cope. Trials can be adjourned over and over again for a host of reasons, some of which relate to a lack of resources in the system. The consequences of those problems are that witnesses are inconvenienced, victims are affected and, in some extreme cases, time bars are breached, resulting in prosecutions being lost entirely. In such cases, justice is not being served. Recent figures from the High Court show a rise of 300 per cent in the number of cases that do not go to trial. Part of the problem is the need for more up-front resources and better management, but a major part of the problem is the increasing level of crime. Crime and offences have risen under this Government, with a 24 per cent increase in non-sexual crimes of violence over the past five years. Meanwhile, during the same five-year period, the number of police has risen by a mere 1.2 per cent. Serious staffing issues in the police need to be addressed at the moment.

It is well recognised that, during the first two years of this Government, police numbers declined from the inherited levels. Only in the past year—in the lead-up to the election—has the Executive recognised the need to address that problem. Last year, however, only 21 per cent of police officers completed their 30-year service before taking retirement, compared with 40 per cent five years ago. Over the past five years, there has been a 21 per cent rise in ill-health retirements. As Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary put it in his annual report, that leaves us with "an increasingly inexperienced front line requiring increased training and supervision". Over the period in which crime has increased and police numbers have decreased, fewer prosecutions have taken place. Despite more than 4,000 more offences having been recorded in 2000 than in 1997, the number of proceedings taking place has fallen. A combination of inadequate police numbers, fewer prosecutions and court delays serves to undermine confidence in our justice system. In the Executive, we have a Government that has failed to grasp the need for a more co-ordinated approach in the management of our  justice system. As alternatives to custody have been a topical issue, I will take them as an example. There are bail schemes in Edinburgh and in Glasgow, but nowhere else. Supervised attendance orders are easily available in some sheriffdoms, but not in others. Supervised attendance orders were intended to keep fine defaulters out of prison, but there are massive variations in their use. In East Ayrshire, 253 people are on supervised attendance orders, whereas in Midlothian, there are only five. The disjointed nature of our justice system only undermines its effectiveness. Drugs can be found at the root of many of the problems of youth crime and youth disorder. However, the services that we have to deal with drugs and drug offences are patchy throughout the country.

Pauline McNeill should be patient. At the previous election, we proposed the establishment of drugs courts in Scotland. What happened? Hey presto, three years down the line, the Government stole the idea, having rubbished it three years earlier. That is an example of the SNP policy ideas that have effected change. The initial signs are that our drugs courts are proving to be effective. My colleague Richard Lochhead will address drugs in more detail, because he has been doing work on the issue. However, let us consider the example of drug addicts and their experiences in the Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust. A drug addict in the Grampian area who is looking for help will have to wait longer than 18 months for an appointment to be assessed. If we cannot deal promptly with the needs of even those addicts who are looking for assistance to address their habit, how can we tackle the problem of drugs issues clogging up our courts and the human tragedy of those with a drug dependence ending up in our prisons? That is the type of issue that undermines our system.

I agree that we need to address the alcohol problems in our society. Christine Grahame was probably the first member to raise that issue and the need to tackle the problem, which shows the SNP's commitment to tackling it. On the number of pilot projects that we have in our justice system, everybody agrees that we need to ensure that any new scheme is effective and can deliver the necessary change. We also need ministers who are prepared to decide whether to end a pilot project or to roll it out throughout the country. I will give an example. Two pilot bail information and accommodation schemes were introduced in 1991. A report into their workings, which was produced in 1994, found them to be effective but expensive in reducing unnecessary remands. A further evaluation was undertaken in 1999 and the findings were broadly similar. Rather than a decision on rolling up or rolling out the schemes, we have two projects that are still working in isolation. We have had two evaluations, but the reports are just gathering dust on the Executive's shelves. Let me turn to what we believe is needed to address the problem. There is clearly a need to ensure that more resources are put up front to invest in the system and ensure that it works to deliver the justice system that our people need and deserve. As well as delivering more effective management of the system, we need to ensure that the police are effectively resourced, so that a real increase in the number of police can be achieved, rather than the smoke-and-mirrors exercise that is being used by the Executive. Only through increasing police numbers can we improve deterrence and detection, and ease the fear of crime that paralyses many of our communities. Rather than tinkering at the edges of providing secure accommodation for young people, we should be providing enough places to ensure that the system is sufficiently flexible, as the Association of Directors of Social Work has been calling for. We need to end the proliferation of reviews, strategy groups and so-called pilots that have been instigated under the present Government. In order to find a more effective way of tackling the problems in our justice system, we require an overarching review of our whole justice system to identify precisely where the problems are and to ensure that resources are applied to the right areas to tackle the problems. The Government's failings on the justice system are marked. An overarching review will let us ensure that we take our justice system into the 21 st century and that justice is provided in an even-handed fashion to people throughout the country, irrespective of where they live.  I move, That the Parliament acknowledges that all sectors of the criminal justice system must be managed effectively to ensure the even delivery of services across Scotland and calls on the Scottish Executive to conduct a fundamental review of the criminal justice system to establish how best to ensure that justice in Scotland is delivered in a fair, effective and appropriate manner.

Some members may feel that there is, given the minister's statement of 5 September, no need for this debate. However, the minister did not address fully in his statement a number of the particular concerns that are highlighted in the Justice 1 Committee's report on the prison estates review. A ministerial statement does not afford members the opportunity to debate issues in any great detail.

The minister should let me first make some progress.

I am sure that one of the first lessons that the minister will take from this debate is that the way in which the Scottish Prison Service has handled the prison estates review is exactly how not to undertake a policy review, judging from the mess that the service has made over the past three years. I acknowledge that the Justice 1 Committee's report was probably uncomfortable reading for the minister, but I hope that it was also uncomfortable reading for senior managers in the Scottish Prison Service, and that they recognise the challenge that has been laid before them in a number of the concerns that the committee expressed. The SPS's senior managers should be very uncomfortable with the committee's report because it "calls into question the quality of operational leadership and management of public sector prisons".  It also calls into question whether the Scottish Prison Service is sufficiently accountable to the public. It highlights concerns that were expressed about evidence that was given by the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service. The report states that "The Committee found the evidence of the Chief Executive of the SPS extraordinary and unconvincing", and that it "found his comments about the inefficiency of his organisation astonishing." The committee was astonished not only that the organisation was so inefficient, but that its chief executive was so open about it. That begs the question what the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service had been doing during the previous four years that he was in charge of it. I hope that the SPS's senior management recognises the challenge that lies ahead. I must confess, however, that the committee's findings do not exactly inspire me with confidence in the ability of the SPS's senior managers to rise to that challenge. I sometimes wonder whether the minister appreciates the depth of concern among members throughout the chamber about the way in which the SPS operates and about its stewardship of our prisons. I am surprised that despite the amount of criticism that has been levelled at it, it appears to be business as usual at the SPS. If we are to have confidence in the ability of our senior managers within that public service to deliver a modern and efficient prison service, the service should not be built on the inefficiencies of the past. It is clear that those senior managers are part of the problem. I welcome—as, I am sure, do all members—the minister's announcement of a new monitoring system through a performance framework, but why has it taken so long for the Scottish Prison Service to wake up to the fact that it needs to be more accountable for its actions? I confess that I do not share the minister's confidence in the Scottish Prison Service's senior management, even following his announcement today. The culture of secrecy that lies at the heart of the SPS is one of the major inhibitors to examining the way in which our prison estate and the SPS operate. When I have been in correspondence with the SPS, I have at times been unable to help but feel that the organisation is somewhat resentful that MSPs dare to question it on particular issues. When its representatives came before a committee of the Parliament, I could not help but feel that they were somewhat reluctant to come along and answer questions from MSPs. I hope that the minister will make it clear to the SPS that the days when its senior management could, as civil servants, do what they liked are gone.  They are accountable to the Parliament and to the people of Scotland. They should accept that and be prepared to be so. Alongside the culture of secrecy within the SPS are fundamental problems in ensuring that private prisons are sufficiently accountable to the public, because issues to do with private prisons are hidden behind the cloak of commercial confidentiality. It took the Justice 1 Committee six months to get access to the contract for Kilmarnock prison after protracted correspondence between the committee and Premier Prison Services Ltd and the SPS. Given that the Executive is intent on privatising yet further the prisons estate, it is essential that the problems of insufficient accountability and scrutiny of the running of private prisons be addressed. I hope that the minister will in his closing remarks be clear about the action that the Executive is prepared to take to ensure that there is no hiding behind commercial confidentiality, and about the fact that committees of the Parliament will be able to scrutinise openly and accountably what happens in private prisons. A key point about privatisation and the contracts for private prisons particularly concerned the Justice 1 Committee. When the committee was taking evidence, Wendy Alexander brought up the way in which the contracts had been set up in 1999. She questioned whether any internal or external work had been commissioned to examine whether the cost structure that was agreed in 1998 for Kilmarnock prison had been fulfilled over the past four years. Surprisingly, or maybe unsurprisingly, Tony Cameron said that there had not. Given that the minister has decided to build another private prison—and, possibly, a third—I would have thought that it would be a priority to review the contract for Kilmarnock to see whether the cost structure and staffing levels that were agreed back in 1998 have been fulfilled. I hope that the minister will recognise that that should be a priority, and that the matter should be reviewed quickly. I turn to the Spencer report. The Justice 1 Committee was unable to examine the issues, given that the minister had decided to set up an expert group under Alec Spencer, the director of rehabilitation and care at the Scottish Prison Service. His report on the future management of sex offenders within our prison estate makes interesting reading. The panel of experts recommended that long-term sex offenders should be contained in a single-purpose prison. The report suggests that Glenochil prison, for example, could deal with the numbers of sex offenders in the Scottish Prison Service system. In his statement in September, the Minister for Justice ruled out consideration of another prison to  deal with long-term sex offenders and stated that such prisoners would for the foreseeable future be dealt with at Peterhead. The expert panel report stated that there are in the region of 450 to 500 long-term sex offenders in the Scottish prisons estate and the panel believes that we require enough places for those prisoners. Given that Peterhead has capacity for only 300 long-term sex offenders, it is obvious that we need another 150 to 200 places. I hope that the minister will acknowledge that the best way to address the problem is to build the extra 200 places at the single-purpose site at Peterhead. I hope that the minister will show that it is ministers who are driving matters, rather than their officials. The minister's credibility on such things is at issue. There is a need to tackle the problem of how in future we will deal with long-term sex offenders. If the expert group recognises that there is a need for another 200 places, those places should be provided at the single-purpose site at Peterhead. The minister should be big enough to act on that.

I have a letter from the SPS that was sent by e-mail dated 4 October. The letter details that it would cost £100,000 per acre, or £200,000, to buy the properties at Newlands Road.

I thank Fiona Hyslop for securing the time for this debate. It is a pressing issue and I was keen to have a debate on it as early as possible. I lodged the motion only two weeks ago, and I am grateful for having been able to secure time for the debate so quickly. I welcome the members of the social club who are in the public gallery. They have been campaigning for months to stop the closure of their local social club. I am sure that most members have some form of social club in their constituency. Often social clubs are closely linked to companies or industries in local communities. They are often left behind when industries move on or cease to be located in Scotland. Clubs find themselves struggling to cope—struggling for members, struggling financially and struggling because of the poor state of their establishment. The story of the Polmont prison officers' club is very different. It is not a story of a struggling club. Opened in 1957, the club is well established in the local community and is well used. In its 44 years, it has been seen as a key part of the community in Polmont. It has 350 members. They include people who currently work in the Scottish Prison Service, retired prison officers, officers' families and friends, and members of the wider local community. The club is well supported, so why close it? I am sure that many members present at today's debate will be aware that the Scottish Prison Service tends to work in mysterious ways. Back in 1998, the club indicated to the Scottish Prison Service that it would like to purchase the property and raised the matter with the SPS directly.  Naturally, the club was delighted when on 21 August 1998 it received a letter from the governor of Polmont prison, Dan Gunn, who indicated that at a recent meeting the prison board had decided that the club committee should be offered the opportunity to purchase the club premises. The governor invited the club to indicate whether it was interested in doing that. In the past two years, because of the governor's offer, the club has invested some £45,000 in upgrading the building to ensure that its standards are adequate. I am sure that members will recognise that, after such investment, this is a very good club. The chamber can imagine the shock and dismay that club members felt when, in August this year, they found out that the Scottish Prison Service had decided not to renew the club's lease on 4 January 2003. That decision came out of the blue. It was not preceded by any consultation and is a complete U-turn from the commitment that was made in August 1998. Members may ask why the Scottish Prison Service decided to make such a U-turn. In its corporate plan for 1999 to 2002, the service stated that one of its key objectives was to move the Scottish Prison Service college to premises that were better designed and serviced to meet the service's needs. The SPS has now decided to knock down the social club, which is beside the college, to landscape the site for two years and to save up a little capital, which will allow it to build new facilities on the college campus. Some may say that it is important for the SPS to have adequate facilities for training staff. However, I understand that the real reason for the decision is to allow the SPS to enhance the college to use it for corporate functions. In August, the officers' club raised concerns about the proposal not to renew its lease with the SPS. On 4 October, it received a letter from the SPS confirming that it would not renew the lease on 4 January. However, in its generosity the service has agreed that the club may purchase a piece of land for a new officers' club. A piece of land of around an acre will cost the club about £100,000. That figure does not include the capital costs of building a new club. However, because the SPS recognises that capital costs may be involved, it has offered to allow the club to purchase some properties in Newlands Road. The cost of those properties would be £200,000. I am sure that members will recognise that purchasing either land or the properties that have been offered is well outwith the financial scope of the club. I believe that the SPS letter is nothing more than an excuse to allow the SPS to say that it is trying to work with the club. In reality, the letter offers the club nothing.  Members will be aware from my comments that the club is well used by the local community. I will illustrate how well used the club is. Between now and the end of March 2003, the club has bookings for functions on every Friday and Saturday night. For the new financial year from April 2003, the club already has 27 bookings for various functions and events. The club is extensively used by a wide range of organisations within the local community and for family functions and parties. I will give members only a taste of the groups that use the club, but I could mention many. One group is the Braveheart project, a voluntary mentoring group that was recently established in the local area to work with people with heart problems. The project is being piloted and monitored by the Health Education Board for Scotland, the British Medical Association and the British Heart Foundation. The Braveheart project chose to use the prison officers' club because it is much cheaper than using any community facility within the local area. The club provides an important resource for an important and worthy project. The club has had a letter from Squadron Leader Murray of the Air Cadets, who states: "I am sorry to hear of the impending closure of the Polmont Officers Club. Over the years members of the Air Training Corps have used the club for a variety of functions ... The main reason the Officers Club was used was the friendly, safe environment. The Officers Club serves all members of the community." There is also correspondence from the local football club, which uses the club extensively and demands that it remain open. Clearly, the club is an important resource in the local community. I have a document called "A New Vision For A New Service", which was printed from the Scottish Prison Service website. The document states under the heading of "Respect for our Staff": "The Scottish Prison Service is proud of our people. We recognise that our staff work in difficult circumstances and are dedicated and skilled. But our image is not good and often that is a self-inflicted wound. We all have a responsibility to make sure that the work we do is recognised, in the wider community." Clive Fairweather stated at the Justice 1 Committee recently that there was a need to build relations between SPS staff and senior management. How does the SPS's treatment of the officers' club fit in with the SPS's new vision? I hope that the minister will recognise that the Scottish Prison Service has not given due credit to the important resource that the prison officers' social club is for the Polmont area. I hope that the minister will intervene personally to ensure that the SPS honours its commitment of August 1998 to allow the club to purchase the property. [Applause.]

The SNP amendment is in the name of Kenny Gibson. I welcome the opportunity to have this debate today. Most of us recognise that one of the biggest enemies of a successful campaign to tackle racism would be complacency about the extent of racism in our society and in our communities across Scotland. Research figures that were released this week indicated that some 25 per cent of Scots considered themselves to be racist. The headline news was along the lines of, "How can there be so many people in Scotland who consider themselves to be racist?" The danger with such a result is that some people will think that the figure suggests that too many people are racists, while others, sad to say, will think that the figure suggests that not many people at all are racist. Some would argue that the majority of people in our society are racist in some way, irrespective of their ethnic background. The challenge to us, in tackling racism, is to ensure that those who harbour racist views are challenged as to why they harbour such views. I welcome the Executive's campaign and its decision to bring it forward in the way that it has. The Minister for Social Justice will be aware that John Swinney wrote to party leaders back in April on this issue, looking for a united campaign against those who would seek to create racism in our communities. Given the recent events involving parties such as the BNP—including its attack on my parliamentary colleague Roseanna Cunningham—it is essential that all democratically elected members of the Parliament should be united in campaigning against such organisations and abhorrent views. I particularly welcome the fact that the First Minister has been so positive in acknowledging the need for a united campaign to  tackle racism. I am sure that the minister is looking forward to chairing her working party, which will have cross-party representation. Although I welcome the campaign, I have some concerns. If we are to tackle racism effectively, it is essential that we address it at a grass-roots level. That message must be taken into every home, classroom, workplace and community group throughout Scotland. There is a danger that, if we have an apparently media-led campaign, it will be perceived as a top-down approach. It is essential that local organisations that are actively involved with local groups in local communities—such as the race equality councils—are part of the implementation of the campaign. The minister may wish to intervene on that point. It is essential that such local organisations feel as though they are partners in delivering the campaign and that they are provided with the resources to do so effectively.

I welcome the minister's response. However, only last week, I received representations from members of race equality councils, who expressed concern that they had not been provided with any additional resources to deal with a possible increase in direct inquiries. A number of race equality councils throughout Scotland are having funding problems just now because of the changes that may occur as a result of the CRE's review. We must ensure that they have at their disposal the resources to ensure that the increased inquiries that they may receive as a result of the campaign are tackled effectively. It is also important that the campaign should not be regarded as a one-off. It must be a sustainable campaign. It must continue. It must continue to challenge racism. To think that a one-off campaign would be the magic wand that could eradicate racism in our society would be wrong. We know how deep-rooted it is. The minister mentioned the 3,000 incidents that are reported to the police every year. We also know from research about the racism that exists in institutions in Scotland. For example, the average Asian person is probably paid around 15 per cent less in some types of jobs in Scotland as a result of their ethnic background. That institutional racism is unacceptable.  Tommy Sheridan has already raised my next point. Last week, I shared a platform with Doreen Lawrence, the mother of Stephen Lawrence, at a race awareness conference in Grangemouth, which was set up by central Scotland race equality council. One of the clear messages that came across from the organisations that were present at the conference was that we need to have political leadership in implementing any campaign to eradicate racism. They were concerned that every politician should show that political leadership, irrespective of whether they are at Westminster or in the Scottish Parliament. The organisations noted their concern about David Blunkett's comments, because such comments do not help those within our communities who suffer from racism. Those to whom I spoke were disappointed that the Scottish Executive did not show political leadership in Scotland by distancing itself from David Blunkett's comments. I hope that the minister will reflect on that at some point and consider distancing the Executive from those comments. Scotland is a rich society because of its diversity, and our diversity is something that we as a society should celebrate. I close with a quotation from last Friday's conference: "In our difference lies our strength; in our unity lies our future." I move amendment S1M-3423.2, to insert at end: "and recognises the importance of fully resourcing these bodies in order to sustain their efforts over the long term."

I begin by congratulating the Justice 2 Committee on its robust report. The committee has had to go through more than 280 items of evidence, and it has clearly had its work cut out in considering the various provisions of a large and complex piece of legislation. It is fair to say that most members have concentrated on three key parts of the bill—parts 1, 2 and 7—much of the debate on which has been recorded in the media. The SNP strongly welcomes the provision in part 1 to create orders for lifelong restriction. We have called for such orders to be provided for several years, but the Government previously dismissed them. The orders are welcome, although they come somewhat late. The Justice 2 Committee has highlighted several concerns, particularly about the risk management order, the role of the prosecutor and the risk assessment report. The Minister for Justice referred to that, because the Justice 2 Committee is concerned about the sources that will be used to provide information for the compilation of such a report. I hope that the minister will ensure that clear guidance is issued alongside the bill, if it is passed, to ensure that the organisations that provide information for such reports are bona fide and that the information that they provide is not frivolous. I welcome the minister's comments on the committee's concerns about the risk criteria. If the new order is to work effectively, we must ensure that all the provisions are clear and robust. A range of members referred to the provisions on victim statements in part 2. There has not been a debate in the Parliament in the past three and a half years on crime or our criminal justice system in which members have not discussed services for victims. If one thing has improved in our criminal justice system, it is services and support to victims of crime. However, the intent of the victim statement is unclear. I am attracted to it. When I first heard of the Justice 2 Committee's recommendation, I confess that I was somewhat surprised, until I read the committee's report and  saw the evidence that it had received. It is unclear whether victim statements are intended to affect sentencing in court or are merely a therapeutic outlet for victims to make their views known to the court. If the measure is to be effective, it is essential that its intent is clear. As Brian Fitzpatrick said, it is essential that it is an individual's choice whether to give a victim statement. Individuals should not be forced to make a statement if they do not choose to do so. It is important that people are provided with the right practical support to make victim statements. The Executive described to the Justice 2 Committee a range of agencies, including the police, the procurator fiscal and social work services, that can provide such support. We must identify a lead authority that is intended to give victims support and guidance when necessary, in case there is confusion about who should offer such support. I agree with Pauline McNeill's comments about release on licence. The provision that entitles a victim to be informed when someone is applying for parole or is being released on licence is significant. I have corresponded with the Minister for Justice about that in relation to the Andrew Halliday case and I believe that many victims will welcome the provision. However, Dr McManus, the chairman of the Parole Board, has said that if victims are to be given the opportunity to make representations to the Parole Board, and if the system is to work effectively, they must be given the necessary guidance on the relevant information to provide. I hope that ministers will address that issue. Part 7 deals with the physical punishment of children. I welcome the Justice 2 Committee's recommendation on the issue. Common sense has prevailed, particularly over section 43(3)(a). I welcome the minister's decision to drop that provision. I hope that the message is clear that the issue is one of the separate roles of Government and family—a family is not mum, dad and the Minister for Justice. I hope that ministers will reflect on whether the role of Government should be to interfere in family life in such a way. If the Executive's intention is to change the culture of how parents chastise their children, it should seek to educate and not legislate. If the Executive remains committed to addressing the issue, I hope that it will introduce an education programme at an early date. Like Stewart Stevenson and many other members, I support the banning of the striking of children around the head or with implements.

I fully agree with Pauline McNeill. That is why, if the Executive is to do anything in this area, it should consider providing education and support to families. It should not criminalise individuals who may be reasonably chastising their children. A number of members mentioned their concern about or support for the youth crime pilot studies. I am a keen supporter of our children's hearings system. It has many attributes and better resources should be provided for it. I am inclined to agree that there is a need to examine how the system operates. One of the common complaints that I hear from individuals who sit in the hearings system concerns the lack of disposals that are available. A children's panel chairman in somewhere such as Falkirk can tell me that a great range of disposals is available to him, but the chairman of a panel in Glasgow can say that he has severe problems in getting a child allocated to a social worker from the local social work department. There is a need to ensure that a consistent approach is taken in dealing with young people. Like Christine Grahame, I believe that we have to go up river to stop young people falling into the world of crime. The best way to do that is through the children's hearings system. I hope that ministers will address that issue. I will turn briefly to the issue of police custody and security officers.

Roseanna Cunningham raised the matter of the unnamed Executive spokesperson who stated that the tendering process for the introduction of officers into our court system had begun. I hope that ministers will be able to confirm this afternoon that that is not the case. The Parliament has not passed the bill and it would be an affront to democracy if that process had begun. Pauline McNeill raised an important point about the number of officers who will be released as a result of the measure. Officers to whom I have spoken have informed me that many colleagues who are involved in court duties are involved because they are near the age of retirement, are close to leaving the service or are unable to undertake operational duties owing to health  problems. That means that the net gain in the number of officers released from court duties may not be particularly significant. I hope that ministers will address at an early stage the concerns that have been raised by the Sheriffs Association and the police. The SNP supports the general principles of the bill and will do so this afternoon. However, our support is qualified. We agree with the committee's recommendation in paragraph 207 of its report. There are a number of serious flaws in the bill and they need to be addressed before the bill is passed.

I congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing time for this debate. The importance of the debate is clear from the number of members who have stayed on for it. One of the first campaigns that contacted me after I became a MSP was SCID. I commend SCID for the way in which it has continued to pursue this matter. I am inclined to agree with John McAllion that there is beginning to be movement on the issue, although the wheels of power seem to move very slowly—at times, too slowly. Until SCID contacted me, I had little knowledge of the issues surrounding dangerous driving or the people who were killed by it. Two years after meeting SCID members, I found myself working with SCID and a family in Bonnybridge, whose 15-year-old daughter had been killed in a road traffic accident. Kathleen Fitzpatrick was killed in January 2001 when she left her school bus, went to cross the road and was hit and killed instantly by a heavy goods truck that was passing the bus. When her family approached me in April 2001, they had just been advised that no charges were to be brought against the driver of the truck. We have heard about families whose cases have been referred only to the sheriff court, not to the High Court, or whose cases have been downgraded. The Fitzpatrick family did not even get their day in court after their 15-year-old daughter was killed on the street just across from their house. I am sure that many of us cannot imagine the pain that someone goes through when they lose a young child, but the pain that someone feels when they are told that no one will be held to account for the death of their child on a road is unimaginable. The local procurator fiscal office in Falkirk tried its best to keep the Fitzpatrick family involved and to inform them about what was happening. Although there were problems at times, the odd letter from an MP or MSP put the office back on track in ensuring that the family were kept informed. For the past year, the family have been pushing to get answers to why no charges were brought against the driver and to find out the exact circumstances. Through their persistence, a year after the accident there is to be a fatal accident inquiry, which I hope will provide answers. Families should not have to go through that process. They should not have to work for years to get answers to their questions. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee considered the Dekker family's petition—PE29—almost two years ago, but nothing has happened about it. I hope that the minister will take on board the point that Christine  Grahame made and the points that the Justice 1 Committee made in its letter to Jim Wallace. I hope that the Executive will set a clear timetable for action to ensure that families do not have to go through the suffering that they go through at the moment.

I want to raise two issues. The minister made great play of reducing the prison population by some 700, using alternatives to custody. Will the minister confirm whether that will be a reduction of 700 in the overall prison population or whether it will be nothing more than a reduction in an increasing prison population? Could the minister also refer to the £110 million modernisation fund that he announced today? The minister will be aware that capital investment is already taking place in Edinburgh and Polmont and that plans have been submitted for Perth. Does the £110 million constitute any new capital investment? Is the money that is already being spent in those three prisons included in the £110 million that the minister announced?

So it is not new money.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister guarantee that the loophole will be closed before October? If not, the Executive will allow people in Scotland to be exposed to sex offenders for four months. I believe that the Executive can deal with the matter more quickly. It has failed to address that point.

rose—

I cannot welcome the fact that we are debating the 34 th Sewel motion in the Parliament, and the ninth Sewel motion on a devolved area that relates to criminal justice matters. However, I am sure that most members recognise the need to close the loophole that was highlighted in the Steven Beech case, which affected Grampian police. I am sure that most members agree that few issues create greater public concern than how we deal with sex offenders and ensure that there is sufficient public safety. However, the matter—

I ask the member to bear with me. The matter highlights not only the inefficiencies of the present legislation but the difficulty of dealing with sex offenders. For the price of an £80 flight ticket to Aberdeen, Cambridgeshire police has been able to rid itself of the costly exercise of having to monitor a sex offender.

No, that is not the case. The situation highlights the financial implications for local constabularies. I understand that it is costing Grampian police £200,000 a year to deal with that individual, which highlights both the complexity of the matter and its financial implications. The question arises whether Westminster is using the best mechanism for closing that loophole by using a Sewel motion. The Police Reform Bill is a House of Lords bill; it is not a House of Commons bill. There is considerable uncertainty over the bill's timetable. I repeat that I am sure that all members recognise that that loophole should be closed, but the clerks who are dealing with the bill at Westminster have stated that it will be extremely difficult to ensure that the bill is passed before Westminster gets away for the summer recess. The loophole could be left open until October, when the House of Commons returns from the summer recess, and the Government has no control over the timetable because the House of Lords will deal with the final stage of the bill. I am sure that the minister recognises that it is important to close the loophole quickly. We have dealt previously with similarly urgent matters by means of emergency legislation. We did so with the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 1999 and the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2002. We also had emergency legislation on the Erskine bridge tolls. If legislation for reinstating tolls on the Erskine bridge was considered an emergency matter, closing a loophole in dealing with sex offenders is an even greater priority. The minister should have introduced emergency legislation. To say that there might be inconsistencies in the drafting of legislation in Scotland shows a lack of confidence in the Executive about being able to draft its legislation. Further, the Home Office has confirmed that drafting instructions, which detail exactly what has to be provided for, have been passed to the Executive. Therefore, the Executive has the information that would allow it to act. Can the minister give members a guarantee that the loophole will be closed before Westminster rises for its summer recess? If not, is he prepared to come back to Parliament, when we return from the summer recess, to introduce emergency legislation that would allow us to close the loophole, which would ensure public confidence in how we deal with sex offenders in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to ensure adequate funding of the police service. (S1O-5363)

Is the minister aware of the Edmund Davis blip and of the fact that police budgets are under increasing pressure because of the need to make pension payments? Does he recognise that pension payments will absorb the increase in central Government grant to the police from 2001-02 to 2003-04? Will the minister assure the chamber that the recruitment of new officers will keep pace with the increasing number of retirements? Is he prepared to review the central Government grant to the police, to ensure that they are able to invest in the service, instead of just funding pensions?

An interesting aspect of the debate is that it has illustrated the difference of opinion between the two Executive parties on how we should deal with youth crime. A consistent theme has been concerns about the way in which the children's hearings system operates. Historically, our children's hearings system has been held up as an example that many other countries should seek to follow. It has served its purpose in a number of ways, but there is an increasing feeling that it is untouchable and that we should not change it. Our society was different when the children's hearings system was established and a clear need exists for us to address concerns about the way in which the system currently operates. Johann Lamont highlighted a number of concerns about cases being marked "no progress", or cases not being referred to the children's panel. We have all witnessed the frustration of constituents who complain at our surgeries about what they see as the failure of the system to address the problem of persistent young offenders in our communities. We have also heard complaints from police officers. They become fed up when they lift people, the referral is passed on to the children's panel system and the case is marked "no progress". The problem demoralises communities, the people who are trying to improve their local environment and the police officers who are trying to address the concerns of the community. If we are to have an effective children's hearings system, it is essential that we move on and ensure that it reflects the complex problems that exist in our society. A number of members have mentioned secure accommodation. Christine Grahame highlighted the concerns that have been expressed to the Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee about the lack of available places. It is unacceptable that young people are being placed in adult prisons. The most recent statistics that are available, for 2000, show that 14 under-16s were held in adult prisons. That is 14 too many. Last week in a meeting with me, the director of social work in Falkirk Council highlighted the problem of having to seek secure accommodation places in the north of England. That is unacceptable, because it breaks the family link for the individuals concerned.

I acknowledge that it is for only a short time, but it is still unacceptable that any young people should find themselves in such an environment. A colleague mentioned the provision of services at HM Young Offenders Institution Polmont. I visited there recently and, when I went into the metal workshop, I found the inmates playing cards because there was no work for them to do. If we are to address their offending behaviour through remedial programmes such as work provision in young offenders institutions, we must ensure that there is work for them to do.

The throughcare provision at Polmont has improved considerably. However, when I met the director of social work of Falkirk Council, she highlighted her frustration at the on-going tendering process that the council must engage in with the SPS to provide social work services. I hope that we will see an end to that. I am conscious of the time, but I want to mention programmes. Freagarrach has been mentioned as a programme that works with young offenders, and Paul Martin highlighted programmes that are being run in Islington. We hear often about programmes that operate effectively in communities, but the problem—similar to that which was identified in our debate about alternatives to custody—is that those programmes are not rolled out across the country. We must ensure that the success of Freagarrach is reflected in other parts of Scotland. The programmes often deal with those who have committed offences. However, the Cluaran project in Falkirk is multi-agency based and involves community education, social work services and all the other services working together with families whose children are at risk of committing offences. The root causes of much youth offending are poverty and lack of opportunity. Unless we are willing to address the fundamental causes of the problem, youth crime will not be dealt with effectively. With child poverty increasing, the likelihood is that youth crime will, increasingly, be a problem in our society.

I congratulate Murray Tosh on having climbed almost all Scotland's Munros, which is no mean feat. The minister might agree that, given the contribution that physical activity can make to improving an individual's health and well-being, today's debate could be led by the Minister for Health and Community Care. Often we ignore the long-term problems that can arise in a society because of lack of physical activity among younger and older people. It is important that we take every opportunity to educate all members of our society about the potential health benefits of physical exercise. Some 20 per cent of younger people in Scotland are overweight. That illustrates the potential problems that we are storing up for the future in cardiovascular disorders, diabetes and high blood pressure. If we do not adopt a longer-term strategy to tackle those problems, they will return to haunt us. Margo MacDonald noted that a lack of physical exercise has a health cost for individuals and a financial cost for society. It is important that, where possible, we encourage young people to participate in regular physical activity. In doing so, we must tackle the barriers that prevent individuals from participating in such activities. The physical activity task force report cites 13 reasons that people commonly give for not participating in physical activity. Those reasons range from lack of money, being too old and having no one to go with to being put off by the weather. The last reason—point 12—I found rather disappointing. If we in Scotland depend on good weather to encourage people to become involved in physical activity, very few people will participate. We must ensure that people are aware of the benefits that can be gained from physical activity. In her speech, Cathy Peattie talked about the need to ensure that physical activity provision is as inclusive as possible. We must ensure that all members of our society are able to participate in physical activity equally and fairly. Provision for disabled people at sports centres is often limited to a ramp leading to the door. It is necessary to ensure that staff are educated and that they able to work with disabled people, so that disabled people can participate in the activities that interest them. Fergus Ewing referred to the Badaguish centre, which specialises in providing outdoor activities to young disabled people. We must also ensure that staff are aware of the religious and cultural sensitivities—for example, relating to dress—of people from ethnic minority groups. It is disappointing that the report does not  appear to tackle the issue of outdoor education. One of the many sad legacies of the Thatcher Government was the systematic closure of local authority outdoor centres, which were set up in the 1950s and 1960s to ensure that all young people had an opportunity to participate in outdoor activities. Because there is now a shortage of such facilities, it is very difficult for people from deprived communities to participate in activities in which they might be skilled. I hope that, in trying to increase the level of physical activity by young people and others, the minister will ensure that our education system provides young people with an opportunity to participate in outdoor activities. If, for example, someone is studying standard grade or higher geography, there is nothing better for them than going on a day's walk somewhere such as Glencoe to study glacial features, which will give them practical experience of the academic subject that they study in the classroom. I hope that we can consider the issue holistically. Excellent centres such as Glenmore lodge, which I visited recently with the cross-party sports group, were set up specifically to give young deprived people the opportunity, which every young person should have, to walk in the mountains of Scotland. I discovered that it has become very difficult for young people from deprived communities to participate, because local authorities are not providing that service. I hope that at the end of the process, we will ensure that young people are given the unique opportunity to appreciate the natural beauty of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to improve the provision of criminal justice social work services. (S1O-5267)

The minister will be aware that, in March 2000, the Scottish Prison Service decided to invite tenders for the provision of social work in four of its prisons. Can the minister explain why the independent evaluation of the tendering process, which was due to be published in the middle of December last year, has been delayed on at least four occasions? The evaluation will not now be published until June this year. Does the minister agree with the Association of Directors of Social Work in Scotland that more effective criminal justice social work could be provided in our prisons if funding was given directly to the local authorities, instead of to the prison service?

The debate has been constructive. There is much common ground on the potential benefits of alternatives to custody, although I am not sure whether Phil Gallie's bid to bring back the birch will carry much weight. Our nation locks up more people than many other western European nations do and there is clearly a need for more alternatives to custody. If we are to believe the figures in the prison estates review, the likelihood is that our prison population will continue to increase over the next eight to 10 years. Our society has become too dependent on custodial sentences. We lock up individuals who should not be in jail. There are those—some of them not too far away from us in the chamber—who subscribe to the simplistic notions that we should lock people up and throw away the key and that if prisons are overcrowded we should build more prisons. However, as a new Parliament, we have a responsibility to ensure that we have a mature debate about how we reform our penal system. Any modern society should be willing to question whether the current system is operating  effectively. Kenny MacAskill made that point in his speech. For politicians to suggest that we should lock up fewer people is potentially a rather risky strategy. Members will be aware that there are no votes in prisons and there is a misconception among members of the public that we do not lock up enough people. The figures show otherwise. We are locking up too many people. As politicians, we should be big enough to challenge that problem. Karen Whitefield highlighted the point that alternatives to custody are often treated as if they are a soft option. They are not a soft option. Alternatives to custody are often more difficult. As Bill Aitken highlighted, some people will choose to go to prison because they know that a community disposal could be more difficult for them. Prisons will always have a place in our society, to ensure public safety, but we should change the balance in our penal system, so that prison does not have the weight that it has currently. Roseanna Cunningham highlighted a number of cases of people who should not be in prison wrongly being placed there. A number of members have questioned whether the Executive is doing enough to address the problem of prison numbers and whether the current alternatives to custody are sufficient or effective in what they are meant to achieve. One of the Executive's targets is to tackle youth crime. We know that there are inadequate secure places for young people in Scotland. It is now a common occurrence for 14 and 15-year-olds to be placed in adult prisons. As Paul Martin correctly pointed out, if we are to prevent young people from going into a life of crime, we must be prepared to support and provide adequate funding to projects that work with young people to address their offending behaviour. Too often, we hear of a project that has been established and which works effectively, but which ends after three years when the funding is cut. We must ensure that there is greater continuity of funding for such projects. As Donald Gorrie said, when projects are successful, we must roll them out across the country. Some time ago, the Executive set a target to reduce the number of female prisoners in Scotland. In 1998, the former First Minister, Henry McLeish, who has been in the chamber for the majority of the debate, commissioned a report entitled "Women offenders - A Safer Way". The report recommended: "The number of women offenders who are sent to prison could and should be reduced." We were led to believe that that recommendation would be addressed, but what has happened  since the publication of the report? The population of Cornton Vale has continued to increase. A prison with a capacity of 230 is currently overcrowded, as it has 255 prisoners. The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice referred to the time-out project, which will be set up in Glasgow. He will be aware of the concerns that Pauline McNeill raised in the Justice 2 Committee—the project is meant to be a national project, based in Glasgow, but there are no proposals to have a similar project elsewhere in the country. Female offenders come from throughout Scotland, not just from Glasgow. The majority may come from Glasgow, but there is a need to ensure that there is consistency in the programmes that are delivered. The Executive has failed to address the number of female prisoners. We have heard that supervision orders, restriction of liberty orders and drug treatment and testing orders are not rolled out across the country in a uniform fashion. I have no doubt that ministers are committed to the idea of alternatives to custody, but if we are to evaluate programmes, it is essential that we waste no time in introducing them and ensure that they apply across the board. The minister has said, both at the Justice 1 Committee and today, that if we are to use alternatives to custody, they must have public confidence and the confidence of the bench. To achieve that, the alternatives must be sufficiently resourced. There are serious concerns that they are not sufficiently resourced. I turn to the issues that my colleagues have raised. The SNP has proposed constructive ideas to address the problem of prison numbers and the issue of finding suitable alternatives to custody. For example, the Executive stole from us the idea of drugs courts, which now exist in Glasgow and elsewhere. We are grateful for that, because the system appears to operate effectively. As Keith Raffan pointed out, drugs courts will not work if the support programmes that work alongside the courts do not receive sufficient resources. There is increasing concern that those resources are not being provided. I turn to fine defaulting and the unit fine system, which Bill Aitken said had been tested in England but did not work. The reason why that system was not rolled out in England was because the then Home Secretary, who was on a drive to be tough on crime, thought that it was a soft option. Interestingly, the people who are most affected by the unit fine system are the richest—the Tory voters from whom the Home Secretary knew that he was likely to lose votes. That is why the Tories did not roll out the unit fine system. Alternatives to custody are only one element of our penal system. I hope that, in considering the  prison estates review, ministers will take the opportunity to examine the penal system as a whole. They should consider how to reform the system so that it is more organised and so that it works for the benefit of the people of Scotland. In the coming elections, the penal system should not be a political football or subject to the whims of politicians who come up with new ideas that sound good but which do not address the problems that must be addressed.

They were very successful.

If the member had listened closely to what was said, he would know that compensation orders would not be applied only in financial terms but could involve repairing damage to property. Both physical work and financial penalties could be involved.

I have a question on houses in multiple occupation and the cost of installing domestic sprinklers. Does the minister accept that if we place an obligation on the owners of HMOs to install such systems when they are seeking licences, the cost would be neutral to the public purse, and the burden would have to be taken up by the owners?

I am sure that all members would support the Executive's desire to have an efficient and modern fire service, but we should be mindful of the extent of the problem of domestic fires in Scotland. Every year, there are about 13,000 fires in Scotland, the vast majority of which are controlled professionally and dealt with effectively by our fire service. Often, firefighters put themselves at risk in their work. Sadly, fires take people's lives. In 1999, 107 people in Scotland were killed by fires. The minister referred to the average levels of fire deaths in Scotland compared to those in England and Wales. In Scotland, on average, there are 21 fire deaths per million of our population, which is double the rate in England and Wales. Our record compared with that of England and Wales is only one aspect of the problem. If the rate of deaths in fires in Scotland is compared to rates in other European countries, it will be seen that we have one of the worst records in western Europe. That is not a failing on the part of our fire service, which is extremely professional and in  which people are very dedicated to their jobs. The rate is the result of social factors such as smoking, alcohol and the types of property in Scotland. The costs of fires to our society are considerable. I am sure that all members recognise that the loss of human life is by far the most important cost of any fire, but we should not ignore economic costs. There are costs to the fire service, the health service, councils and to other agencies. In 1999-2000, the estimated cost to agencies in Scotland of dealing with fires was about £180 million. If the number of people who are injured, killed and the financial costs of fires in Scotland are considered, we can see the extent of the problem. I want to turn to domestic fire sprinklers. We may want an efficient fire service, but we must also be prepared to prevent injuries and loss of lives as a result of fires. In "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future", the minister recommends that we should consider further the issue of domestic sprinklers. That is a missed opportunity. The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers Association—CACFOA—supports wider use of domestic fire sprinklers. Firemasters throughout Scotland, an increasing number of local authorities and the firemaster in the minister's constituency all support greater use of domestic fire sprinklers. Sylvia Jackson, who has unfortunately left the chamber, spoke about a local private company that is extending its work in that area. We require a radical approach to dealing with the number of fire deaths in Scotland and domestic fire sprinklers are a key way in which we can address that problem.

I am sorry, but my time is limited. Fire sprinklers can reduce significantly the number of fire deaths in Scotland. We should look at international comparisons, which show that fire sprinklers have a dramatic impact. I note from the document that ministers have ruled out our transferring something directly from another country to Scotland, but our record is such that we should lead the way in the matter. We should also be prepared to ensure that those who are particularly at risk from fires are targeted as a first priority. We saw the desperate situation in Glasgow, when a number of students were killed in a house in multiple occupation. Such properties are particularly vulnerable to fires. Sheltered housing complexes and residential nursing homes should be targeted because they are occupied by vulnerable individuals. There is also an issue about firefighters. When they enter a residential nursing home or sheltered housing complex, it  often means that they will have to carry someone from the fire. A number of members have said that they would like to commend our firefighters in Scotland for the work that they do. Firefighters support the wider introduction of domestic fire sprinklers. I ask members to join them in tackling fires by supporting the wider use of domestic sprinklers.

For the member's clarification, I should point out that it is a common misconception that domestic sprinkler systems are extremely sophisticated. Domestic sprinkler heads are activated only when the temperature of a fire reaches between 70 and 90 deg C. Members should not think that such systems operate in the same way as smoke detectors in houses.

I am sure that the majority of members will welcome the passage today of this important bill. Let me briefly add my thanks to the committee's staff—the amount of work that is placed on them often goes unnoticed—and members. I also thank those organisations that gave us evidence, which we found extremely useful in our consideration of the bill's provisions. The committee's scrutiny of the bill led to significant changes being made to it. I believe that those changes are for the better and  will only improve the freedom of information regime that the bill introduces. I continue to have concerns about the issues that I raised today—the question of campaigning and the use of the ministerial veto. However, the passage of the bill is only the beginning of the process. We have only to look at the experiences of other countries that have introduced freedom of information legislation. The effectiveness of the bill will not merely be down to its provisions; a change to the culture of secrecy that exists in many of our public services is required. I believe that that is the greatest challenge that the bill faces. The Information Commissioner of Canada said only last year that it has taken some 10 to 15 years to start to break down the culture of secrecy that exists in many of Canada's public services. I believe that such a culture is probably even more deep-rooted in Scotland. I hope that the public authorities are gearing themselves up so that they will be ready for the legislation. I wish the bill well in its passage.

I welcome the minister's comments on my probing amendment 78 and take note of his willingness to consult on whether social landlords should be included under schedule 1. I turn briefly to amendment 79 and the issue of whether private prisons should be subject to the freedom of information regime. I take note of what the minister said about private contracts and PPP projects. However, it is quite clear what Kilmarnock prison delivers. The contract that the public sector has with the prison makes clear what it does. I see no reason to delay making Kilmarnock prison subject to the provisions of the bill.  Amendment 78, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendments 42 to 47 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to. Amendment 79 moved—[Michael Matheson].

Yes.

I hope that you have another 10 bob for the meter.

Amendment 78 is essentially a probing amendment to seek clarification, as it is unclear whether a fire authority that is within a single local authority area is covered by the bill, as the bill refers to joint boards. I would welcome clarification from the minister on that. The purpose of amendment 79 is to ensure that private prisons are included as public authorities under the bill. Private prisons work for the Scottish Prison Service and it is essential that we have an opportunity to scrutinise what they do. The SPS often responds to questions from MSPs concerning Her Majesty's Prison Kilmarnock by saying that the information is commercially confidential or is the responsibility of Premier Prison Services. Even when we request information on matters such as the conditions in Kilmarnock medical centre, minimum and maximum nursing staff levels, agreements on procedures at the medical centre, the number of prison officers who are employed at Kilmarnock or issues relating to staff bullying, we are told that they are matters for Premier Prison Services, which naturally chooses not to provide us with that information. It is clear that those matters are of public interest. Neither the operating company nor the Prison Service has an interest in remedying situations that it thinks might be in its commercial interest, but which we think might not be in the public's interest. Amendment 79 will ensure that private prisons are treated on a level playing field with public sector prisons. In light of the fact that the outcome of the prison estates review might be that we will have more private prisons in Scotland, I see no reason why a private prison should be treated differently from a public prison. The same terms should apply to both private prisons and public prisons. I hope that members will support amendment 79 to ensure that private prisons are covered by the bill. I move amendment 78.

When the Justice 1 Committee considered the issue, it was not persuaded of the Executive's need for a five-year period of commencement. Although I welcome the Executive's amendment 37, I am not persuaded that there is even a need for a commencement period of three years and seven months.  At stage 2, I lodged an amendment whereby the commencement date would have been in two years, in line with the recommendation of the Justice 1 Committee's stage 1 report. At that stage, ministers were not persuaded by the argument. I recall from the discussion in the committee that members felt that the Executive had not put forward a strong argument against a two-year commencement period and that it was probably more in favour of three years. I therefore lodged an amendment that would have allowed a three-year commencement period, which would have been more than enough. The minister referred to the Irish experience of the introduction of a freedom of information act. I notice that the freedom of information act in New Zealand came into force within seven months, in Australia it came into force within nine months and in Canada it came into force within 12 months. I cannot see why we have to opt for three and a half years for implementation in Scotland. That makes it seem as though we find it difficult, for some reason, to implement the legislation. I see that the Deputy Minister for Justice is shaking his head in disagreement.

I will make my point first. The minister should have listened to the evidence that was provided by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which represents the public authorities that are probably going to be most affected by the legislation. COSLA stated that a year would be sufficient for local authorities to prepare for implementation. I see no reason why we need more than three years.

Given that COSLA representatives stated before the committee that a year would be sufficient, can I take that as an assurance from the minister that, from the day of royal assent, local authorities will implement the provisions of the legislation within a year?

I have not missed the point; rather, I do not accept the minister's point. If he considers the discussions that took place within the Justice 1 committee, he will see that we were not persuaded by his arguments. That is why the committee recommended that the legislation should commence two years after royal assent. That was the recommendation in the Justice 1 Committee's report. During the committee's stage 2 deliberations, when the minister was not willing to accept two years, it appeared that three years would be the compromise. We see that the minister is not even able to accept that today. I hope that members recognise that three years is more than long enough to implement this legislation.

I welcome the amendments that the Executive has lodged, because they represent a welcome step in the direction of limiting the way in which the section 52 certificate could be used. It will now only be possible to use such a certificate with issues that are considered to be of exceptional sensitivity. On amendment 8, I do not believe that a ministerial veto is necessary. The bill contains a range of exemptions and safeguards that apply to a variety of information, whether that information is secret, commercially sensitive, in the public interest or represents a class exemption. All those safeguards will ensure that information that should not be released to the public is not released. Therefore, I can see no reason for having such a backstop measure—the belt-and-braces approach that will allow ministers to veto a decision by the information commissioner to release information. That is what the ministerial veto will allow. The minister has said much today about the fact that the information commissioner has an important role to play in engendering an open culture and ensuring that the legislation works effectively. However, the ministerial veto will allow the First Minister to overrule the information commissioner when he has directed that information should be made available. There is no justification for such provision to be made in the legislation. If anything, the ministerial veto acts in favour of non-disclosure as opposed to acting in favour of disclosure. If ministers are intent—as it appears that they are—on maintaining the ministerial veto, it is unacceptable for them to allow themselves 10  working days before laying the certificate before Parliament. It is clear that ministers do not work at the weekend, but 10 working days is equivalent to two weeks. If ministers have consulted their Cabinet colleagues and have considered the matter seriously, surely it would be a perfectly simple matter for them to lay the certificate before the Parliament within five working days. I do not accept the minister's arguments about why there is a need for a fortnight's wait. The only reason that ministers might want to delay laying the certificate would be in order to take the political sting out of an issue. The sooner the certificate is before the Parliament, the earlier members will be allowed to scrutinise exactly why the First Minister has acted in such a way. That is why the time scale should be reduced from 10 working days to five working days.

The purpose of amendment 5 is to prevent public authorities from claiming commercial confidentiality when passing information between each other. It may seem odd to talk about public authorities trying to dress things up in commercial confidentiality, but increasingly frequently, a public authority will ask another to tender for a specific service. When the Scottish Prison Service put social work and education for prisoners out to tender and  public bodies tendered for the contract, commercial confidentiality prevented the release of information. I lodged a parliamentary question asking for the number of social workers at HMP Glenochil and at HM young offenders institution in Polmont, but the information was refused because the contracts specified outputs and not inputs, which are characterised by commercial confidentiality. It is clearly a matter of public interest to know what is happening in such public institutions, given that often—if not in all cases—the social work and education facilities are being provided by other public agencies. In another recent case, Glasgow City Council was unable to provide information relating to the national asylum support service on the basis that it was commercially confidential. I do not believe that one public authority that is working with another should be able to dress matters up in commercial confidentiality. Amendment 5 seeks to ensure that that does not happen. I move amendment 5.

I press the amendment.

I intend to move amendment 71. However, I want to make a point for the record. We are debating the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill, but time seems to be preventing us from having a proper debate. It is clear that we must urgently review the rules in standing orders for dealing with stage 3 debates.  I move amendment 71.

There are serious concerns about amendment 24. I understand that, when the Freedom of Information Bill was introduced in England, the loophole was referred to as the MAFF exemption, because it was the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food that pressed for such a provision to be included in the legislation. I understand the concerns that the minister has expressed and the way in which the Executive has tried to address the issues. However, I would like the minister to comment on whether people who are carrying out genuine research that is not yet complete and who do not want to provide information to their competitors will be covered by commercial confidentiality exemptions. Preliminary information shared among researchers is also protected by intellectual property rights. Are not the concerns that the minister has expressed sufficiently covered by existing provisions? I know that a number of organisations in Scotland believe that amendment 24 is a retrograde step, and that it will leave a significant loophole in the legislation. It will be interesting to hear whether the Deputy Minister for Justice thinks that the present provisions could address suitably the issues that have been raised, without having to create a potential loophole in the bill.

It is difficult to hear you, Presiding Officer.

Amendment 66 would remove the provision by which a public authority may deem several requests to be part of a concerted campaign and refuse to answer them if the cost of answering all the requests would be more than £500. The aggregation of requests allows public bodies to ignore two or more requests if they perceive them to have come from an organised campaign and if answering the requests would cost more than the prescribed threshold figure. Section 14 gives public authorities sufficient protection from vexatious or repeated requests. The campaigns exemption is open to abuse by public bodies, which could misinterpret several similar requests that originated from an organised campaign. Members should be minded that, in a democracy, the opinions of people who participate in a campaign do not count for less. Those people should continue to have a right to obtain information.

The Justice 1 Committee was given an example of a campaign that Friends of the Earth Scotland ran. It wrote to public  authorities throughout Scotland to request information. That campaign would fall foul of the system under the bill. I hope that members will recognise that the bill contains sufficient provisions to deal with vexatious or repeated requests. I move amendment 66.

Yes.

The minister is correct about the amendment that I lodged at stage 2. However, the text proposed by the Executive tidies up the issue and offers the clarity required in section 10.  Amendment 14 agreed to.

I will be brief, Presiding Officer. I note that there has been considerable concern in the disability community about this issue. RNIB Scotland, in its briefing, Capability Scotland, Enable, Sense Scotland and the Scottish Association for Mental Health all expressed that concern. My comments refer particularly to the Executive's amendment 12, which will delete a provision that was inserted at stage 2 to make specific provision for disabled people. I believe that amendment 12 is a step backwards and does not provide disabled people with the assurance that disabled organisations believe is required to ensure that the bill's provisions are implemented equally for everyone, irrespective of whether they have a disability.

The minister mentioned Phil Gallie's point about air traffic control. Perhaps my use of air traffic control as an example was not wise because air traffic control is covered by the UK regime, which means that amendment 1 would not affect it and that the Scottish freedom of information regime will not apply to it. Christine Grahame reflected on the serious concerns of the Justice 1 Committee at stage 2. We have not been provided with the reassurances  that the minister gave when he spoke to the committee on the issue. Donald Gorrie and John McAllion also sought reassurances. We must keep it in mind that the bill will become legislation. A different minister or Executive could have a different interpretation of the legislation and its application. It is all very well for the minister to give his personal reassurance, but that is based on his being the minister who will make decisions in future. I turn to the minister's comments. A number of issues must be corrected. John McAllion asked whether, if a local authority has an interest in a private company, the freedom of information regime will apply to that company. The answer is that it will not. Will we have to go to the commissioner to ask that he or she recommend to ministers that such a company should be covered by the regime?

I welcome the minister's clarification. However, it is wrong to give the impression that amendment 1 will alter those provisions. It will not. Amendment 2 makes specific reference to a controlling interest, "if a majority of shares in the company are held". If, for whatever purpose, a public authority takes a 5 per cent interest in a private company and members persuade the minister, or the minister chooses, to have it covered by the freedom of information regime, I would have thought that the bill should automatically apply to a public authority that took a controlling interest—a majority interest—in a private company. We should not have to consider whether the legislation should apply to such a company—that is the difference. Amendment 1 would not alter what John McAllion said or the minister's point to him. If a public authority takes a majority interest in a company, we have an obligation to ensure that the freedom of information regime applies to it. On universities and the impact that the bill may have on them, section 33 deals with commercial confidentiality. I do not see why any public authority should take a controlling interest in an important service without some public  accountability in terms of providing information. It is important that members are clear that there are two ways in which matters can be dealt with. We can leave it to ministers and the commissioner to do all the work, or we can ensure that when a public authority or group of public authorities takes a majority interest in a private company, the bill automatically covers them, instead of waiting for the Executive or the minister to act.

I refer Mr Gallie to section 33, which deals with commercial interests specifically to provide exemption for commercially confidential matters. I know that research matters will come up later. If an important public institution such as a university takes a majority controlling interest in a private company, should not the public have the right to information about that? I believe that they should. That is what amendment 1 would ensure. If a university chooses to take only a 5 per cent interest, amendment 1 would not affect it. It must have a controlling majority shareholding in the company.

There are provisions in the bill that will apply to universities as public authorities. Amendment 1 would mean merely that, if a university took a controlling interest, the bill would also apply to it. I see no reason why it should be otherwise. If it is, we will end up with a two-tier system in which it is okay for the private sector to take a majority interest in a private company, but a different standard will be applied to the public sector. Amendment 1 is about continuity and equality in the provisions of the bill. I therefore press amendment 1.

It is important that members are reminded of the Justice 1 Committee's recommendation at stage 1, which Christine Grahame highlighted. Members will also be aware that there is an increased incidence of the transfer of public services to the private sector. I have often heard members complain of the difficulties that are involved in obtaining accurate information from those private sector organisations. In the course of the evidence that the committee received, and which is contained in its report, Glasgow City Council stated that it believed that: "private organisations carrying out public functions should automatically be covered on the principle that 'openness is the price of doing business with the public sector'." I believe that a general provision should be made for public services that are transferred to the private sector. The problem with the system that the bill will introduce has been illustrated by the fact that, in the couple of weeks between stage 2 and stage 3, eight organisations have been taken off the list and one has been added. On that basis, I will press amendment 63.

It seems unreasonable that a company that is wholly owned by the public sector should be subject to the bill's provisions, but that a company in which private members hold a minority interest— [Interruption.]

As I said, it seems unreasonable that a company that is wholly owned by a public authority should be subject to the bill's provisions, but that a company in which private members hold a minority interest should not be. It would be easy for any public authority in such a position to sell its shares in such a business to ensure that the bill did not apply to it. For example, City of Edinburgh Council has a majority share in Savacentre, and the UK Government has a majority share in National Air Traffic Services. If it is fair for the public sector to take a private interest in such services, the bill should also apply in the circumstances where that happens. Amendment 2 is consequential on amendment 1, as it provides a definition of the phrase "controlling interest". As it stands, section 6 applies only to companies that are owned wholly by one public authority, and does not apply when a company is owned jointly by several authorities. Perhaps I am being slightly paranoid about this matter. However, local authorities are increasingly entering into partnerships with the private sector to provide services. It is important that we ensure that those services are included in the provisions of the freedom of information regime. I move amendment 1.

The purpose of the amendments—I will refer to them collectively as several are consequential—is to make special provision for records transferred to the keeper or to an archive service. The amendments make special provision for the National Archives of Scotland, in the name of the keeper, as it holds the records of several other public authorities. The same issue arises for other public authorities that hold archives for yet more public authorities. For example, Glasgow City Council holds records for Strathclyde Regional Council on behalf of 12 local authorities, Strathclyde fire brigade, Strathclyde police and West of Scotland Water. The intention of the amendments is to ensure that all public authority archives are treated in the same way as those of the National Archives of Scotland, as long as the archives are publicly accessible and that copies can be provided where appropriate. As is the case with the Keeper of the Records of Scotland, it is the business of such archivists to ensure that there is public access to records held in their care, whenever a request is made. However, when a request is made in accordance with the full range of the freedom of information legislation, there is some concern that the archiving service will be required to deal with matters such as family and historical research, largely at public expense. The professional management of records is a vital component in any freedom of information regime. The changes in the wording are intended to ensure that there is compliance with professional standards and will highlight the need to ensure that there are adequate resources to invest in archive and recording services in public authorities. Finally, the amendments are supported by the  Society of Archivists, Scotland. I move amendment 61.

I am surprised that no other members want to contribute to the discussion. I am somewhat reassured by what the minister has said. There is concern within the profession about the management of records and the professional standards that apply to it. I understand that there is concern to the extent that archivists believe that there is a requirement for some form of legislation to try to improve those standards and they have gone to the length of drafting their own bill for that purpose. However, because of the reassurance from the Deputy Minister for Justice, I seek to withdraw amendment 61.  Amendment 61, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 62 not moved.

The purpose of amendment 63 is that, where a function of a public authority is privatised or put into the charitable or voluntary sector, the body to which the service is to be transferred will be treated as a public authority. If it is not, the Scottish Executive will have to give reasons to the Scottish Parliament as to why it should not be classified as a public authority. Private finance initiatives and contracting out of services mean that the bill will no longer cover many functions that public authorities used to undertake and which have been transferred or contracted out. Allowing sources of information to slip out of the freedom of information regime runs against the spirit of the bill. We should have a right to know the staffing levels in our direct labour organisations, our public hospitals, our schools and our public prisons, as we do at present, but we should also have a right to that information if those services are contracted out. The public interest remains the same, irrespective of who undertakes such roles. Amendment 63 would address the problem of the lack of a level playing field between public authorities, such as direct labour organisations, which compete with private companies for public service contracts. Private companies, unlike public authorities, do not incur the costs of the freedom of information regime and do not have to reveal information to their rivals on request. If that loophole in the bill is not closed, the danger is that it could act as an incentive for privatisation for  authorities that do not like, or do not wish, to place information in the public domain. Those difficulties exist primarily because the Executive has failed to include in the bill a general definition of a public authority. Instead, it has chosen to provide a list of all the public authorities to which the bill will apply. The complexity of that arrangement has been highlighted in the past few weeks, as the Executive has had to lodge eight amendments to take account of institutional changes. Furthermore, the Executive had to lodge an amendment to add licensing boards to the list, which had been missed out of schedule 1. The best way of ensuring proper democratic accountability of services that move from the public sector to private contracts would be to include a provision that applies the freedom of information regime to services that transfer to the private sector. I move amendment 63.

The SNP supports amendments 59 and 60. Donald Gorrie raised this concern at stage 2, but the matter was not suitably addressed in committee and concerns linger. Some members may think that public authorities would not do something such as prevent the publication of requested information by quickly going round the corner and destroying it. However, if we are to ensure that the provisions of the bill work effectively, it is important to ensure that there are no loopholes. Amendments 59 and 60 seek to close such loopholes.

The debate has been extremely useful and we have heard several considerable contributions. George Reid was right when he stated that opposition to private prisons is based not purely on ideology but on moral and ethical grounds. Several members referred to the right-wing former Home Secretary, Jack Straw, who, when he was in opposition, opposed private prisons because "almost all people believe that this is one area where the free market does not exist". Today, those seem hollow words. If the state requires a person to be deprived of their liberty, it is the state's responsibility to provide the prison for them. In the past, MSPs have been keen to line up in outrage about prisoners who have written books to profit from their crimes. I believe that it is wrong and outrageous that private multinational companies should profit from crime by housing prisoners. Prisons are a basic component of our criminal justice system. As several members have pointed out, the only way in which a private company can make a profit from running a company is by paying the staff less and by employing fewer staff. That is what happens in Kilmarnock. George Reid said that the last thing that we should do is to go down the road that America has gone down. Members should be mindful of the fact that, if the proposals in the prison estates review  are implemented, 38 per cent of our prisoners will be housed in private prisons. In America, the proportion is only 3 per cent. Not only would we Americanise the prison system, we would surpass the Americans in doing so. Over the past two years, figures have been bandied about comparing the cost of private prisons such as Kilmarnock and public SPS establishments. The SPS even tried to have us believe that the cost per prisoner in Kilmarnock was in the region of £11,000. The SPS's calculation clearly did not make a fair comparison. On 1 February 2001, I asked the Minister for Justice to explain the conflicting figures on the cost per prisoner in a public prison and the cost per prisoner in Kilmarnock prison. The minister said: "We have asked independent accountants to evaluate the figures that will be contained in the review."— [ Official Report , 1 February 2001; Vol 10, c 880.]  He made it clear that a group of independent accountants would look at the figures to ensure that there was a fair comparison between public and private. He went on to say that that would be done so that we could compare "apples with apples". Today, the minister referred to the PricewaterhouseCoopers report as independent verification and validation. However, Alasdair Morgan referred to PwC as "the Greeks". How independent is PricewaterhouseCoopers? Under clause 64 of the Kilmarnock contract, the SPS gave the company delegated powers to sign the financial part of the contract on its behalf. PricewaterhouseCoopers's fingerprints were all over the Kilmarnock contract from day one. As Roseanna Cunningham said, the GMB drew attention to the fact that PricewaterhouseCoopers is involved in 132 PPP projects across the country to the tune of £18 billion. Forgive me if I appear a little cynical, but PricewaterhouseCoopers does not strike me as being an independent firm of accountants. On the contrary, it strikes me that it is a company that has a vested interest in PPP projects. It is up to its eyes in PPP projects across the country. The report was commissioned purely to justify the continued privatisation of our prison service. It was provided as a convenience for ministers to hide behind when they are asked questions about why they want to continue with privatisation. The minister said that the report would allow us to compare apples with apples. However, Maureen Macmillan stated that there is a strong suspicion that the report does not allow us to do that. She is right to have that concern. She highlighted the fact that the costs in the report for the private sector do not take account of pensions,  whereas those for the public sector do. The SPS made an assumption about the public sector services that will be provided, such as those for a medical centre. However, those costs have not been included in the private sector calculations. The public sector options also include costs for the SPS headquarters and for a training college, but the private sector submission makes no provision for those. PwC also fails to include costs for the tendering process, which can be substantial, and it conveniently leaves out the cost for contract compliance. The financial case that is made in the report has been cobbled together purely to demonstrate the continued desire of those senior civil servants in the SPS who want to ensure that privatisation wins the day.

The intervention will not be original. Take a seat. Given that hundreds of prison officers and their families have waited for the review for two and a half years and as their lives will be affected by the review, the report should at the very least have made comparisons on a level playing field. However, it is an abject betrayal of the prison officers who have dedicated themselves to the service for so long.

That is not the case. I understand that ministers began the estates review before PricewaterhouseCoopers were involved in the process; ministers decided only at a later date to bring in PricewaterhouseCoopers to carry out the validation process. Phil Gallie should address the question to the minister.

In effect, the report was about a deal that had been done. It is being used to justify a case. No way is it an independent evaluation. I will speak about Kilmarnock prison. I begin by pointing out to Margaret Jamieson that my criticisms of the prison are levelled not at the staff but at the management.

If Scotland's only private  prison had been a success and if it had demonstrated that it was much more effective in dealing with offenders while providing staff with a good working environment and wages and conditions of service equal to those in the public sector, perhaps I could have appreciated the Minister for Justice's enthusiasm for the private sector option. However, the chief inspector of prisons' latest report, which was published only this week, again highlights many deficiencies at Kilmarnock prison. For example, there have been more assaults on staff by prisoners. The prison continues to have a high staff turnover, although it is doing well—the level of turnover is decreasing. Moreover, the prison has the highest level of self-harm among prisoners, the worst record for deaths in custody, the poorest prison discipline record, one of the poorest records on staffing levels and the worst rate of staff sickness. Finally, of the 41 fires that occurred in prisons across Scotland last year, somehow 26 of them happened at Kilmarnock.

I am sure that the  Official Report will bear out what Mr Reid says. I found it interesting that the chief inspector of prisons also highlighted the fact that the staff at Kilmarnock not only have felt unsafe in the past, but feel that the situation is deteriorating. That is the very prison that Bill Aitken told us is doing well and is indeed better than SPS establishments. However, its record does not strike me as glowing. I turn briefly to Peterhead prison. When I visited Peterhead with the Justice 1 Committee, I felt for the first time that I was in an establishment that was doing what it should have been doing: working with offenders to deal with their offending behaviour. I believe that the prison's closure will put the public at risk. Indeed, Bill Rattray, who was the governor of Peterhead for six years, told the Justice 1 Committee this week that he had no idea what the implications of the closure will be. That is a risk too far. Moreover, given some of the comments from Labour members, the minister should realise that this is a privatisation too far.

rose—

In preparing for today's debate, I was interested to note that the Executive's website appears to contain only one publication that refers to civil emergencies. Although the Parliament is debating civil emergencies this afternoon, the subject does not appear to have been at the top of the Executive's agenda in years gone by. Members have covered most of the issues that required to be addressed. The minister's speech was relatively reassuring. Several members have highlighted that the planning process for dealing with civil emergencies is crucial in ensuring that there is an effective response when an emergency occurs. Sadly, effective planning for an emergency can be tested only when the emergency itself takes place, but we are fortunate that such emergencies rarely occur. However, there is always a need to ensure that the plans are updated and, where possible, reviewed to consider whether changes and improvements can be made. A lot of staff commitment is required for emergencies. Several members have referred to the role of the police, the fire service and the ambulance service but, as members have indicated, local authorities and health board staff also have a role to play. However, many local authority and health board staff have not been given a dedicated role in emergency planning. The staff are often officers of the council or members of the health board who have volunteered to take up a role during a civil emergency. For many of them, that involves a considerable level of commitment and dedication as they need to be trained for an event that they hope will never occur. By volunteering, the staff put themselves on 24-hour call, 365 days a year. Although they are not called upon often, the Parliament should record its recognition of the dedication that many members of staff display. Climate change was mentioned. Flooding seems to be an increasing problem in several areas across Scotland. The best known of those areas is probably Perth, although considerable work has been done there to address that problem. The Executive has produced figures for the potential rise in the cost of flood damage from the present figure of £28 million. The figures show an increase of 27 per cent by 2020, and by 2050 the increase will be some 86 per cent. Many of us will not be around in 2080, but the cost will have increased  by 115 per cent by then. Adequate preventive measures need to be put in place to ensure that such flood damage does not take place.

That example illustrates the very real issues that relate to climate change and the on-going problem of flooding, which is not only a Scottish or a UK issue, but one that affects countries across the world. Holland has a particular problem in that respect. It is interesting to note that, under the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961, local authorities have a clear and wide-ranging responsibility for the issue. I hope that ministers will ensure that local authorities have the resources that they need to tackle the problem. I turn briefly to the issue of terrorism. A number of members highlighted concerns about the possibility of a threat to nuclear power stations and nuclear weapons. I was interested to hear that, in Devonport and Plymouth, schools near to the nuclear military facilities have radiation alarms. Medication—I believe that it is potassium iodide tablets—is also provided for children if an alarm goes off. Will the minister inform members whether schools near to a nuclear power station or a military facility such as Faslane will be offered a similar facility? It is essential that, if such an event were to happen, the appropriate measures would be taken to reduce the harm that it could cause to the local community. Like Bill Aitken, I hope that the issue is one that we do not have to return to. However, it is essential to ensure that we have the proper plans and services in place to deal with emergencies.

The minister advised that about 670 staff will be affected by the reduction in size of Barlinnie and the closure of Low Moss and Peterhead but that  there will be no compulsory redundancies. Can he explain what will happen to those staff? Will they be absorbed into the current estate? Will he also advise us whether the staff in the new prisons will be on a similar rate of pay to that of the current public sector staff? Will the ratio of prison officer staff to prisoners be the same in the new private prisons?

Does the minister not agree that it would be better to address the issue in the access code instead of in the bill?

I welcome the Justice 2 Committee's report. The debate has been interesting because, although the Minister for Environment and Rural Development  tried to maintain his party's line, it was clear from the speeches of his back benchers that a number of them believe that the bill does not go far enough and that there are still matters to be addressed, particularly in relation to commercial interests. The debate has also been interesting because, if we are to believe Bill Aitken, the Minister for Environment and Rural Development—Captain Mainwaring—has become Che Guevara. I have never considered the minister's sidekick, Jim Wallace, to be a Fidel Castro. The 3,500 responses that the Executive received on the draft bill illustrate the considerable public interest in the issue. Of those 3,500 responses, around 80 per cent were on access. A number of members referred to the confusion about the trespass law in Scotland. I confess that, before I read the Justice 2 Committee's report, I thought that there was no law of trespass in Scotland. I still think that that is the case, but I have been left somewhat confused and I do not believe that the minister has cleared the matter up. Even my colleague Alasdair Morgan believes that he is free to roam wherever he chooses. Perhaps the minister has created problems for himself by the way in which he has chosen to interpret the matter. As a climber, access is close to my heart. We should all cherish freedom of access to our land. A number of members highlighted the importance to rural communities of outdoor activities. The most recent opinion poll that I can find shows that 80 per cent of people believe in the principle of public access to our land. I have some concerns about the access provisions in the bill and the proposed access code. I am concerned that the Executive might make the situation too confusing, which would inhibit people from accessing land and cause confusion about their rights. It is essential that we address such issues in the access code, so that they can be dealt with flexibly and returned to at a later date. The access forum will have an important role in considering those issues and I welcome the fact that NFU Scotland has decided to rejoin the forum. Nevertheless, concerns have been expressed—I do not know whether the committee received evidence on the subject—about access for disabled people. Section 3—"Reciprocal obligations of owners"—prevents "unreasonable interference". For an able-bodied person, "unreasonable interference" might not mean much, but to someone who has a disability, it could mean something much more important. I hope that the minister will reflect on that.

It is important that landowners should not be able to use such a provision to lock gates and erect stiles where they could provide a reasonable alternative, as such action could inhibit a disabled person. I hope that landowners will be reminded that they have a responsibility to provide access. That issue can be addressed in the access code. I hope that the minister will bear that in mind when the code is considered. Several members mentioned responsible access. Anyone who listened to the Tories could be forgiven for thinking that everyone who tries to access the countryside is some type of hooligan out to break up the countryside, damage people's buildings and cause problems for the local communities.

Bill Aitken can sit down. We heard a lot from him this afternoon. The vast majority of people who access our countryside do so responsibly. However, I cannot say that all landowners act responsibly. Fergus Ewing referred to the voluntary code that was implemented by those who used the countryside during the foot-and-mouth outbreak. At the end of that period, when signs could be removed, I found that many areas of land in places where I often climb still had signs up saying "Keep Out—Foot and Mouth". If the landowners had acted as responsibly as the walkers, people would have a little more respect for their views on the issue. Several members mentioned section 9(2)(a). I have several friends and colleagues who are mountain guides and outdoor instructors. From my experience as an outdoor instructor, I appreciate the impact that the provision could have on employment. I have serious reservations about section 9. Although the Queen's estate gives regular open access to Lochnagar, mountain guides might, under the bill, have to seek the Queen's permission to use the land. The minister said that he was willing to consider the matter on the basis of the difference between exploitation of the land and passage through the land. I say to him that a mountain guide taking a group to climb a crag on Lochnagar is going to exploit the land, not pass through it. We must be clear about how we interpret section 9. I believe that it should be removed completely. We have heard a lot from the Tories about subsidies for those who purchased land such as Eigg and Assynt. However, the Tories have made no reference to the £2 million that has been given to a laird for tree planting. They have made no  mention of woodland grant schemes, management funds for sites of special scientific interest or the money and grants that are regularly provided to landowners. We do not believe that the bill goes far enough. The right to buy should be triggered when land is transferred. Inheritance—transfer within a family or to a trust—should also trigger the right to buy. The bill should go further. The only ones who want to impede it are the Tories—as ever.

I will not take all my allotted time, as I am sure that Gordon Jackson will have a number of points that he wishes to cover on behalf of the committee. A number of members have concentrated on civil legal aid, and I wish to pick up on a few matters relating to criminal legal aid. Since the introduction of fixed fees in April 1998, the fixed fee system has been something of a running sore among those who work in the legal profession. It is clear that things are getting rather bad when friends who are solicitors take every opportunity to nip yer heid, even in the pub, about the impact of the fixed fee system. We should reflect on the reasons why we have arrived at the present situation. It was interesting to hear the evidence of the then Deputy Minister for Justice, Iain Gray, who stated: "The legal aid fund is demand led."—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 19 June 2001; c 2580.] Christine Grahame picked up on that point, and ministers are often keen to highlight it. Given the evidence that was presented to us, particularly in consideration of the impact that the fixed fee system has had on the legal aid budget, I cannot help but feel that what we have is, in all but name, a capping system. When the fixed fee system was introduced, the Westminster Government perceived legal aid as an open-ended commitment to an ever-escalating budget, which had to be brought under control—hence the fixed fee system. In written evidence to the committee, the Glasgow Bar Association described the fixed fee system as "a very blunt axe to deal with a fine problem." The introduction of the fixed fee system for criminal legal aid brought with it the concept of swings and roundabouts: if a solicitor makes something in one case, that may be offset against a case in which they may have been over the fixed fee limit. That concept does not, however, recognise the fact that, ethically, solicitors are required to ensure that they prepare all cases properly—they cannot decide, for example, that when they have reached their fixed fee of £500 the clock should stop and they have finished.  The evidence that was received by the committee showed that solicitors often encounter a whole series of swings but very little in the way of roundabouts. Some people might think that I am talking about "The Magic Roundabout", but this is a serious issue for many solicitors, particularly those who practise in criminal legal aid. I might be a little old-fashioned, but I believe that the going rate should be paid for a piece of work. If it costs £150 for a solicitor to do a piece of work, he should be paid £150; a solicitor should not be paid £500 for doing £150-worth of work. Conversely, why should a solicitor do £700-worth of work when he will receive a fixed fee of only £500? I was surprised to note from the evidence that we received that no value-for-money test has been applied to the fixed fee system since its introduction. I welcome the fact that the Executive has agreed to undertake later this year some form of research into the impact that the system has had since it was introduced. One concern that I have—and which was highlighted to the committee—relates to the impact that the fixed fee system is having on our ability to attract young solicitors into criminal legal aid work. Some of the evidence that we received, particularly from the Glasgow Bar Association, made it clear that young potential members of the profession are being put off by the financial limitations of working within the criminal legal aid system. It is a matter of concern that those limitations are discouraging good people from entering this area of work. At the same time, the fixed fee system appears to be forcing out people who have experience of criminal legal aid work. Peter Gray of the Faculty of Advocates stated that "in the region of 40 per cent of the more experienced junior counsel and senior counsel"—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 13 March 2001; c 2257] have left the bar in the past five years. People may have a variety of reasons for choosing to leave the criminal bar, but it is clear that one contributory factor is the fixed fee system. The fixed fee system has wider implications both for solicitors and for other parts of the legal profession. The system is in the interests neither of the client nor of the solicitor and will serve only to undermine the administration of justice. I hope that the discussions that arise from today's debate and the further evidence that the Justice 1 Committee receives will allow the committee in its subsequent report to tackle a number of the chronic problems, which, if they are not addressed, will continue to be a running sore within the legal system.

I will continue the consensus by warmly welcoming the bill. However, it is important that what the bill can achieve is kept in context. As Jackie Baillie said, we should all cherish the right for any child to have education. Sadly, over the years, many disabled children who have  sought to go to their local primary or secondary school have found themselves left at the school gate as the school was not suitable for them because of their disability. Anything that seeks to end such discrimination against young people is welcome. I will refer to a couple of sections of the bill that require clarification. Section 1(2)(b) refers to "associated services". It appears that that term is a reference to extra-curricular activities that take place within the school campus. It is important to keep in mind that schools can undertake extra-curricular activities outwith the school campus, such as going to a museum. I am aware that museums and other service providers are covered by the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and that it is difficult for the minister to address the issue. However, we may need to put something in guidance alongside the bill to ensure that when the section is being interpreted it is clear that extra-curricular activities outwith the school campus are also to be considered; when the children go to the museum or elsewhere, a child who has a disability should not be left behind because of a lack of suitable disabled facilities. Like Jackie Baillie, I welcome the fact that the minister is seeking at stage 2 to lodge an amendment to section 1(3) on alternative formats for the provision of accessibility strategies. Section 4 makes provision for obtaining records and for those who are providing the records to supply copies and "to charge such fees as they think fit" although it adds in brackets "(not exceeding the cost of supply)". The Justice 1 Committee has been debating a similar issue in relation to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill. Concern has been expressed that it may be much more costly to obtain such records in an alternative format than it would be to get a photocopy of the records. It is essential that disabled people are not put off requesting the records in an alternative format. The minister might want to reflect on the issue and consult her colleagues who are dealing with the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill, because we are anxious to ensure that a charging mechanism that is introduced under that legislation also meets the needs of disabled people and does not discriminate against them in terms of cost. I will mention a couple of wider issues. I welcome the fact that the bill deals with access to school buildings and the curriculum. Only yesterday, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, Mary Mulligan, and I met an organisation called Playback, which works with  young people who require equipment to access facilities such as schools. It is all very well for schools to have disabled access provisions and to talk about access to the curriculum, but many young disabled people cannot get the wheelchair that they require to go to school. As an example, Playback mentioned a young girl who had to wait for more than a year to get the right wheelchair to go to school. If we are to make school buildings and the curriculum accessible, we must ensure that service providers such as the national health service meet the needs of young disabled people by providing them with equipment that will allow them to use the facilities that the bill will make available. I want to refer to the continuing problem that a number of local authorities experience in relation to children with special educational needs who are in facilities that are outwith their area. Local authorities cannot accommodate all children in their area. During a recent briefing by Falkirk Council, which a colleague attended, the director of education highlighted the fact that the cost of placing young people with special educational needs outwith the local authority area has increased by 50 per cent in the past year. That trend puts considerable pressure on local authorities that are trying to meet the needs of disabled people who require special educational establishments. Although I welcome the bill, we must ensure that there is proper joined-up thinking and working in Government departments to ensure that there is a proper package for disabled children, irrespective of which school they attend or which local authority area the school is in. I hope that the minister will take this opportunity to ensure that there is a proper strategy for disabled children, not one that covers only the curriculum and school buildings.

During the course of our debates on the bill, a number of extremely important contributions have been made. Several individuals have raised important points, in particular about resources, which I hope ministers will reflect on. We are all conscious of the good work that is done by our procurators fiscal and court administrators, but we need to ensure that they have the resources to do their job as well as possible. Members also recognise that responsibility for the situation does not lie with particular organisations or individuals, such as the Crown Office or the sheriffs. All departments that play a part in the administration of justice in Scotland need to work closely together to ensure that such problems do not occur. I listened to what the minister said about the standardisation of procedures in courts and the potential problems that can be encountered. We need to weigh up whether, as well as removing problems, standardisation would create other potential difficulties. An evaluation needs to be made of the best approach to allow different courts to have the necessary flexibility. However, it is important that the public has confidence in the system. The potential for difficulties exists, but I am of the view that we should seek standardisation so that public confidence in our justice system is maintained. There may be merit in pursuing standardisation where that is necessary. Several members have highlighted the value of the Scottish Parliament, which has responded to the situation so rapidly. I would be surprised if Westminster could have responded as quickly. It is to the credit of the Executive and the Parliament—and all the parties within it—that we have been prepared to move so quickly.

Well done, Westminster. However, I think that we probably do things better than Westminster, irrespective of the time taken. Several members mentioned that the reason for passing the bill on an emergency basis is that the  victims of crime could suffer most if they saw a person accused of committing a crime walking away as a result of an administrative problem. An accused person should have their day in court to justify themselves and put their case. It is important that victims have confidence in the Scottish criminal justice system and see justice being done. I thank the minister for making his officials available to Opposition spokespersons for background briefings and I await the latest instalment from Linlithgow sheriff court.

As I said earlier, the SNP supports the bill, which results from the appeal court ruling made on 14 February in the Reynolds case at Linlithgow sheriff court. The minister has also pointed out that the bill will put on a statutory footing a procedure that was presumed to be part of the system. The appeal court ruling in the case might have had a considerable impact on our criminal justice system if the emergency legislation had not been introduced. Indeed, the minister has already outlined the ruling's potential impact. However, the circumstances that gave rise to the problem in the first place raise a number of serious questions about our criminal justice system. The problem with the Reynolds case appears to be that the style used by the sheriff clerk for granting the warrant for Reynolds's arrest did not include the discharge of the trial diet. The case highlights the variation in the practice of handling such warrants across district courts and other sheriff courts. Some clerks do not automatically  issue a discharge of the trial diet when a warrant is issued. I am concerned that such variation has been able to creep into our criminal justice procedures across Scotland, and it raises the question why the glitch in the system was not picked up earlier. As I mentioned earlier, about 2,500 warrants are outstanding throughout Scotland from intermediate diets. All the cases are potentially under threat. It is clear that if the legislation were not applied retrospectively, as the minister has said, literally thousands of cases, probably dating back to 1981, could be challenged. As the minister said, we should always be careful in applying any legislation retrospectively. I am sure that someone is currently considering challenging the legislation under the European convention on human rights on the basis of its retrospective application. I do not want to be alarmist, but I would welcome an assurance from the minister or the Solicitor General that they are confident that the bill will stand up to any strong ECHR challenge. It is important for members to reflect on the pressures that our criminal justice system is under. This challenge in itself has probably added greater pressure to our prosecution and court administration services. The ruling in the Reynolds case might have been unexpected, but sadly it fits a pattern of procedural errors and other mistakes by one party or another that have often resulted in the accused walking free. The responsibility for that problem does not lie with any particular party, but it is an issue that we must address. The Chhokar case highlighted the pressures under which the Crown Office operates. In August last year, there was the case of Andrew Sands. He was accused of two stabbings and attempted murder but, because the Crown Office had miscalculated his trial date, he walked free. At the end of January this year, Austin and Paula Arthur, who were accused of drug dealing, walked free because the search warrant that the Crown produced in court was found to be a photocopy. Those cases are all symptomatic of a system that is under pressure. It is not only our Crown Office that is under pressure; our courts, too, are struggling to keep pace with the ever-increasing demands being placed upon them. Over the past two years, sheriff courts have consistently failed to meet their targets for waiting times. The courts face the increasing problem of the adjournment of trials: 42 per cent of trials were adjourned last year—a 6 per cent increase on the previous year. One of the most common reasons for adjournment to another date is pressure of time. Notwithstanding the technical glitch that has resulted in this piece of legislation coming before us, it is important to ensure that those who are responsible for running our criminal justice  system—whether they are court administrators or the prosecutors—have the necessary resources to discharge their duties adequately. Sadly, the variation between one court and another and the fact that our prosecution services were unable to pick up on the procedural anomaly earlier highlight yet again the inadequacies in our system. The bill should be passed today on the basis that those who are accused should have their day in court and those who are victims should have an opportunity to see justice being done.

The SNP supports the bill. The Minister for Justice has outlined the legal reasons why we find ourselves having to pass the legislation. The bill will return our criminal procedures to the way in which everyone thought they operated in the first place and will put the procedures on a statutory footing. Since the Executive announced its intention to introduce the emergency bill, I have had an opportunity to speak to a number of people who practise in sheriff courts throughout Scotland and to raise the matter with organisations such as the Law Society of Scotland. It is clear that there is strong support for the bill among those who work in our legal system. This is the second occasion on which the Parliament has had to legislate as a result of a ruling made in Linlithgow sheriff court. Some members may recall the Starrs case, which resulted in the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill having to be brought before the chamber. The matter raises interesting questions about the goings-on of defence solicitors at Linlithgow sheriff court. Members would be forgiven for thinking that there may be an element of competition among them to see who can get the most bills through the Scottish Parliament in a year. Notwithstanding that, the bill is justified and should be dealt with on an emergency basis. The Minister for Justice has outlined why that is the case. Currently, 2,500 warrants from intermediate diets are outstanding in Scotland and could be at risk if the bill is not passed today. I welcome the provision that will allow the bill to apply retrospectively, because the danger is that, without such a provision, there could be challenges about cases going back as far as 1981, when intermediate diets were introduced. It is in everyone's interest to ensure that the bill is given fair passage this afternoon on an emergency basis.

When the ministers next meet sportscotland, will they be prepared to raise the issue of establishing football supporters' trusts in Scotland? The minister will be aware of the increasing development of such trusts in England and Wales, which the Government has provided with financial support. Here in Scotland, no financial support has been provided for the establishment of such trusts. Given that Lord Watson was a keen supporter of football supporters' trusts when he was a back bencher, do the ministers still support the establishment of such trusts? Are they willing to provide financial support for their establishment?

rose—

The deputy minister referred to the need for the ministerial veto in matters of national security or terrorism. However, such situations would be covered by absolute exemptions. I still have not heard a reason why the bill must contain a ministerial veto.

Elaine Bailey, who is the managing director of Premier Custodial Group Ltd, in her evidence to the Justice 1 Committee, agreed that the committee members could see the full contract in private. Why did she write back to the committee on 20 December 2001—some two months after giving that evidence—stating that the offer has been withdrawn?

Most members have been constructive in welcoming the general principles of the bill, with the exception of the Conservatives. The Justice 1 Committee report and the comments that have been made by other members today make it clear that a number of changes must be made to the bill to improve it further. Openness and transparency are important features in any modern, mature democracy. The fact that the bill goes further than the Westminster legislation shows that the Scottish Parliament has demonstrated a greater willingness to enhance its democratic credentials. The Tories' position in the debate has been strange. In his opening comments, Lord James stated that the Conservatives "support open government with flexibility". I see no reason why the Conservatives would not support the bill, if they wanted to put their words into action. Murdo Fraser said that the  Conservatives support the right of the individual. However, it appears that they do not support the individual's right to information. As members have suggested, an ingrained culture of secrecy exists in many of our public authorities. It is easy for the Conservatives to suggest that the authorities should just make the information public in the first place. The reality is that there is a culture of secrecy, which must be addressed. The best way to do that is through the bill. Unfortunately, some public authorities seem to think that any form of external inquiry is to be viewed with suspicion. We should consider freedom of information regimes in other countries. One of the greatest challenges that other countries have faced in implementing their regimes is the breaking-down of a culture of secrecy. Last year, the Information Commissioner of Canada visited Scotland and delivered a lecture, during the course of which he highlighted the fact that, in the 10 to 15 years since Canada introduced its own freedom of information regime, the Government had continually had to address the need for a culture change among public authorities. The Scottish freedom of information commissioner will have an important role in promoting the bill when it is enacted and in changing that culture. I turn to the list of public authorities in the bill. Concern has been expressed that there are areas or organisations to which the bill will not apply. Schedule 1 lists several public authorities that, according to section 5(2)(a), "appear to the Scottish Ministers to exercise functions of a public nature". As several members have pointed out, public services are increasingly being provided by private companies. Examples that Unison Scotland cited to the Justice 1 Committee included the provision of services under social inclusion partnerships and housing associations, and, as John Farquhar Munro said, there is the PPP for the Skye bridge. Premier Prison Services is running Kilmarnock prison at considerable cost to the taxpayer but will not be covered by the bill. In his intervention on Bill Aitken, Brian Fitzpatrick said that he was keen to ensure that the Prison Service was made more open and transparent. Unfortunately, the Scottish Prison Service is not listed in the bill as a public authority. That is to be regretted. The committee's report recognises the fact that not all public authorities can be listed. However, with the increasing dependency on private companies to provide public services, there must be a level playing field in the application of the bill's provisions. Unison Scotland highlighted the fact that there is a danger that we could create a two-tier freedom of information system if that issue  is not addressed. Gordon Jackson referred to the evidence that was provided by Glasgow City Council, that "openness and transparency is the price of doing business with the public sector". I hope that the Executive will address that matter at stage 2. I turn to the provisions for making an application for action under the bill. In his opening speech, the Minister for Justice stated that the application process was user-friendly. I am not sure whether that is true. The evidence that the committee received suggested that there are problems with it. Unison Scotland stated that, if all applications have to be made in writing, the bill "could discriminate against people whose first language is not English".—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 13 November 2001; c 2792.] Furthermore, the Disability Rights Commission pointed out that the bill could marginalise disabled people who have difficulty in communicating through writing. No one should be marginalised by the provisions of the bill. We also stress that the public authorities, which must act under the provisions of the bill, have an important role to play in enabling people who may have difficulty in making an application to do so, to ensure that they have an equal opportunity to gain the benefits that the bill provides. I hope that the Executive will acknowledge the Justice 1 Committee's recommendation on the issue of applications. If we do not address that issue, the mechanism will not be as user-friendly as Jim Wallace intends it to be. I turn to the issue of exemptions, which members have suggested is probably one of the more contentious aspects of the bill. The Justice 1 Committee is aware of division on the issue among its members. Maurice Frankel, representing the Campaign for Freedom of Information, stated: "the number of exemptions in the bill is potentially overwhelming."—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 27 November 2001; c 2892.] I recognise his point. There is the content exemption, the class exemption and the absolute exemption, and those are topped off by the ministerial veto. The question about exemptions is how they affect the balance of the bill, which should be framed for disclosure as opposed to non-disclosure. I am concerned that some of the exemptions in the bill as introduced could be used by some public authorities to try to prevent information being placed in the public domain. We all accept the content exemption. It is to be welcomed, because it applies the public interest test. The class exemption, however, has to be questioned. Gordon Jackson said that he had some difficulty with its application, in that it will  apply where it is considered that disclosure would normally result in substantial prejudice—it is assumed that the harm test has already been satisfied. In my view, the class exemption is surplus to requirements and, given that a robust harm test and a public interest test are contained in the bill, I see no requirement for the class exemption. I believe that the Executive should seek to have it removed. Another vexed issue is that of the ministerial veto that the bill contains. The very idea that the First Minister can overturn an enforcement notice that has been issued by the information commissioner is, I believe, unjustified, and I do not think that it was justified by the evidence given to the Justice 1 Committee. I recognise that ministers view it purely as a backstop and consider that it will be rarely used. As Roseanna Cunningham highlighted in her speech, the Law Society of Scotland asked why the veto is there in the first place if it is not intended to be depended upon. The ministerial veto also alters the bill's balance in the direction of non-disclosure, which is to be regretted. There is a need to shift the balance back in favour of disclosure at stage 2. That may be achieved by removing class exemptions and the ministerial veto. Roseanna Cunningham also referred to the NUJ's written evidence. It asked: "If harm cannot be demonstrated to the Scottish Information Commissioner"— or to the court— "can any harm really exist", other, perhaps, than political discomfort? Several members referred to the fact that, if a certificate is issued by the First Minister, it could be subject to judicial review. Should the information commissioner choose to issue a certificate for the disclosure of information, that too could be challenged through a judicial review. I believe that we should follow that option, because it alters the balance back in favour of disclosure and protects the public's right to information. If the Executive is determined to keep the ministerial veto in the bill, I hope that, at the very least, it will accept the Justice 1 Committee's recommendation about laying the ministerial certificate before Parliament. Notwithstanding the limitations of the bill as introduced and the issues that require to be addressed, I support the general principles of the bill.

The minister will be aware that there are two important factors in assisting ex-offenders to get into employment. First, appropriate training opportunities need to be provided while they are in prison. Secondly, there needs to be good linkage between employment agencies and the prison. What resources are being provided to young offenders institutions to assist the development of good links with the employment agencies to ensure that there is investment in the necessary training while the offenders are in prison in the first place?

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Bristow Muldoon on securing time for a debate on an important issue. I, too, welcome the staff and residents—and their relatives—of Binny House who have travelled here for the debate. In particular, I mention Mrs Robertson, who first raised the closure with me some months ago. Her relative, Sylvia Anderson, has been a resident of Binny House since August last year and has enjoyed extremely good care there. There has been a strong campaign to highlight the issue and to get to the bottom of why Sue Ryder Care arrived at the closure decision in the first place. I have considerable concerns about how Sue Ryder Care arrived at that decision. I sympathise strongly with Trish Godman's comments, because in my previous job in social work I had to deal with a home that closed. I had to take residents, who were literally in tears, from their home to a new home. The closure of that home damaged the community that had developed there, and I fear that the same will happen if Binny House closes. Not only am I concerned, but it is clear from the most recent correspondence that I received from Forth Valley Health Board that it was extremely surprised that such a unilateral and quick decision had been taken. The health board does not feel that it was given sufficient time or information to make suitable contingency provisions. I had the good fortune to visit Binny House on a number of occasions in my last job, organising placements for respite breaks. The last time that I was there was not long after the staff had completed their redevelopment work in the new wing. That wing was an excellent facility and it was clear to me from my experience there, and from residents who had been placed there, that those residents received a high standard of service and care within the home. The decision to close Binny House will impact on more people than those who are in the home at present, although they will feel the major effect of the closure. The whole of central Scotland, and Forth valley in particular, has virtually no dedicated services for providing long-term and respite care for young disabled people. A few nursing homes there have a variation on their contract, which allows them to take young chronically sick people for respite breaks, but those homes by no means provide an appropriate environment in which to  place a young disabled person. If the closure goes ahead, the central Scotland area will be left much poorer for the loss of the service. I believe that the statutory organisations have done everything in their power during the negotiations that have taken place to try to avoid closure. If the closure takes place, we will no longer have a suitable facility for young chronically sick people in the large population area of central Scotland. Falkirk Council tried to enter into an agreement with the local primary health care trust, but because they were unable to come up with capital funding, that project, which aimed to set up facilities for young chronically sick people at Larbert, fell. Many members have spoken about trying to get those who are involved back round the table. My concern is that if we lose the facility, it will be nearly impossible to provide suitable respite or long-term care for young chronically sick people in the Forth valley area. If Binny House closes, we will require a strategy for the Executive to act on the need to replace services that can provide the long-term respite care that many young disabled people require. If we fail to do that, we will fail those young disabled people. We will be leaving many families to pick up the pieces and to continue to support their relatives without the necessary support and opportunity for respite care. If Binny House closes, we need to consider what the strategy will be to ensure that the Executive provides appropriate care and support for young disabled people in the affected area.

If anything, the debate has illustrated the fact that the Government's record in managing the Scottish Prison Service is one of abject failure. Notwithstanding the warm words that we have heard from ministers and from Labour and Liberal Democrat back benchers this morning, the Prison Service is close to breaking point in a number of key areas.  Let us be clear about the purpose of today's debate. It is to hold the Executive to account for its failure to address many of the problems that exist in the prison system. I know that that may be uncomfortable for those in the Executive parties, but that is the reality of a Scottish Parliament being able to bring a Government to account on such matters. The Labour Government has had the opportunity for some five years to start to address those issues—as the Government at Westminster, when it was in control of the Scottish Office, and for the past two and a half years as the new Scottish Executive. Those Labour members who think that today's debate is about bringing forward other ideas are wrong. It is about holding the Executive to account for its failure to address the problems in the first place. Overcrowding and unrest, which existed during the Conservative years in a number of Scottish prisons, have been brought back to the agenda. We have heard that Aberdeen, Barlinnie, Inverness and Greenock prisons are all something like 20 per cent overcrowded. We have heard Roseanna Cunningham talk about the failure to reduce the number of prisoners at Cornton Vale. As Christine Grahame said, Cornton Vale was at one point overcrowded by about 29 per cent. We also heard from Richard Lochhead that Craiginches prison is currently around 30 per cent overcrowded. A number of members have raised points about overcrowding during the debate. Another issue that has been highlighted is the continuation of the Victorian practice of slopping out. That practice was condemned by the Council of Europe's torture committee, which investigated the issue back in 1996 and demanded that action be taken then. However, slopping out continues to this day. Ministers have said that the Scottish Prison Service and the Scottish Executive have the objective of ending slopping out by 2005, but that is an aspiration and there is no clearly set date by which the practice will end. Overcrowding and slopping out are key factors that influence the ability of the Scottish Prison Service to undertake the important role of rehabilitation work. Running alongside that, we have the prison estates review. That review has been on the books since autumn 1999. It started in December 1999. When I asked Jim Wallace about it at the Justice 1 Committee in September this year, he told me that it would be published by the end of the year. As we learned the other week, there has been a further delay, supposedly because of the change of ministers. It is my understanding that Jim Wallace has been Minister for Justice for two and a half years, so I do not see how a change of ministerial role has any part to play in the matter. I begin to wonder whether there is a report. Is the estates review continually delayed because it acts as a continuing excuse for failing to address  issues? Whenever we ask about slopping out or overcrowding, we are told to wait for the estates review. It has been a most convenient excuse for the Executive over the past two years for not addressing the problems in the Scottish Prison Service.

Last year, the minister promised that the review would be published in the new year. I hope that it will be published in 2002. Perhaps the minister will confirm that it will be published then.

Let us be clear. The problem has gone on for many years. For five years, the Government at Westminster has been in a position to address the problem. Report after report has said why slopping out should be ended. I would not take £13 million and another £17 million out of the Prison Service budget, as the minister has done—that money could be used to resource the change that needs to take place. I suspect that the real reason for the delay in the prison estates review is that privatisation of the Prison Service is at the heart of the Executive's prison policy. Kilmarnock prison is already privately run. Medical services in the Prison Service have been privatised. The result is that fewer doctors provide cover and there is a greater dependency on locums with no experience of working in a prison environment. In the past year, creeping privatisation of social work services has also taken place. Four prisons put their social work services out to tender. The failed Tory agenda of privatisation is at the heart of the Executive's policy.

I must move on. The Executive's amendment says that the SPS has a "commitment to collaborating on an increasingly transparent basis with statutory and voluntary agencies to provide effective rehabilitation and through care". That is not the SPS that I recognise or to which many members have referred. It certainly does not reflect the experience of many operational staff in  the SPS. Let us consider an example of the new collaborative working that apparently exists in the Scottish prison system. This year, the SPS put out to tender the provision of social work services at HMP Edinburgh. In describing the service, the chief inspector of prisons had said that he was "impressed with the way that the Social Work Unit was integrated into the work of addressing the needs of the prisoner population". What did the SPS do with a good service that was working well? It put it out to tender. A senior member of staff at the City of Edinburgh Council said that the SPS handled the negotiations in an aggressive and bullying fashion. The council withdrew the services and, for a period, the prison was without necessary social work services—it had to use a private locum company to provide them. When it realised that that did not work, it went back to the council, cap in hand, to ask it to provide the services. By that time, the experienced staff had been dispersed and only one experienced criminal justice social worker was able to go back to the team. In his intermediate report on Saughton, the chief inspector of prisons said that, because of the social work services problems in Edinburgh prison, risk assessment for short-term sex offenders had not been provided since the termination of the council's contract and group work had not been provided as a result of the incompetent way in which the SPS had handled the whole affair. The Executive's amendment demonstrates its continual failure to acknowledge the problems in the prison system. Ministers are abdicating their responsibilities and passing them on to officials in the SPS. The Government is failing to address the problems at the heart of the system and it is determined to continue with the right-wing privatisation agenda that started under the Conservative Government. I support the motion.

A number of members have highlighted the extent to which our society suffers from the problems of youth crime. The persistent offending of a small group of young people can have a debilitating effect on communities; it creates victims, destroys property and ruins lives. Cathy Jamieson rightly pointed out that only a minority of young people offends and that, within that group, an even smaller minority persistently offends. However, we should not ignore the financial costs of youth crime. In June, Audit Scotland's report estimated that the costs of youth crime are about £80 million per year. Those resources could be put to better use but, unfortunately, cannot be put to better use. That highlights the need to tackle the problem seriously. As several members highlighted, there is no single solution or quick answer to the problem. The figures speak for themselves. In 2000, about 27,500 young people were charged with and were proved to have committed offences. In 1999-2000, almost 15,000 young people were referred to children's panels. If we are to tackle the problem, clearly we must work with the agencies and communities that are affected by it. Having acknowledged the extent of youth crime in our society, the Parliament's responsibility—and, in particular, the Executive's role—is to ensure that we identify a series of routes by which to address the problem. Many members have referred to a variety of projects that they have contacted or with which they have been involved and agencies with which they have been in touch. That highlights the fact that we require a multi-agency approach to tackling the problem. However, many young offenders are also victims of physical, sexual or emotional abuse. Many have also, as Irene McGugan pointed out, suffered poverty. If today's Tory press release states that those who are involved in child prostitution are "the authors of their own misfortune", that is to be regretted. Child prostitution is, in reality, sexual abuse, as my colleague Gil Paterson highlighted this afternoon.

That is all very well, but to describe as "the authors of their own misfortune" people who have been trapped in child prostitution is deeply regrettable. We must also be realistic about what we can achieve in tackling the problem. There exists increasing concern about the funding that is available to the agencies that work in the field. The Executive accepted the recommendations of the report of the advisory group on youth crime. That report received wide-ranging support and the group, which considered the matter in detail, highlighted that to implement the report would require about £36 million. It is therefore to be regretted that on 22 November this year Nicol Stephen indicated that the Executive would provide only £20 million to address the report's recommendations. If we are to be honest in our commitment to tackle youth crime, we must be prepared to ensure that sufficient resources are available for those who are responsible for dealing with the problem. We should spend in order to save. I will discuss briefly social work services. As the minister rightly pointed out, social work services have an extremely important role to play in early intervention work with youth offenders and their families. However, there is a growing crisis in social work services, in particular in recruiting staff for work with children and families. I take on board the fact that the minister has agreed to examine the issue, but it is not a new problem. It has existed for a number of years and should have been addressed some time ago. Ronnie O'Connor, the director of Glasgow City Council's social work department, stated that the Executive had not addressed how manpower might be supplied at a time when recruitment and retention is a national problem. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Justice will, in his closing speech, set a time scale for addressing that problem. The social work department, charities and other voluntary organisations all have important roles to play in tackling youth crime and in ensuring that that is done using a multi-agency approach. However, the strength of that approach will be realised only with sufficient funding to ensure that the agencies can do their job properly.

Fergus Ewing called for a fair and just settlement for the thousands of pensioners who have been affected by the way in which this matter has been handled. I had hoped that, since a new minister has responsibility for transport, this debate would bring about some changes to the provision that has been made for the pensioners. I had hoped that the Executive would take this opportunity to right a wrong that has been done to the pensioners and that it would do the right thing by the pensioners, who are the innocent party in this affair. Instead, we have an Executive amendment that starts off with ministers congratulating themselves on what they have been able to achieve before going on to say that there is an "absence of any legal entitlement". During today's debate, members have pointed out that, in Scotland, there has been no legal challenge. I note that Murray Sinclair, giving evidence to the Finance Committee, stated quite clearly that "It is within the competence of Scottish ministers"—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 26 June 2001; c 1383.] to act on the issue. It is strange that ministers should choose not to exert their authority. If the Treasury rules that present us with the problem were made by the Conservative Government, why is the new Labour Government content to continue to enforce them? They should be applying pressure to change the rules. The minister has announced an extra £18 million. It is in addition to the £250 million surplus that exists because of the change in the Treasury rules. The  pensioners are entitled to that money. Broadly, the pensioners will receive only 40 per cent of the present level of surplus. How would any member of the Scottish Parliament feel if the Government creamed the surplus off our pension fund and sent that money to an already bloated Treasury? [Applause.]

The people who are suffering the most are those who invested in the pension scheme. We can all talk about the technicalities and ask why there has been no legal challenge and so on but the reality is that pensioners, many of them dependent on their pension, are suffering. Indeed, many have passed away and will not benefit from the pension scheme. I ask the minister to consider the possibility of making interim payments, particularly to pensioners who are in ill health and may not benefit from the surplus. I ask the minister—not his officials—to meet the action group, take a personal interest and try to find a way of making progress on this issue. I also ask the minister to tell the Treasury that the Scottish pensioners will not accept any settlement that is less than that of their English counterparts. They got 60 per cent of the surplus and the Scottish pensioners should get the same.

I am sure that no one in the chamber fully appreciates the pain and anguish that the Chhokar family have suffered because of the loss of their son. Some three years on from the date of their son's murder, two court cases and two reports later, the family continue to feel a great sense of injustice. It is understandable that they feel that our criminal justice system has let them down. As several members did, I pay tribute to the family for the determination that they have shown in the pursuit of justice for the death of their son and for the dignified manner in which they have conducted themselves throughout this difficult period. I agree with the Lord Advocate that the reports are significant, because they catalogue serious failings in our prosecution service. Insufficient resources are the root of several of those failings. No family that has lost a loved one, as the Chhokar family has, should experience the systematic failure of the prosecution service in dealing with their case. Several members asked why our prosecution services failed a family so dramatically. The strains have been on our justice system for some time. Several members referred to specific signals, and the evidence is clear for all to see. For example, the number of cases marked "No  proceedings" has risen by 19 per cent over the past four years. More casual staff are working in the service to deal with the additional work load. The number of cases sent to the district courts has fallen by 30 per cent in the past four years. Regulatory cases on health and safety and environment matters very often have a low priority or go unprosecuted. Furthermore, there are delays in court because of the Procurator Fiscal Service's difficulties in making suitable arrangements. All those factors point to a service that is under ever-increasing pressure and that is struggling to cope with the demands that are being placed on it. If we are to ensure that the service has adequate resources, we must tackle the problems that have been highlighted. In his evidence to the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee in September—and again in today's speech—the Lord Advocate admitted that the Crown Office's own staff survey found that there was low morale among staff; that they were finding it difficult to cope with the heavy work load; and that they felt that they were undervalued. As Gordon Jackson pointed out, we cannot afford to place the staff in our Crown Office services in such a position. If we expect to get the best from the many dedicated staff in the prosecution service, we must ensure that they have the resources to do the job properly. Although the two reports will not solve the problems that have been highlighted, they detail the ways in which the system has failed and point out that the staff are doing their best to cope. If the system is ill, there is no point in merely treating the symptoms with new initiatives; instead, we must deal with the root causes of the problems and ensure that we have the resources to do so. Like the Chhokar family, the CRE and the STUC, I do not believe that the reports carry the confidence that is necessary to create the climate of change needed in Scotland. Kenny Gibson referred to the Home Secretary's decision to establish a public inquiry into the Stephen Lawrence case, which was based on the need to create such a climate of change. I believe that the same kind of inquiry was needed in Scotland. The Lord Advocate stated that one of the reasons why he chose not to have a public inquiry was that it took 18 months to complete the Stephen Lawrence inquiry. I would be more inclined to have a public inquiry, to ensure that we get things right from the very start instead of moving along quickly and then finding out that only half the job has been done. Furthermore, given the serious allegations that have been made in the Jandoo report against certain individuals in the Chhokar family and involved in the Chhokar family justice campaign, a public inquiry would have at least afforded those individuals the opportunity to defend themselves.  I hope that, at this point in the whole affair, ministers will take the opportunity to listen to those who have expressed serious concerns about the way in which the inquiries were conducted in private. I also hope that, when the Minister for Justice winds up, he will detail the additional resources that will be provided to our prosecution service to address the failings that have arisen in the system because of a lack of resources. Although I welcome the fact that the Executive has decided to implement the reports' recommendations, there continues to be considerable mistrust among members of Scotland's ethnic minority communities about the workings of our prosecution service. The way to rebuild that bond of trust is to have a public inquiry into the handling of the Chhokar case. I hope that, at this stage, the Minister for Justice will take the opportunity to rebuild that bond.

I, too, congratulate David Mundell on securing the debate. I do not have a specific interest in relation to the situation at Lockerbie; my interest is primarily as convener of the cross-party group on disability. When one speaks to many disabled people about issues that impact on their lives, they often say that public transport is at the top of their agenda. It should be acknowledged that the Executive has recognised that. In 1999, the Executive undertook a piece of research entitled "Transport Provision for Disabled People in Scotland". It made six key recommendations for improving public transport, including the rail network, for disabled people. The report highlighted that about 5 per cent of the Scottish population has difficulty accessing trains and other forms of public transport. I will give an example that may not be covered by David Mundell's motion. Apparently, only about 15 per cent of our bus fleet has low-floor access, which is a considerable benefit to many disabled people. Many disabled people must travel by bus to get to a train station. I will give some examples of where access remains a problem at major train stations in Scotland. At Glasgow Central station, Shopmobility applied to Railtrack—which owns and operates the station—to provide a service for the shopping area in the station. The application was denied because the station manager and Railtrack's disability adviser—who I understand is based in London—witnessed a speeding wheelchair on the concourse. They were concerned about the safety of other travellers in the station. Edinburgh Haymarket is one of Scotland's busiest railway stations, yet it is inaccessible to disabled people who have mobility problems as they cannot get on or off a train there. They often have to take an extra journey on to Waverley and come out again. If they have to get off at  Haymarket, they require physical assistance, which they sometimes have to pay for, to get out of the station. Railtrack also owns and operates Edinburgh Waverley station. Although it has made a number of improvements to disabled access there, additional problems have been created. For example, parking was reorganised as part of the disabled access development. It was moved from close to the platform to the rear of the car park. Disabled parking is now further away from the platform, which creates a barrier for disabled people who want to access trains. On the broader issue of public transport for disabled people, five key areas must be addressed. First, we should have a co-ordinated public transport policy that sensitively meets the needs of disabled people. Secondly, any such policy should provide more physical access and services to disabled people who are using the transport. Thirdly, staff who understand the needs of disabled people using the service must be available. Fourthly, we must have clear information about the services that a company provides to disabled people and that alerts people to places where there are problems with access. Finally, there should be consultation between transport providers and those who are responsible for organising transport infrastructure and policies. Addressing such issues would go some way towards addressing the problems that many disabled people encounter when accessing public transport. I have referred to a piece of research that the Executive undertook back in 1999. Given the problems that were identified in the report and the six key recommendations that were made in it, I ask the minister to tell the chamber what the Executive has done to improve access for disabled people.

As I have done before in Sewel motion debates on the International Criminal Court Bill, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill, the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill and the Criminal Justice and Court Services Bill, I preface my remarks by placing on record my distaste for the process. I am concerned at the frequency with which the mechanism of Sewel motions is being employed. It is not appropriate for the Parliament to allow legislation over which it has competence to bypass the chamber. Notwithstanding the Minister for Justice's remarks, I remind members—as I have done previously—that the late Donald Dewar reassured us in January 1998 that, although Westminster would continue to have the power to legislate on devolved matters, that power would be used only in very rare circumstances. The Scottish Parliament is far and away a better forum than Westminster for dealing with law specific to Scotland. Much of the Proceeds of Crime Bill—particularly regarding civil recovery of criminal assets—specifically relates to Scotland. Indeed, of the 444 clauses in the bill, 111—a full quarter of the bill—specifically relate to Scotland. With that caveat on record, the SNP will support the motion because we support the principles of the bill and welcome the development that means that the Scottish Executive will become the enforcing agency for civil recovery in Scotland. Money recovered by civil recovery and criminal confiscation in Scotland will go into the Scottish budget. However, I am concerned that civil recovery orders could fall foul of article 6.2 of the European convention on human rights. We know that criminal confiscation orders are lawful because they are part of the punishment for a crime. However, that cannot be said of civil recovery orders as they apply to civil recovery cases. A person who is the subject of such an order could be regarded as having put themselves in a position of self-incrimination because of the disclosure provisions in clause 379 of the bill. How would that fit in with the right to a fair trial, which is protected under article 6.1 of the ECHR? The cynic in me cannot help but wonder whether one of the reasons why the Executive has lodged a Sewel motion rather than introducing a separate piece of legislation is that the Scottish Parliament has a higher standard of human rights protection than Westminster, as Westminster can pass laws that breach the ECHR. That is why I want the Executive to guarantee that the bill complies with  human rights protections. However, the bill will enable the justice system to deal with drugs barons, who until now have regarded themselves as above the law. Over a year and a half ago, Roseanna Cunningham and I visited Ireland to see what Scotland could learn from the various aspects of its justice system, such as drugs courts, which the Executive at that point was decrying, but has now adopted. While we were there, we visited the Criminal Assets Bureau and were extremely impressed. I know that the previous Deputy Minister for Justice, Angus MacKay, paid a similar visit and returned extolling the virtues of the Irish system. The Proceeds of Crime Bill will send a message to those who seek to make their fortunes from a life of crime. If they cannot prove that their gains are not ill-gotten, those gains will be confiscated. They will no longer be untouchable. However, the new legislation will have to be properly resourced. Only last year, James Hamill, who was convicted of heroin dealing and was reputed to be worth £4 million, was sentenced to 18 years in prison and under a confiscation order was ordered to hand over the profits from his crimes. He was reported to have "punched the air in delight" when a 60-second court hearing ordered him to pay up just £32,000. The explanation that was given at the time was that the Crown Office had just two full-time staff dealing with the seizure of criminal assets and they had neither the time nor the resources to get to the bottom of his finances. The financial stress on our Crown Office is a different debate, but that report highlights the fact that the system is not sufficiently well resourced for the provisions that are in place. If that problem is not addressed, no matter how strongly I support the principles of the Proceeds of Crime Bill and the motion, there will be little point in passing the bill.

On behalf of the Scottish National Party, it gives me pleasure to support the Parliament's first committee-initiated bill. I thank those who were involved in producing the bill, those who gave evidence to the committee, the committee clerks and, as Christine Grahame has mentioned, the non-Executive bills unit. Credit should also be given to members who were on the Justice and Home Affairs Committee from the outset, who were keen to introduce their own legislation and had the foresight to do so. I looked at the Official Report of the first meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and it was interesting to see what members said at that time. In particular, it was clear that members from all parties were keen to ensure that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee was not just there to scrutinise Executive legislation. The committee wanted to tackle issues that were brought to it as a matter of concern and to initiate its own legislation. At that first meeting, Christine Grahame stated: "I think that it is very important that we are not simply a scrutinising committee, but that we initiate legislation. It is exciting that this committee can legislate on a number of areas that will affect ordinary people. We all have our pet lists, but I am sure that we can reach consensus on some areas, such as family law or domestic violence, in respect of which measures could be introduced". She went on: "That would show that the Parliament is delivering in a very simple but obvious manner." Today, the Parliament is showing that it is delivering in what appears to be a simple but obvious manner. As that first Justice and Home Affairs Committee meeting continued, Pauline McNeill, Tricia Marwick and, in particular, Maureen Macmillan—who has been a driving force behind the bill—illustrated that domestic violence was an area of particular concern. Pauline McNeill highlighted the issue when she said: "I would like to see a women's dimension to our work because it is important, in terms of women's perceptions of the Scottish Parliament, that we deal with an issue that affects women. I know that several members are interested in the issue of violence against women".—[ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 29 June 1999; c 7.] The Parliament is illustrating that it takes seriously issues that are of importance to women. One in four women in Scotland suffers from  some form of domestic violence, and 25 per cent of all violence that is reported to the police is the result of domestic violence. Parliament has demonstrated today that it is willing to take the issue seriously. Until today, not everyone was treated equally in the eyes of the law. By providing greater protection to people who suffer domestic violence, whether they are married, cohabiting or divorced, we have addressed an inequality in our legislation. The bill illustrates that the Parliament is willing to listen. It also illustrates the value of the committee system. The bill has delivered on an important issue for many people in Scottish society.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve services for people  suffering from lung diseases. (S1O-3833)

The minister will know that Scotland has a poor record when it comes to lung disease and that there are many thousands of lung-disease sufferers in Scotland. Within that group, around 1,000 patients would benefit from the provision of liquid oxygen. At the moment, the Scottish drug tariff prevents general practitioners from prescribing liquid oxygen to their patients; however, in England GPs can prescribe it. Is the minister prepared to review the Scottish drug tariff to allow GPs to prescribe liquid oxygen for those patients who require it? If not, will he explain why GPs in England are trusted to do so but GPs in Scotland are not?

That is the counsel of desperation.

I begin by thanking the 36 or so members from all the main parties in the Parliament who took the time to support my motion. I also welcome representatives of the British Lung Foundation and of the Forth Valley Breathe Easy group, who have come to hear the debate and who have been instrumental in introducing the issue to the Parliament. They hope that the Parliament will address it. When the late Princess of Wales was patron of the British Lung Foundation, she stated that breathing should be a pleasure, not a fight for life. However, 500,000 Scots are affected by lung disease. It touches all parts of society, from premature babies and children with asthma to employees with work-related lung disease and elderly people who suffer from emphysema and bronchitis. Every day, thousands of people in Scotland struggle with lung disease; it affects every aspect of their daily lives. Many members take for granted activities such as walking to the shop or car, or climbing the stairs in their home, but such so-called normal activities can leave thousands of Scots who have lung disease breathless and struggling to draw their next breath. The effect that lung disease can have upon an individual's quality of life is dramatic. We have all experienced some type of breathing difficulty in our lives. Perhaps we have had a lung infection or an injury, or perhaps the wind has caught us and made our breathing difficult. It is only at such moments that we appreciate how  much we value being able to breathe without great difficulty. Although lung disease is predominantly a physical condition, we should in no way underestimate the psychological effect that it can have upon a sufferer. Alongside the physical limitations that I mentioned, loss of confidence and a feeling of isolation are common. Scotland has a poor record on lung disease in comparison with many other European nations. If we include lung cancer in our definition of lung disease, Scotland's record is appalling. In some areas of Scotland, lung disease now kills more people than heart disease does. In essence, lung cancer is an extreme form of lung disease and it is on the increase. Annually, about 4,500 people in Scotland are diagnosed with lung cancer. Of those diagnosed, fewer than 5 per cent will live longer than five years. Survival rates have shown little improvement in the past 20 or so years. If we compare the figures with those of other European countries, we see that the equivalent survival rate in other countries is in the region of 14 per cent. Although I am sure that most of us would recognise that people survive longer in different countries for a variety of reasons, one of the most important factors is the ability to get access to the right treatment at the right time. One consultant from Falkirk royal infirmary highlighted to me the advances that have been made in the treatment of people who have lung cancer. Continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy treatment—CHART—has been shown to improve considerably the survival rate among lung cancer sufferers. To date, the treatment is not available in Scotland, although it is readily available in many European and non-European countries. I am sure that the minister will say that CHART can be considered within the Executive's proposed cancer plan, but given that the incidence of lung cancer in Scotland is so high and that it is coupled with a poor survival rate, why do we continually find ourselves trying to catch up with other European nations? Given our record, Scotland should, if anything, be at the forefront of developing new treatments and ensuring that they are implemented for those who suffer from lung cancer and other lung diseases in Scotland. If we are to shake off our sick-man-of-Europe tag, we must recognise that lung cancer remains one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers among men in Scotland and that the rate of diagnosis among women is steadily increasing. Even the most recent statistics from the World Health Organisation show that our record is extremely poor in comparison with that of other countries. The latest figures show that the death  rate for males per 100,000 is in the region of 94. In Ireland, the equivalent figure is about 53; in Finland, it is around 60; in England and Wales, it is around 74. The number of women in Scotland who die from lung cancer is even more concerning. The figure has tripled over the past 20 years alone. In Scotland, in the region of 63 women per 100,000 head of population die from lung cancer. In France, the figure is as low as 13; in Ireland, it is 28; in England and Wales, it is 41. I hope that the minister will take on board how poor Scotland's record on tackling lung cancer is. We need to be at the forefront of eradicating it. We should also recognise that there are considerable inequalities in the service that is provided across the country. For example, the provision of oxygen to people who suffer from a lung disease can vary from one pharmacist to the next. The deposit that needs to be put down for the cylinder can vary. Service can also vary from one health board area to the next. General practitioners prescribe only a standard size for the gas bottles that are used for oxygen because the Government's drug tariff only allows them to do that. However, patients who are dependent on oxygen often find that they run short of oxygen early on. If they go on a day trip or on holiday, they need to take a large supply of oxygen with them. One solution suggested by the Forth Valley Breathe Easy group is the provision of liquid oxygen, which lasts much longer and allows patients to have a better quality of life. I hope that the minister will consider drug tariffs, to allow general practitioners to prescribe liquid oxygen, especially for patients who are heavily dependent on oxygen as a result of their condition. From one hospital trust to the next, there are variations in the provision of nebulisers: some will provide them, some will not; some will charge, some will not. In addition, few trusts in Scotland provide respiratory nurses. Those nurses can often add significantly to the quality of life of someone with lung disease, bridging the gap between GPs, the hospital and the patient. Respiratory nurses can play an important role, not only in improving patients' quality of life but—through early intervention in the home—in reducing admissions to hospital. To its credit, Forth Valley Primary Care NHS Trust has been one of the leading trusts in achieving that. It employs several respiratory nurses. The resultant improvement in the health of the local community has been significant. It is disappointing that many other trusts across Scotland have failed to follow suit. Given the extent of lung disease in Scotland and the considerable variation in the quality of care and service, I believe that we require a national  respiratory disease strategy. That would assist in ensuring that respiratory medicine is given sufficient priority and would allow for a better quality of service across the country. If we are to tackle lung disease, a national strategy is required to ensure that we do so in a focused, determined, serious and concerted manner.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in developing joint working between the health and education sectors to improve children's health in schools. (S1O-3585)

The minister will be aware of the genuine concerns of parents about a number of health boards and education departments that are considering making the morning-after pill available via school nurses. Does the minister condone such a policy? If so, what guidance will the Executive issue on such a policy direction? If she is against such a policy, what action will she take to ensure that it does not happen?

I welcome the debate. Several members said that they were finding it difficult to make new points, given the speeches that had already been made. I hope, therefore, that members will have sympathy for those of us who have to close the debate. I welcome the fact that we will be among the first 60 countries to ratify the treaty. The Westminster act was given royal assent at the beginning of May. I particularly welcome the fact that we are dealing today with a distinctive Scottish bill. That highlights the fact that Scots law has a long, proud tradition and that it is held in high regard internationally. Margo MacDonald made an important point in response to a comment by Phil Gallie. She noted that Scotland has a distinctive contribution to make to an international criminal court. I am sure that all members welcome the fact that the bill will make genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity offences under Scots law. We all recognise that there should be no hiding place anywhere for individuals who perpetrate such crimes. A recurring issue in the debate, which also featured in the Justice 2 Committee's report, is that of time constraints. Several committee members highlighted that in their speeches. It is disappointing that we return to that problem time and again. We must ensure that our committees are given sufficient time at stage 1 to scrutinise legislation appropriately. If we do not provide them with the opportunity to do that, we undermine some of the founding principles on which the Parliament is based. I do not believe that it is acceptable that we should be debating a distinctive Scottish bill, but having to content ourselves with the consultation exercise that was undertaken for the Westminster bill. We should have had proper consultation for the Scottish bill. The fact that only two Scottish organisations made submissions as part of the Westminster consultation process raises serious concerns. Mary Mulligan claimed that a considerable amount of consultation took place for the UK bill. However, this chamber is concerned with the  Scottish legislation. It is incumbent on us to ensure that there is proper public consultation on the bill. Scotland has a distinctive legal system, and we have a responsibility to ensure that any legislation that will affect it is properly consulted on and scrutinised. The Justice 2 Committee has recognised that by suggesting how the problem could have been addressed. The two pieces of legislation should have been debated in parallel. While the International Criminal Court Act 2001 was going through Westminster, this bill could have been going through the Scottish Parliament. We could have considered the two bills in tandem. I would like to hear the minister's comments on that. We have a recurring problem of lack of time for some committees to consider legislation, but we never seem to come up with a solution to it. Tavish Scott raised the issue of the consultation period and noted that Ireland has already ratified the treaty. He suggested that if we had not pushed ahead with the bill, the SNP would have complained that the Executive was taking too long to deal with it. No one would seriously suggest that two weeks for a committee to carry out stage 1 consideration of a bill is sufficient. We must ensure that the committees are protected and given time to carry out their role. As several members have indicated, there is international experience of universal jurisdiction on which we could draw. New Zealand, some Scandinavian countries and Canada have all introduced universal jurisdiction. I would not advocate committees heading off to places such as New Zealand and Canada—

Mr Jackson may suggest that, but I am not inclined to do so in the chamber. One committee has already used the Parliament's videoconferencing facility. That gives committees an opportunity to find out from other countries what their experience has been. We should not shy away from that when we are considering legislation. Concern has also been expressed about the procedures for the ICC and the fact that the delegation from the UK will be UK-led. There is a concern that Scotland's distinctive legal system could be forgotten. The Justice 2 Committee summed that up well when it stated: "'UK courts' or 'UK law' is a meaningless concept." It is important that ministers ensure that the Scottish legal system is properly represented in any discussions that take place on establishing procedures for the ICC. A number of members raised the issue of universal jurisdiction. There are concerns about  whether we should adopt that or whether we should follow the course proposed in the bill. I regard that question much as I regard the debate about whether we should establish a human rights commission. In this chamber I pointed out that the founding principles of any human rights commission would be the Paris principles. Those are the minimum standard that we should set ourselves. The same issue was highlighted in evidence that was given recently to the Justice 1 Committee. When considering the establishment of an international criminal court and the practice that we should adopt in Scotland, we should aspire not to a minimalist approach but to the highest possible standard. It is incumbent on the Executive and those who oppose the introduction of universal jurisdiction to provide good reasons for their stance. The Executive has not yet done that. I cannot see any evidence in the report of the Justice 2 Committee that suggests that we should not introduce universal jurisdiction. Like Phil Gallie, I believe that the Justice 2 Committee has a considerable amount of work to do at stage 2, giving the limited time that was available to it at stage 1. A number of issues will require detailed consideration. However, I wish the committee well in the course of its consideration. I am pleased to say that the SNP will support the general principles of the bill.

A committee has used videoconferencing.

I begin by thanking the clerks to the Justice 1 Committee, who were of great assistance in lodging amendments at stages 2 and 3. I also wish to put on record my thanks to those who came before the Justice 1 Committee and took time to give us evidence, both orally and in writing. As was outlined in the stage 1 debate, the Scottish National Party welcomes the general provisions of the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill. Although the argument that the bill has been forced upon the Scottish legal system will not end as a result of the bill being passed, a considerable number of its provisions will enhance and improve the Scottish legal system. If it had not been for our incorporation of the European convention on human rights, we may not have had a debate about improving our criminal justice system in the way that the bill will improve it. Congratulations should be given to those who decided, back in the 1950s, to sign up the UK to the ECHR. We should congratulate in particular the Conservative members of Parliament who supported the convention at that time and realised the benefits that it would have. I am sure that Conservative members of the Scottish Parliament will want to continue that tradition by supporting human rights in Scotland. It would be naive of any member to think that the bill will draw a line under some of the conflicts that occur in our justice system or in legislation that  does not comply with the ECHR. Two options are available. We can stick our head in the sand and ignore the issues or we can be more proactive and take up the challenge that the ECHR sets us to improve our system. The bill will do the latter. I hope that the bill will be something of a watershed. Legislation that has dealt with ECHR-related matters, such as the Noel Ruddle mental health issue and the issues addressed in the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Act 2000, has all been a result of potential conflicts and challenges. At least the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill is more proactive and will make changes before problems occur. On that basis, it is to be welcomed. A human rights commission is needed. It would augment the work that has been done with the bill. I will conclude on a personal note. As the Minister for Justice said, the bill when passed will amend the Lyon King of Arms Act 1867 to transfer the power to appoint a procurator fiscal to the Court of the Lord Lyon to the safe hands of ministers of the Scottish Executive. I am sure that Scotland will be able to rest easy now. The ECHR has an important role to play in Scotland and is important to the people of Scotland. The bill will enhance and improve the Scottish legal system. On that basis, the SNP will support the motion to pass the bill.

I confess that, after the minister's explanation, I was wavering about what to do with my amendment, but, having heard Phil Gallie's contribution, I have made up my mind. Members have to reflect on the important role that is played by this part of the bill. It gives considerable powers to ministers to provide remedial orders to amend primary legislation, which the chamber and the parliamentary committees will be unable to amend. The Parliament will be able to pass comment on the legislation, but will have to either take it or leave it. Given the wide-ranging nature of the powers, it is important that there should be an element of necessity before legislation is changed by means of a remedial order; it is not enough to say simply that it would be expedient to do so. I take on board the distinction that the minister is trying to make, but I find it difficult to understand why his aim could not be achieved with wording that mentions only the idea of necessity. There is nothing in the bill that would prevent that. In defence of the inclusion of the word "expedient", the minister talked about a situation in relation to which his officials had advised him that there would be a clear incompatibility that, if it were not acted on, could leave the legislation open to challenge. However, that would be a compelling reason and would make the passing of a provision necessary. Similarly, if a case were being challenged in the courts and it looked as though there would be a ruling that there was an incompatibility, there would be a compelling reason and a necessity to act in the interest of Scottish ministers. Taken together, the factors of compelling reason and necessity give ministers sufficient ground and latitude to make provisions.

That is correct, and the situation that Mr Morgan talks about happened with the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill because of a challenge against the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. I take on board what the minister said about the Scotland Act 1998, but the policy memorandum for the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill says that the remedial powers section mirrors the provisions that are contained in the Human Rights Act 1998. In the section of that act that deals with remedial powers, there is no mention of expediency.

It is a catch-all word that people who draft bills like to include just in case a situation arises that they have not considered. However, the ministers have been unable to come up with a situation in which the factors of compelling reason and necessity would not give them the power to act. The question is, if there is no need for the word to be in the bill, why include it? It has been included because it is a catch-all word. I will press my amendment.

Amendment 22 is, essentially, a paving amendment to amendment 23. Amendment 23 reflects some of the concerns that exist around the provisions under section 12, which deals with remedial orders. As was mentioned in the debate on amendment 46, ministers will have wide-ranging powers, as the bill stands, to modify by way of a remedial order any sort of instrument or document, although it may not be directly related to the functions of the ministers. At stage 2, the Deputy Minister for Justice said, of instruments or documents that would not relate to ministerial functions: "I admit that we have no particular documents or instruments in mind".—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 25 April 2001; c 2370.] He was unable to give us an example in which such powers would be required. It is only right for the Parliament to be a little suspicious of giving ministers powers to change things of which they are unable to give specific examples. Ministers should be able to use the powers under remedial orders only in connection with functions of the Scottish Executive. On that basis, and given that the minister was unable to give us clear examples at stage 2 of the type of documents and instruments that ministers may have to change and for which they do not have direct responsibility, I do not believe that it is appropriate that we continue to have such provision in the bill. I move amendment 22.

This is a result—I have not written a speech for such an occasion. I thank the minister for exhibiting such humility before so many of his fellow members. I have no difficulty with the use of remedial powers in relation to issues for which the Scottish ministers have direct responsibility. However, given that the minister has failed on at least four occasions to give an example, it is only right that the Executive should accept that there is no need for such a power.  Amendment 22 agreed to.  [Amendment 23 moved—[Michael Matheson]—and agreed to.]

Amendment 46 refers to section 12 of the bill and seeks to bring the bill into line with the Human Rights Act 1998. As it stands, the bill allows ministers to use remedial orders to rectify incompatibility with the European convention on human rights when it is considered "necessary or expedient" to do so. First, I find it difficult to imagine a situation in which it would be expedient, but not necessary, to make a remedial order to address any ECHR incompatibility. At stage 2, the minister lodged an amendment that stated that the remedial orders will be used only when "there are compelling reasons". Surely any such compelling reasons would fall under the category of necessity. As a result, there is little justification for continuing to have the catch-all phrase "or expedient" included in section 12 of the bill. Secondly, the bill's explanatory notes state that the proposed legislation mirrors the Human Rights Act 1998. However, I refer the minister to section 10(2) of that act, which states: "If a Minister of the Crown considers that there are compelling reasons for proceeding under this section, he may ... make such amendments to the legislation as he considers necessary to remove the incompatibility." The Human Rights Act 1998 does not mention expediency. Given the concerns that have been highlighted about the use of remedial powers, I believe that the word "necessary" gives sufficient latitude for ministers to act where they have compelling reasons to address ECHR incompatibility. As a result, I do not believe that it is appropriate to invoke remedial orders purely on the basis of expediency. I move amendment 46.

Is the minister saying that the Executive would use the expediency test only if a court were about to rule that legislation was incompatible with the convention? Is he saying that it would not use the necessity test to address problems in advance of a ruling?

I note from the minister's comments, and also from amendments 20 and 24, that there is a definition of what is meant by "incapable". Will the minister expand on the process that courts will use in deciding whether somebody is incapable? What assessment process or tests will apply? I understand that the courts currently use various systems. I would welcome clarification from the minister on the mechanism that will be used by the court to decide whether a person is incapable.

I echo Gordon Jackson's comments. There is common purpose and concern on the issue, which we have discussed in some detail. My primary concern is the potential for divergence between the sentencing for the punishment part of discretionary life prisoners and that of mandatory life prisoners. I note that, when Lord Ross gave evidence on behalf of the Parole Board to the Justice 1 Committee, he indicated that he expected that the courts would simply treat both in the same way. As Gordon Jackson highlighted, the concern is that there is always the potential for that strange judicial logic and for judges to go in the opposite direction. The question is whether we should put something in the bill to ensure that we do not have that divergence. I therefore ask the minister to put on record clearly how the Executive believes that such sentencing should work. I also ask that, where possible, guidance be issued to judges to make it clear how they are expected to apply the proposed new paragraph.

I cannot help but feel that when the minister made his opening speech, he had come prepared for another debate on police figures. When Phil Gallie made his speech, I formed the impression that he was just listing the Tory manifesto commitments, rather than addressing the issue that the motion raises. Robert Brown and several other members  complained that some speeches were nothing more than political posturing during an election campaign. However, the motion concerns the problems in the Crown Office and the Procurator Fiscal Service. The intention behind the debate was to highlight the extent of those problems. We should consider the facts. Fact one: a third of Scottish courts-sheriff courts—are not meeting their waiting times. In the six months up to the end of January 2001, 1,113 cases fell because they were time-barred. The minister, in his closing speech, said that responsibility for that did not always lie with the Crown Office or the Procurator Fiscal Service and that often, the responsibility lies further down the line. However, the overall responsibility lies with the justice department, for which the minister must be accountable. He cannot dismiss the problem as the responsibility of other agencies.

The question for the minister is—what action is he taking to address the problem? The reality is that nothing appears to be getting done. The criminal justice system is under increasing pressure. The staff problems show that. The procurators fiscal have considered taking industrial action, and I formed the impression from the evidence that the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee took that quite a bit of the work of our Procurator Fiscal Service depends on the good will of its staff. That situation is unacceptable. Not only those who work in the service realise that a problem exists. We took evidence from Gerard MacMillan, president of the Glasgow Bar Association, which is the largest bar association in Scotland. He summed up the situation when he said: "There are too few fiscals."—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee, 16 May 2001; c 63.] I take on board the fact that 30 new fiscals are being provided, but that statement links with the evidence that we received from Phyllis Hands and the District Courts Association, that too many inexperienced fiscals are prosecuting cases. Phyllis Hands said that fiscals seem to be recruited one day, spend a day in the court watching what is happening, and are then up in the court prosecuting a case the next day. We must ensure that those who join the fiscal service have adequate training. It was clear from several  members' comments about David Hingston that the problems are long-term and deep-rooted. We need to tackle them properly and fundamentally. Resources are at the heart of the issue. It is interesting that the Executive's amendment tries to trumpet the resources that will be spent on the Crown Office and the Procurator Fiscal Service. The Executive tells us that £22 million will go into the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service in the next three years. However, the Executive's Scottish budget shows that the Crown Office budget from last year to the end of March this year was just over £51 million. At the end of the three-year spending plan, the budget will increase to £61 million. We do not need a mathematician to work out that only an extra £10 million is in the pot, even though the Executive tried to spin that the figure is £22 million. That is spin over the substance of the problem that lies at the heart of our criminal justice system. That is the Executive's responsibility. I understand that Pauline McNeill, as convener of the Justice 2 Committee, has every right to defend what her committee is doing. However, I do not think that she needs to work herself up to the point at which she suggests that we should not debate in the chamber any issue on which the Justice 1 Committee, the Justice 2 Committee or any other committee holds an inquiry. When the facts make it clear that our criminal justice system has a fundamental problem, we have a responsibility to debate that. It is interesting that the Executive has held two debates on justice in the past month. Both were extended press releases on police figures. If the Executive were serious about the justice system, it would have held a debate on the system's fundamental problems and detailed what it intended to do to address those problems.

I am winding up, although I am conscious that the minister ran over his time and ate into mine.

The situation makes it clear that our criminal justice system is under extreme pressure and is struggling to cope. As several members said, the Solicitor General's dismissal of the views of the Procurator Fiscal Society is not helpful. That highlights the division between senior management and the procurators fiscal. That is unhealthy and should be addressed. Morale among our Procurator Fiscal Service staff is at rock bottom. The evidence from the  service makes that clear. Procurators fiscal have even threatened industrial action. Cases are being dropped because they are time-barred. Inexperienced staff are dealing with cases without the necessary training. It is clear that a problem exists. The Executive has failed our justice system, and by default, failed the people of Scotland by not ensuring that they are served with proper justice.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in the fight against lung cancer. (S1O-3396)

Scotland has a terrible record on lung cancer, but not one of our five cancer centres in Scotland provides a treatment called continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy—CHART—which is a form of radiotherapy that can considerably extend someone's life expectancy. In a written reply, the minister told me that the National Institute for Clinical Excellence was currently considering the matter. I have been in contact with NICE, which has advised me that it is not considering the treatment and that the issue is not on its work schedule. Why did the minister provide that inaccurate information? Is she prepared to refer the treatment to the Health Technology Board for Scotland for consideration?

Is the minister aware of Falkirk Council's concerns that the structure plan might have to wait the full  40 weeks before it is approved, which could undermine the proposed development of the new community stadium at Westfield in Falkirk? Will the minister assure us that he will try to expedite the process of considering the council's structure plan to enable us to get it through before the 40-week period is completed?

It is only a few weeks since we were here having a debate on this very topic. On that occasion, Jim Wallace had hotfooted it from Hampden, where he had been inspecting all the new recruits to Strathclyde police. I do not know which football park he has been at today, or whether he plans to go to one after the debate. I recommend Firhill on Saturday, when Partick Thistle will lift the second division championship. We are expecting a bumper crowd and he will be able to see Strathclyde's finest operating well.

It will be all-ticket, of course—but Gordon Jackson always has a couple of tickets. It is clear that the Executive does not feel that its propaganda on police numbers is getting through—hence a further debate on the issue today. It is interesting to note that there is no mention in the Executive's motion of the wider issues in our criminal justice system. The minister referred to those wider issues in his speech, but the motion does not refer to them at all. There are many parts of our criminal justice system of which we should be rightly proud, particularly as a result of the commitment of the staff. However, it would be  wrong to judge any Government or Executive on a single component of the justice system and to ignore the views of those who are on the front line, particularly their views on policy direction. Over the past couple of weeks, we have heard criticism from the Scottish Police Federation about the Executive's use of statistics. That was coupled with industrial action in Scottish prisons. It is clear that, since 1997, when the Labour Government came to power, the trend in crime has been increasing. It should come as no surprise that there are many people across Scotland who are imprisoned in their own homes because of their fear of crime—they are afraid to walk the street alone and afraid to open their doors at night. I imagine that every MSP, as several have mentioned, has had some representation from a constituent who is concerned about criminal behaviour in their local community and the fact that such behaviour appears to go unchecked. Often, when we go to the police and raise such issues, they come out with the old chestnut: "We don't have enough front-line officers. We have people training and on secondment and there are folk off sick." Gordon Jackson made a good point about the police engaging with the local community in trying to tackle crime. However, as Margo MacDonald pointed out, if a community continually complains about criminal activity in its area, it will eventually lose faith. That is why we must ensure that, if we are to engage with local communities, there are sufficient police officers to take on that role and to address the issues that are highlighted by the local community.

In the context of this morning's debate on the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill, the effect of Mr Gallie's amendment did not fit with its intention. There is a wider issue about people who continually commit crimes. To address the issue purely in terms of improving sentencing procedures is inappropriate. It is a wider social problem and various factors must be taken into account. As ever, the Tories have taken a simplistic approach to a complex and deep-rooted problem. The Executive has repeated its desire to congratulate itself on police numbers. However, as usual, we must go back to those on the front line.  Several members have quoted representatives of the Scottish Police Federation who have highlighted genuine problems in relation to police resources on the front line. A key to good policing is the ability to plan resources. Over the past four years, the police have seen their resources being reduced and that has created difficulties in planning for the future. Pauline McNeill and Paul Martin both criticised the SNP amendment. Pauline McNeill suggested that we would fund our extra 1,000 police officers by asking the Treasury for money that it has been paid in fines for crimes that have not been committed. I do not know whether Pauline McNeill was listening, but Roseanna Cunningham made it clear in her speech that the cost would be one sixteenth of the Executive's underspend last year. It is money that is in the pot to be used.

That is not the case, as the minister is well aware. The minister has tried to raise the issue of how we could fund 1,000 officers out of £25 million. The criteria in the equation that was used to make that calculation are the same as those that were used by the Executive in calculating its 300 extra officers and the £8.9 million that that would require. That is the reality. Several members mentioned the Scottish Prison Service and it is regrettable that the minister has not examined that matter in detail. The minister cannot have failed to notice that morale among prison officers is at rock bottom. There has been industrial action. There is low morale because of the delay in the results of the prison estates review, and concern about possible further privatisation and prison officers' working conditions, which—in places such as Barlinnie—are appalling. Anxieties have been expressed time and time again by an important part of our criminal justice system—the prison officers who work in Scottish prisons. The situation is not helped by senior members of the Scottish Prison Service stating in the national media that industrial action will just play into the hands of those who want to privatise the service when, often, some of those senior SPS members are the ones who want to privatise it, as—I suspect—do some ministers. I am onside with Tony Blair on this matter. I do not normally align myself with right-wing people, but I am onside with what he said when he wrote to the Scottish Prison Officers Association when he was in Opposition: "We remain firmly opposed to privatisation of prisons, driven as it is by dogma rather than a serious strategy to reduce crime". The question for the Executive is whether its policy  to deal with the real issues of crime in Scotland is based on dogma or a simplistic strategy. Today, we have witnessed the Executive parading figures in celebration, when in reality we have not moved on since 1997. It is time that the Executive produced a strategy to tackle crime, because the real story is that the Executive has failed to deliver a safer Scotland for everyone.

Perhaps I, too, should declare an interest, which is included in the register of members' interests. I congratulate Robert Brown on securing this member's business debate; I attended the Manufacturing, Science, Finance union lobby several weeks ago as well. I want to widen the focus of the debate slightly. The motion concentrates on health visitors and community nurses, who are often attached to primary care teams. Community health care has changed dramatically in the past couple of years with the extension of secondary care provision, particularly the introduction of multidisciplinary area rehabilitation teams. Although health visitors and community nurses play an important role in delivering health care, area rehabilitation teams include therapists such as physiotherapists, occupational therapists and psychologists, who are all affected by the same problems as community nurses and health visitors. If the minister makes a commitment to examine ways in which the system can be changed, I ask him to ensure that any review includes people who are  members of professions allied to medicine or of multidisciplinary teams in the secondary care sector. Although this point is slightly outwith the focus on the health service, I point out that social workers and community social care staff suffer similar problems because of a dislocation in the car leasing system operated by local authorities. I have suffered from the problem myself; when I left Highland Regional Council, I was offered the opportunity to buy my lease car at an extortionate price that was nowhere near its market value. I then had to buy myself out of the car leasing scheme so that I could go and do the same job in another local authority. In both posts, I was an essential car user; I was doing a job that the local authority was legally obliged to fulfil. As the same difficulties exist in the social care and health care sectors, any attempt to address the problem must be comprehensive. In the course of the MSF lobby, I was extremely surprised to hear about the car leasing agreements that are provided to senior managers in the health service. Nicola Sturgeon has already touched on this point: senior managers in the health service who are not essential car users are offered extremely generous car leasing arrangements and loans way above the level for clinical staff who are essential car users. There is a need to examine that, to determine whether it is an appropriate use of public money. I was surprised to hear that consultants also receive a generous package involving either a car loan or a car leasing system. They may have to make occasional trips, but they do not strike me as being essential car users. I recognise the need to ensure that appropriate packages are supplied to maintain the high quality of health care professionals, but I ask the minister to consider the anomalies in the system that have developed over the years because their presence has just been accepted. There is a need to examine the issue comprehensively, to ensure not only that the car leasing system for health visitors and community health nurses is revised, but that the situation for social care staff and other professionals in the health service who are affected is considered.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Commission for Racial Equality in Scotland. (S1O-3283)

Is the minister aware of the document entitled "Modernising Local Racial Equality Work", which was published by the CRE? That document will result in the abolition of all the racial equality councils in Scotland. Does she support the work that is conducted by organisations such as the Central Scotland Racial Equality Council, which has an important role in central Scotland in tackling racism, as have the many other racial equality councils in other parts of Scotland? Does she recognise that the councils have a continuing and important role in tackling racism in Scotland, or does she support the CRE's wish to abolish them?

I note that Paul Martin is constantly being confused with his father. The Executive could have initiated a debate on some of the fundamental problems in our criminal justice system. Unfortunately, although some members highlighted those problems, much of the debate has been more like an extended press release, as Roseanna Cunningham pointed out. Lyndsay McIntosh tried to dispel the notion of an alliance between the SNP and the Conservatives. However, the more someone tries to dispel such notions, the more people are inclined to believe them. We should take heart from the fact that there are only two places in Scotland where the Tories have any type of power—in Perth and Kinross, where they share power with the Labour party and the Liberal Democrats, and in East Dunbartonshire, where they share power with the Liberal Democrats. Incidentally, the Liberal Democrats used to be in power with the Labour party in that area, but they went off in a huff.

I do not have time, I am afraid. Clearly, crime is an issue in Scotland. The figures show that there is an overall increase in crime. We have only to consider the statistics in the most recent report by Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary, which details the constabularies in Scotland that have recorded an increase in crime. It is important to note that the forms of crime that have increased have been the serious ones. Across Scotland, violent crime has increased by 22 per cent. Fife constabulary reported an increase in violent crime of 47 per cent; Grampian police reported a rise of 42 per  cent; Northern constabulary reported a rise of almost 30 per cent; and, in Edinburgh, violent crime was reported to have risen by 24 per cent. Alongside the rise in violent crime, there has been a 30 per cent increase in the number of people arrested for carrying weapons or for being involved in incidents in which weapons were used. Serious assaults are up by 16 per cent. Those figures illustrate a clear trend in Scottish society. The minister said that he met newly recruited police officers in Hampden Park today. We should note that there is a problem with the recruitment of police officers, especially from particular sections of society. In 1997, about 0.3 per cent of our police officers came from an ethnic minority. In the most recent HM chief inspector of constabulary report, that figure had risen to only 0.5 per cent. That is unacceptable and I hope that the minister will detail what action will be taken to address the problem. Currently, only 15 per cent of Scottish police officers are women, whereas about 40 per cent of MSPs are women. We need to ensure that we recruit more female police officers, as police recruitment must reflect the diversity of Scottish society. Gordon Jackson mentioned his discussion with John Orr. I have spoken to the chief constable in my area recently and—as is always the case when one meets the head of a service—he was keen to tell me the good points about the force. However, I also met officers who told me that morale among some is at rock bottom because of problems with resources, including staff resources. A shortage of staff can cause problems when officers are off sick or are on training courses. Officers are having to do double shifts to take up the slack. We must deal with issues arising from how police forces operate within their areas. It is all very well for ministers to talk about being tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime, but people on the ground experience a different situation. The perception of those people must be the litmus test of whether we are being effective and successful in tackling crime. I will deal with the broader issue of the criminal justice system in Scotland. When Labour was in opposition, it was against the privatisation of public services. However, we now have a private prison in Scotland and Central Scotland police are having to consider a private finance initiative project to build a new police station in Falkirk. There is creeping privatisation in our criminal justice system. I hope that the minister can assure us that, when he produces his Scottish prisons estates review, he will address the issue of privatisation within the Scottish Prison Service, as that is an issue that prison officers constantly raise. I hope that he will rule out privatisation and that he will ensure that that commitment is made  known to the Prison Service staff in order to improve morale. The legacy of the Government will be that it has failed the Scottish justice system. Crime is up, police numbers are down, prisons are being privatised and our courts are struggling to cope. The Government might talk about being tough on crime, but the reality is another story.

I, too, thank the committee for its inquiry and its excellent report. If any members had any doubt about the link between social deprivation and drug misuse, clearly the report will have dispelled it. I will address an area that is of interest to me and which the report considered: the need to deal with the drugs problem in the Scottish Prison Service. I must first say that I am saddened to see that the Prison Service asked to give its evidence in private. The culture of secrecy that, for whatever reason, pervades the Prison Service must end. Everybody, including the Prison Service, must work to tackle the drugs problem. I hope that ministers will ask the Prison Service to change its attitude to these matters.

I fully support that view. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Justice will deliver that message to the Prison Service. Some of the evidence that the Prison Service gave was excellent. That evidence showed the depth of the drugs problem in our prisons. Three  out of every four prisoners test positive for drugs when they enter prison. The Prison Service said that occasions on which 100 per cent of prisoners being received into prison test positive for drugs are not unusual. That illustrates the depth of the problem that the Prison Service faces and that we have to tackle. The focus on the drugs problem in prisons tends to be on mainstream prisons, but we also have to consider the problems that occur in young offenders institutions such as HM Young Offenders Institution Polmont. On a recent visit to Polmont, I learned of a project to provide employment opportunities for young offenders, which was provided in co-ordination with the Falkirk Enterprise Action Trust project. Unfortunately, the project ran out of money, and the Prison Service desperately needed to find £50,000 to keep the project going. That project would have enabled young offenders to develop opportunities for employment. It is essential that we bear in mind that we are not just locking up criminals who have a drugs problem; we are locking up people who often come from extremely difficult family circumstances and who have mental or physical health problems. It is often said that our prisons reflect the whole of society, although the evidence that the committee received was clear: they are not necessarily representative of the whole of society; often they represent a section within society that is most deprived, for whatever reason. The lifestyle that many of those prisoners lead prior to going into prison is chaotic. It is difficult to intervene in that lifestyle while they are in the community. To an extent, prison offers a good opportunity for intervention, so that their drugs problems can be dealt with. They are often caught in a vicious circle of crime and drugs—they commit crime only to feed their habit. As Keith Raffan said, just keeping a heroin habit going can cost £50 a day, which amounts to £18,000 a year. The occasional foolhardy politician will say that the way to tackle Scotland's drugs problem is to cut off the supply. However, the issue is much more complex than that, and we must ensure that, in tackling the difficulties, our approach is balanced between enforcement, treatment and education. Even if the prison-based services were given the necessary resources to tackle the problems that are encountered with prisoners, they would find themselves fire-fighting. When prisoners leave prison, often they will go back to the same chaotic lifestyle and environment that they were in prior to entering prison. The SPS evidence was quite clear: there is a need to ensure proper throughcare. Nick Royle summed up the position  when he stated: "We can clean people up, we can dry them out, and we can prepare them to take advantage of the opportunities that are available to them. But we cannot give them a house, we cannot give them a job and we cannot give them a new life on the outside." It is extremely difficult for young offenders institutions such as Polmont to work in a co-ordinated way with local agencies, because those institutions take young offenders from throughout Scotland. I hope that the minister will address that in his winding-up speech. Co-ordination among services is absolutely essential if we are to break the links with the serious drugs problem that Scotland has. The report makes it clear that the serious drugs problem is predominantly based in the most disadvantaged communities in both urban and rural Scotland. I regret the comment that Margaret Jamieson made about taking money from the fishing budget to tackle the drugs problem. If we are to tackle the drugs problem, we must deal with the issues that the report highlights—boredom, frustration and lack of opportunity—in order to ensure that young people believe that they have opportunities in society. As was highlighted on the BBC programme "Newsnight Scotland" last night—and the Deputy Minister for Justice will be aware of that, given that he participated in the programme—2.1 million daily doses of methadone are prescribed in Scotland a year, of which 1 million are prescribed in Glasgow. In Glasgow, 4,000 people are on the methadone programme, which is now full. No one is saying that methadone is the best way for every addict, but it has a clear and important role to play, as illustrated by the committee's report. It is essential that we ensure that those who go on to the methadone programme eventually come off methadone. There is no point getting people off heroin and on methadone and simply leaving them on methadone. We must have a clear exit strategy to get them off the programme. The system in Glasgow is not working, as it is not achieving that.

I will take a brief intervention.

The committee report illustrates clearly that the methadone programme  has an important role to play in getting people off heroin. However, it is essential that we do not just put people on methadone for the rest of their lives, and it is clear that the methadone programme lacks the structure to get people off that drug. We must put in place an exit strategy to tackle that specific problem. Many members have highlighted the need to ensure that we target resources at those areas that are in greatest need—again, that is clearly illustrated in the report. I welcome the minister's commitment to conducting further research, as that will ensure that the necessary statistical information is available to target resources properly. I will close by adding my support for recommendation 36 of the report, which recommends getting a parliamentary committee together. It is incumbent upon our Parliament to do everything in its power to tackle the problem of drug abuse in Scotland. All the parties in the chamber believe that there is a need to achieve that. Will the minister take a lead on the issue? Will he convene a meeting where all the parties can get together to try to move the issue forward? I recognise that that matter is for the Parliament to decide, but I hope that the minister is willing to take a lead on that recommendation.

The debate has illustrated two key issues about the bill. First, three quarters of the Scottish Parliament—not two thirds, as Richard Simpson said—favour the bill's general principles. Secondly, considerable benefit has been gained from incorporation of the European convention on human rights into the Scottish justice system—although it has not been without its problems, as the situation with temporary sheriffs demonstrated. That said, it has turned out that the solution to that problem has made the system even better. Scott Barrie mentioned an audit. Members of the  Justice 1 Committee felt the need for a more detailed and public audit to ensure that we can find out exactly what is happening and where the areas of concern are. It is clear that a human rights commission has a role to play in that. As ever, there are those who like to argue that the ECHR has been nothing but a complete and utter disaster. As ever, that argument has come from the usual suspects. The Conservatives demonstrated the usual xenophobia that we expect from them on anything to do with Europe. As Roseanna Cunningham pointed out, Winston Churchill ratified the ECHR back in 1951, and as John Home Robertson said, this is not a matter for the European Commission or the European Union; it is a matter for the Council of Europe. Britain was the first member state to ratify the ECHR. Phil, you seem to object to the whole idea that we should have anything to do with the convention. If I recall rightly, you led us to believe that this is an issue where rules are made in Strasbourg which then come and affect the Scottish justice system, and you were surprised that the SNP would accept such a position. Do you not realise that the reason for incorporation is to ensure that judgments are made in Scotland so that people do not have to go to Strasbourg?

That is about as much as Mr Gallie said in his speech.

I entirely agree. Scott Barrie made the good point that people are either for or against incorporation. It appears that the Conservatives are against it—even though a Conservative Government ratified the convention. Robert Brown hit the nail on the head when he referred to the new procedure of setting a punishment part and a risk part in sentences. That will reduce the possibility of a challenge, which will provide important transparency, particularly for victims. We have all met people who have been left wondering how long offenders sentenced to  life imprisonment will serve in prison. With the new procedures, it will be clear when the sentence is handed down that the offender will serve 13 years in prison before they can be considered for parole. Euan Robson mentioned the difficulty the Justice 1 Committee identified with the notification of victims. After 13 years, some victims will have moved on and will not want to be involved in any review of the case. That needs further consideration. The committee agreed to write to some of the victims organisations to ask for their views on whether people who want to be informed should notify the court when the sentence is handed down or be automatically notified. I am of the opinion that they should indicate when the sentence is handed down whether they want to be involved in any parole process.

Of course. That is why the system should be flexible. Phil Gallie suggested that Part 1 is not always necessary for us to be entirely compliant with the ECHR. The committee recognised that, but the proposals in the bill are even better and take us a step further. If they benefit the system, we should be willing to accept them. The ECHR should be only the baseline from which we work; we should always aspire to improve the system in any way possible. That is what the bill seeks to do. Phil Gallie said that the minister is washing his hands of the parole issue and referred to the Parole Board for Scotland as a nameless organisation. As the Conservatives created more quangos than any other party in history, they should know about faceless organisations and faceless individuals. When Dr McManus and Lord Ross appeared before the Justice 1 Committee, they struck me as exceptionally sensible and expert people in their profession. They have a clear knowledge of their role. By removing the ministerial involvement in parole, we will get a decision that is made by people who know all the facts about the case and who have taken time to consider the matter—as opposed to a minister making a decision based on a political whim. Yet again, Phil Gallie struck a chord with me on the power to make remedial orders. If there was any doubt about providing ministers with powers that they can misuse, he made a good case for never doing so. That may be going a bit far—Mr Gallie will never be in a position to use such powers—but he gave us a good example of why we should ensure that proper safeguards are in place. I note what Jim Wallace said about ensuring that the safeguards are sufficient, but as Roseanna  Cunningham and several other members reminded us, we received the same assurances over Sewel motions yet we have been presented with more than 20 of them. The latest figures from the Scottish Parliament information centre indicate that the majority of them have been on justice matters. Introducing a 60-day period for laying an order would allow us to produce our own primary legislation to deal with the problem. David McLetchie made the best speech I have ever heard from a Conservative in support of an independent Scotland. The SNP is supportive of the principles of the bill and will support the motion this afternoon.

Like many other members, I welcome the draft  freedom of information bill. However, before we go over the top in congratulating ourselves on reaching this milestone, we should be mindful of the fact that the Swedish Parliament passed its first freedom of information act back in 1766—the Freedom of the Press Act. We clearly have some ground to make up. I was interested in the comments that Robert Brown made when he referred to those who may be obsessed with single issues but can also be responsible for exposing matters that would otherwise go unnoticed. I can only suggest that, given that Phil Gallie is so obsessed with the European convention on human rights, that makes him the European convention on human rights busybody. I must confess that I do not think that the SNP can support the Tory amendment, because the Tories' benchmark for the draft bill seems to be based on whether they will have access to Cabinet minutes. To be perfectly honest, I am not too sure whether Cabinet meetings will be that interesting to read about. In the course of the debate, several members have highlighted the fact that the draft bill, to some extent, goes further than the Freedom of Information Act 2000. Roseanna Cunningham highlighted three areas in which the draft bill proposes to go further than the UK act. However, there are several areas in which the draft bill falls behind the provisions of the UK act. The draft bill's proposal to set a higher threshold of substantial prejudice when testing for the disclosure of information is one that I welcome. Gordon Jackson referred to it as being a higher standard of prejudice than that set in the UK act, and I entirely agree with him about that. In addition, a positive provision of the Scottish draft bill is the obligation that will be placed on Scottish authorities to provide a certain degree of information under their own initiative. That is also to be welcomed. International experience has been referred to in the course of the debate. I was interested to hear the comments from the Canadian commissioner for freedom of information last year, when he highlighted the fact that the biggest impediment to the implementation of the Canadian act was breaking down the culture of secrecy that pervades many public and private institutions. I find it surprising that the draft bill contains no explicit purpose clause to state clearly the intentions of the bill. Gordon Jackson said that we should warmly welcome the general principles on which the draft bill is based, but I think that we should also ensure that there is a clear purpose clause in the bill so that there is no confusion as to what its purpose should be.

I thank the minister for that comment. I am aware of that paragraph. The consultation document says that it is possible for a purpose clause to be included, but I want to know why the Executive has not yet decided to do so. It seems clear to me that we should include a purpose clause so that we can ensure that there is no misinterpretation of the intentions of the bill and assist in breaking down the culture of secrecy that pervades many of our public authorities. Several members have raised questions about the proposed charging regime that will be used to cover the costs of locating and retrieving information under the bill. I have serious concerns about the deterrent effect that the charging proposals may have. Under the Freedom of Information Act 2000, ministers have made regulations that will permit authorities to charge no more than 10 per cent of the marginal costs of locating information. For example, where the cost is £500, the charge would be only £50. A similar request under the Scottish draft bill would cost eight times more than under the UK legislation. Lloyd Quinan referred in detail to the serious possibility that the financial charging regime could act as an obstacle to requesting information. I note that Jim Wallace referred to the need to ensure that public authorities are not overburdened by requests. However, as he will be aware, the UK act contains at least six restrictions to deal with that very issue, covering cost and vexatious requests. Those provisions are mirrored in the Scottish draft bill, so we already have provisions in the draft bill to deal with that potential problem. That is why they were put in the UK bill in the first place. Several members have highlighted the bizarre situation in which the Lord Advocate and procurator fiscal service will find themselves. The information commissioner will have no power to review refusal to disclose information by either the Lord Advocate or a procurator fiscal. In effect those people, one of whom is a Government minister, will be able to ignore the legislation. Pauline McNeill referred to the need for the Lord Advocate sometimes to retain information for specific purposes. However, as Roseanna Cunningham and Lloyd Quinan highlighted, there have been cases in which access to such information has caused greater harm than good, in particular the Chhokar case and the case of the Cawleys, to which Roseanna Cunningham referred. I hope that the minister will give  consideration to that. Access to information has also been highlighted in relation to prisons. The minister will be well aware of my attempts to find out the cost per year for each prisoner in Kilmarnock private prison. What will the bill do to change the current system? Finally, I want to turn to an area that is of particular concern to me: the First Minister's veto under the proposed bill. As the minister will be aware, when we discussed the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill and the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill at committee, I raised the issue of giving sweeping powers to ministers. The Executive's consultation document "An Open Scotland" stated that the veto could be exercised only on the "collective decision of the Scottish Ministers." In the draft bill, that has been watered down to "after consulting the other Ministers", which is a less demanding hurdle.

I take on board the minister's comments, but I would welcome it if he would consider tightening up the way in which the veto can be used to ensure, as the consultation document did, that the veto can be used only in relation to information of exceptional sensitivity or seriousness, to provide greater safeguards on when it will be used.

Sorry. I think that I am on my last minute. As Margo MacDonald said, the draft legislation is a start and it should be welcomed. I support that. I hope that the minister will take on board the concerns expressed in the chamber today and that he will have given them full consideration and  sought to remedy them by the time the bill comes before Parliament and the Justice 1 Committee.

The minister referred to evidence from America. Is he aware that where domestic sprinklers have been introduced there, fire damage has been cut by nearly 80 per cent? Given that I plan to introduce a member's bill next week to ensure that domestic sprinkler systems are provided in homes of multiple occupancy and in the homes of the elderly and the disabled, will the Executive be sympathetic towards my bill and consider introducing the necessary legislation to which Ken Macintosh referred?

Is the minister aware of the problem of providing transport to allow disabled schoolchildren to attend school link courses that are provided by further education colleges, such as Falkirk college? Is he aware that a number of councils have had to withdraw schoolchildren from courses because they are unable to meet their transport costs? The minister referred to ensuring that children have access to the curriculum. Such courses are part of children's curriculum, but local authorities are unable to provide transport that will meet the needs of the disabled child.

I said that the SNP has "consistently raised concerns". I did not say "opposed".

rose—

I regret the fact that, for the second week running, the Parliament is being asked to consider a Sewel motion, as a result of legislation going through Westminster that affects areas of devolved responsibility. Last week, we considered a Sewel motion relating to a private member's bill that was going through Westminster, which amended areas of devolved responsibility. Today, we are being asked to pass a Sewel motion that will impact on the Scottish criminal justice system and, in particular, our police. As the minister will know, the SNP has consistently raised concerns about the use of Sewel motions. Over the past year, there have been several Sewel motions relating to our criminal justice system. My concern today is not so much the Criminal Justice and Police Bill, but the fact that the Parliament has not been given an opportunity to consider the bill's provisions in detail. Clearly, everyone welcomes new measures that allow us to deal with crime and disorder more effectively. However, as a Parliament, we also have a responsibility to scrutinise legislation in a detailed fashion, in order to be satisfied that its provisions are in the best interests of the Scottish criminal justice system.

I am sorry, but I have only three minutes. Part III of the bill has already raised concerns because of its human rights and civil liberties implications, as it will extend police powers to seize materials. As a Parliament, we have a responsibility to ensure that we consider such concerns and, if necessary, to ensure that the bill has sufficient safeguards to protect individual  human rights.

Time is against us. The motion fails to give us sufficient time to consider such matters in full. Earlier this afternoon, Des McNulty made a point of order on the three half-hour debates in the name of Tommy Sheridan, which will take place tomorrow, because he was concerned that there would be insufficient time for back benchers to participate in the debate. Des McNulty's concerns about those debates could be applied equally to those on Sewel motions. As I have said, the issue is not the potential benefits of the Criminal Justice and Police Bill, but the fact that we have not been afforded sufficient time to give its provisions detailed consideration. I hope that the Executive will reflect further on its use of Sewel motions.

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service. (S1O-2868)

Is the Minister for Justice aware of the way in which the Scottish Prison Service has tried to mislead the public and politicians about the true cost per prisoner of the private prison at Kilmarnock? The service tells us that the cost is £11,000 per prisoner. A parliamentary answer from the Minister for Justice says that the cost is £21,000. Now we have a leaked document from the Scottish Prison Service that says that the cost is £26,000. As the minister who is responsible for justice and for freedom of information, will Mr Wallace ensure that the proper information on the costs of Kilmarnock prison is placed in the public domain, so that the public can decide whether private prisons are appropriate?

I thank the Lord Advocate for his statement. Several members have referred to the possibility of a public inquiry. Should that inquiry take place and sufficient evidence become available, would the Crown Office consider it appropriate to undertake further prosecutions?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Disability Rights Commission. (S1O-2813)

Is the minister aware of the Disability Rights Commission's concerns about its limited mandate to take forward legal challenges under the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and that it has suggested proposals to extend its mandate to allow it to take up legal challenges under the Human Rights Act 1998? Does the minister support the proposal to extend the commission's mandate so as to enable it to take up challenges under the Human Rights Act 1998?  If so, will she make representations to Margaret Hodge, the minister responsible at Westminster, to ensure that the commission's mandate is extended to protect the human rights of disabled people in Scotland?

I, too, welcome this afternoon's debate—a debate that is historical in the short history of this Parliament. The Justice 1 Committee is the first of the Parliament's committees to introduce such a proposal in its own bill. As a member of the former Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I know that the past year has placed considerable demands on its members and staff. It has had a large and varied legislative programme to deal with. That legislation included  the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and the act that caught everyone's imagination, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000. Although that legislation is important, it had to compete with the committee's need to consider wider issues such as the issue that we are discussing today. It is all credit to the committee that it was able to consider some of those wider issues over the past year. From its earliest meetings, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee recognised that there was a need to provide greater protection to women vulnerable to domestic abuse. The committee report and the evidence accompanying it shows the extent of consultation undertaken since September 1999 and that evidence was taken from a wide range of organisations. There were times when the committee became a little too preoccupied with other things and over-excited about the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000 and other bills, so that it lost focus on the issue. If it had not been for Maureen Macmillan's persistence in bringing the issue continually to committee members' attention we might not have got to the report and the debate today. Initially, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee thought of amending the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 and that powers of arrest should be attached to matrimonial interdicts. However, that act is more concerned with conveyancing and occupancy rights than it is with family law, so, as others have said, it would have been very difficult to have introduced the changes needed by amending it. Additionally, that act excludes a large number of people because it defines the group to which it applies as cohabiting heterosexual couples who are joint owners of a property or have a joint tenancy. Those concerns were highlighted in evidence by Louise Sharp of Scottish Women's Aid, who explained that women have no entitlement to occupancy rights under the 1981 act but must go to court to get a declarator of occupancy rights. That process can take 12 weeks and in that period that woman cannot receive protection under the present provisions. Given the level of domestic abuse in our society, there is a real need to ensure that the proper legal protection is given to individuals. Thankfully, it is a responsibility of the Scottish Parliament and, to date, the Parliament has shown willingness to listen and to act on domestic violence. The figures on domestic abuse in Scotland are revealing. From February 1988 until August 2000, nearly 29,000 domestic disputes were dealt with by Strathclyde police. Those figures show the range of relationships that people may be involved in when abuse takes place. Of those cases, 25 per  cent concerned married couples, over 30 per cent those living with a partner, 18 per cent boyfriend-girlfriend relationships, 17 per cent ex-partners and nearly 9 per cent ex-spouses. The protection afforded under the 1981 act does not extend beyond spouses and cohabiting couples who both have occupancy rights. That means that a woman in need of protection while a divorce is going through will lose the rights that she may have had under the 1981 act and become even more vulnerable once that divorce goes through. When she is at her most vulnerable the act fails to protect her. Domestic violence does not recognise relationship definitions, marriage certificates or the individual's location or gender. It is necessary therefore that the protection available to people in abusive, or potentially abusive, relationships does not recognise those distinctions. However, the failings of the present 1981 act go yet further, as has been highlighted by the Scottish Law Commission, which said: "If a woman who is the owner or tenant of a house cohabits there with a man who is not owner or tenant, and he begins to be violent towards her, she cannot obtain the protection of a matrimonial interdict unless he has applied successfully for occupancy rights", which, in an abusive relationship, he is unlikely to do. The act as it stands also leaves out vulnerable groups that could be subject to abuse, such as single-sex couples or the extended family of grandparents. Concern regarding the present limitations of the legislation as it stands has been expressed not only by those agencies that work with victims. It has been expressed by the police, the people who are responsible for dealing with what can be the front line of domestic violence incidents. They have highlighted that at present the legislation does not take into account the complexities of modern-day relationships. The committee considered the possibility of amending the 1981 act and it is clear, from previous comments, that that is not a route to be taken. It was summed up by one individual who gave evidence and said that to try and amend the 1981 act would be a nightmare. The committee has come to the right conclusion, which is to bring forward its own bill. However, we should recognise that the effectiveness of the bill will be achieved only when we also ensure that there is proper access to legal aid. The committee report highlighted the fact that there are many difficulties in accessing legal aid. When the Family Law Association gave evidence, it highlighted those cases where it had sought an order to protect someone who had been subject to domestic abuse, and had failed—often as a result  of not obtaining legal aid, rather than because of a weakness in the case. In addition, the length of time that it can take for cases to be processed by the Scottish Legal Aid Board has acted as a deterrent to victims of abuse from pursuing their cases. I hope that the minister will seek to address that in considering the bill. The SNP is pleased to support the Justice 1 Committee's proposal for a protection from abuse bill.

A number of compelling arguments have been made for the need to tighten up the regulations and to examine current legislation and the way in which our criminal justice system deals with stalking and harassment. A number of the strong cases that have been made have referred to individuals who have suffered as a result of stalking or harassment. Kay Ullrich, Paul Martin and Pauline McNeill all referred to such cases of which they have experience. In recent years, a number of high-profile cases in Scotland and elsewhere have given stalking and harassment a major focus in the media. As a result, there has been growing public concern about the way in which the system addresses stalking and harassment. The primary focus of  concern tends to centre on the inadequacy of our present criminal justice system to provide protection to individuals because of the attitudes that prevail about the serious nature of stalking and harassment. Several members have referred to the fact that stalking and harassment are on-going issues. The matter was debated in Westminster back in 1996. That begs the question, "Why has it taken until 2001 to take real action to address that on-going problem?" Roseanna Cunningham referred to the debate that took place in 1996 and the possibility that was raised then of attaching harassment to the charges against those who were found guilty of breach of the peace, so that harassment could be included on their charge schedule. As the minister pointed out, it has been possible to include harassment since 1998, but the measure has not been implemented. To some extent, that illustrates the nub of the problem: there are provisions, but they are not used adequately. That leads me to the point that there needs to be a change in the culture of the criminal justice system and the way in which it addresses the serious nature of stalking and harassment. I welcome the fact that the minister has asked ACPOS to examine training and guidance for those who work in the criminal justice system. Will he say what time scale will be set, so that we will have some idea of when the provisions will be implemented? The minister also referred to best practice throughout the system. As I am sure he is aware, one of the continuing concerns that people have about our criminal justice system is inconsistency of application. When he winds up, I hope that the deputy minister will refer to some ways in which it is hoped such inconsistencies will be addressed when new guidance and training provisions are introduced. The minister referred to five points that were flagged up by the consultation exercise. The third point was that cost prohibits people from going to court to take civil action. Pauline McNeill made an important intervention, during which she stated that individuals feel that they cannot take action through the civil courts because of the limitations or inaccessibility of legal aid. On a recent visit to Glasgow sheriff court, that experience was highlighted to me by solicitors who deal with individuals who have suffered from domestic violence. Although the minister referred to several ways in which he hopes to tackle that problem, I believe that the point about the cost of accessing civil courts to take out non-harassment orders or any other appropriate form of interdict must still be addressed. Although the minister mentioned a pilot scheme for lay advisers in Women's Aid  projects, I am reluctant to accept that as a suitable solution to the problem. However, I would be grateful if the minister indicated the time scale that will be set for the establishment of that pilot scheme and its intended duration. I echo comments that my colleague Roseanna Cunningham made about the motion that has been put before the chamber. It is vague and our amendment was lodged on that basis. A ministerial statement would have been more appropriate to enable us to consider the proposals—we could then have had a debate at a later stage. However, given the minister's comments this afternoon, the SNP will withdraw its amendment and support the Executive's motion.

I was talking about Glasgow sheriff court.

I am sure that all members present recognise that district courts perform an important function in our justice system. The present situation at Glasgow district court, with cases being delayed, dropped or shelved, is unacceptable. This is the fourth week that Glasgow district court has been subject to industrial action. In that time, it has become apparent that no one seems to be willing to take responsibility for the shambles that that industrial action has caused. At the very top, we have Jim Wallace stating in the press: "The disruption itself is due to a dispute between local authority employers and a union over pay." A spokesperson for the Scottish Executive stated: "it is a matter for the Crown Office to decide how cases are brought before the courts. The dispute is a matter for local government and the employees." However, the Crown Office says: "The council is responsible for the running of the court. We are a customer of the court." Everybody says that it is the local authority's responsibility, but it says: "This is a national dispute . . . Any decisions on cases in the courts are taken by the Procurator Fiscal".  However, the office of the procurator fiscal in Glasgow says: "We are referring all media calls to the Crown Office". Nobody seems to be willing to take responsibility.

I accept that it is a shared responsibility. Every one of the bodies to which I referred has a role in the running of the district courts. However, ultimate responsibility for the justice system lies with the Executive. The minister cannot ignore that. I take on board the minister's comments about cases being moved up to the sheriff court. On Monday, I was at Glasgow sheriff court as a guest of the Glasgow Bar Association, as was Pauline McNeill. The custody court started 40 minutes late and was likely to go on until 7 o'clock at night because of a lack of resources. Papers did not arrive in time and solicitors were left waiting to find out what their clients had been charged with. Some solicitors did not know what their clients had been charged with until they turned up in the dock. It is okay to say that we should move cases up, but if we do that we must ensure that there are adequate resources to deal with them. This is a localised problem that has resulted from a national dispute. As I have said, ultimately the buck stops with the Executive. I am sure that it comes as no surprise to anybody that the Conservative party has sought yet again to attack local government employees' entitlement to take industrial action. There may be members present who have taken industrial action since anti-trade union legislation was introduced under the previous Conservative Government. They will know that local government employees do not take industrial action lightly. Given the Tories' track record on the rights of workers to take industrial action, it comes as no surprise that today they have chosen to attack those rights once again.

My time is limited, but I will take a quick intervention from Phil Gallie.

The people who are taking industrial action at Glasgow district court are local government employees who provide an administrative function to the court. On that basis, they are entitled to take industrial action if they regard that as appropriate.  We find ourselves in this position because of the gradual erosion of the rights of local government employees and, in particular, because of the gradual erosion of their wages when compared with those of similar workers in the private sector. Over the past five years the wages of local government employees have been eroded, so they have a lot of ground to make up. It is all very well for the minister to say that additional money is available this year, but it does not address the on-going problem of low levels of pay. The dispute illustrates the invaluable role that the workers involved play in the courts. They deserve an increase in their pay. Given that a review is currently under way, it would be inappropriate to start making decisions about how we should change the district court system. However, an interim report should be published so that we can see what point the review has reached and what recommendations it may already have arrived at. That might allow us to address some of the problems that exist in the present system. I say to Mr Gallie that that is a genuine attempt to deal with this problem. I am afraid that, although he has called for action now, he has failed to come up with ideas for steps that should be taken. We have become used to that from the Conservative party. This is a national dispute. Our focus should be not on the rights of local government employees to take industrial action, but on ensuring that we find a national solution to this problem. The buck passing must stop now, and ministers and the other authorities involved must address the issue urgently. Public confidence in our justice system is being eroded. It is for the Executive to ensure that that stops and that this national dispute is resolved speedily. I move amendment S1M-1404.1, to leave out from "detrimental" to end and insert "effect of the current industrial action on the operation of the Glasgow District Court; calls upon the Scottish Executive to ensure a speedy resolution of the dispute and, in the light of the current situation, further calls upon the Scottish Executive to publish an interim report from the current review of district courts in order that public confidence in the administration and operation of our judicial system is restored and to ensure that this report is made available to the Parliament."

As the minister will be aware from what Lewis Macdonald has just said, many access panels are concerned about the loss of Disability Scotland. They have come together under the Scottish disability forum and would be keen for the forum to offer a national umbrella for disability organisations throughout Scotland. Is the minister prepared to enter into discussions with the forum to explore whether it could fulfil such a role?

I begin by congratulating Andrew Welsh on securing this debate. He succeeded where I failed, as I lodged a similar motion earlier in the year. I thank all the members who signed that motion. It is an example of teamwork that Andrew took the opportunity to lodge another motion.  Earlier this year, Andrew Welsh and I organised a small reception with the nuclear test veterans here at the Parliament in Edinburgh. They provided considerable insight into their experiences when they participated in nuclear tests in a variety of places around the world. I pay tribute to the work that Sue Roff has undertaken at Dundee University. Andrew Welsh detailed the research that has been carried out there. She has put in a tremendous amount of work to try to establish the link between nuclear test veterans and the cancer that many of them have suffered. I, too, welcome Mr Duggan, who I met earlier this year in Edinburgh. I remember well his recollections of his experiences when he was working during nuclear tests. Unfortunately, my constituent, Ken Sutton from Bonnybridge, who is also a nuclear test veteran, is unable to be with us for the debate. Ken is a former RAF electrician who witnessed the hydrogen bomb tests on Christmas island. He also tested the warheads at Maralinga in the Australian desert. When he was sent to Australia he was given no warning of what he was going to do there; he was told that he would be working on wiring up the airfield. When he arrived, he found that his job was to fly through the mushroom cloud caused by testing the bombs to assist in measuring the density of the radiation. He was told to look away when the bomb exploded. The only protection he had was a cotton cloth to cover his mouth and nose. Decontamination consisted of having a shower. In the 1940s and 1950s, health and safety was not a priority for the Government or the services. Ken now suffers from a form of skin cancer that he believes is attributable to flying through radioactive clouds. Ken and his colleagues in the British Nuclear Test Veterans Association have fought a dignified campaign for recognition of what they experienced for many years. All they are asking for is that the Government recognises that mistakes were made while they were on active service for their country. They do not blame this Government; they argue that a mistake was made by a Government in the past. It is time to recognise that. Some form of compensation or pension would mean the Government giving the elderly gentlemen concerned a better quality of life. It would be appropriate, in this week of remembrance, when we remember all those who sacrificed their life for their country, that we recognise the sacrifice of such men. We should also remember that they were not informed about the potential risk they were put under. I hope that the Minister for Health and Community Care will take the matter up and make it clear to ministers at Westminster that action must be taken sooner  rather than later because the gentlemen concerned are getting older by the day—and there are fewer of them every year.

There has been commonality among the parties today in seeking to ensure that we have a more equal and fair Scotland. However, I have to say to Jamie McGrigor, who ended by talking of people looking at the stars, that many people who come from an ethnic minority or who have a disability have looked to the stars; unfortunately, however, people have put hurdles in their way because of their ethnic background or their disability. Some people do not get to the stars because of their difference.

I have very limited time. I am sorry.

Normally I would give way, but I am limited for time. Bill Aitken referred to the Conservative party's view on dealing with equality. I thought that the Tories were going through a commonsense revolution, but where has Bill been hiding? When it comes to equality issues, that revolution has certainly passed him by. His comments on the edition of the BBC's "Frontline Scotland" on asylum seekers in Glasgow—at a time when some people were quite happy to exploit the racism behind that issue—did not help. We should take no lessons from him or his party on dealing with equality matters. I turn now to Keith Aitken—yes, it is the Tories' turn today.

I am sorry—I meant Keith Harding, who referred to his party's being a minority party and said that he should be treated fairly as a result. When I came into the chamber today, I was all for mainstreaming. However, if mainstreaming means that there will be more Tories, I am dead against it. Much has been said in this debate about the kind of Scotland that we would like to see. The document "Working together for equality" opens with this statement from the minister: "Our vision is for a just and inclusive Scotland." I am sure that the minister will recognise, without surprise, that that vision is shared by SNP members. A number of people have picked up on the language that the minister used in her speech. I worked in social work for eight years, and at times Jackie Baillie lost even me in the jargon. I once went to a lecture on equitemperature metamorphism; I came out of that lecture with a better understanding of equitemperature metamorphism than today I have of Jackie Baillie's equality strategy. There remains a question over whether, because of our limited legislative competence in this area, this Parliament can tackle inequality in Scotland to the extent that we would wish. One of the founding principles of the Parliament is enshrined on the head of the mace—the issue of equality. That means equality irrespective of gender, ethnicity, disability, sexual orientation, age, religion, or whether a person has come from another country and sought asylum here. Inequality within any society is corrosive and results in the marginalisation of a minority within our community. The SNP believes that equality should be at the  heart of government. We have heard a number of members talk about the extent of discrimination in our society. This strategy may be a step in the right direction, but the document states that "the power to legislate on equal opportunities is reserved to the UK Parliament." Legislation is one of the key levers that can be used to tackle discrimination. The effectiveness of this Parliament in tackling discrimination is undermined by the fact that we do not have control over all the levers. The limit of this Parliament's powers is a matter of concern not only to the SNP. As Fiona Hyslop said, the Liberal Democrats were unhappy that the power was reserved to Westminster. Mike Rumbles may acknowledge that the power is reserved, but there is no reason why this Parliament cannot make its views known and speak loudly when we see discrimination in Scotland. A number of important points have been made about areas of discrimination and the lack of the necessary legislative powers. I do not believe that this matter should be left to Westminster. For 10 years, the Commission for Racial Equality has been calling for the Race Relations Act 1976 to be amended in ways that would have made it stronger and wider ranging in its job of tackling racism. Even though that has been called for for a decade, it is only in the past couple of months that Westminster has considered changing the act. That is nothing short of an abdication of responsibility by Westminster. I am sure that the Scottish Parliament would not have tolerated such a delay. If Michael McMahon considers my raising such a matter to be bleating over the Scotland Act 1998, I tell him that I will continue to bleat until we have the right legislation to deal with any form of discrimination in Scotland, including racism. Even the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 has a number of major weaknesses. The Executive's strategy highlights a number of weaknesses in relation to the disability rights task force, including the fact that education is exempt from its remit. Educating disabled people will give them the opportunity to be equal to others. Disabled people continue to be disadvantaged in a number of ways. The disability rights task force raised an issue in relation to transport. Fiona McLeod's point on that has yet to be answered.

The Disability Rights Commission has asked for its powers to be extended under the Human Rights Act 1998 to deal with the gaps in the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. It needs resources and permission and it has made representations in Westminster. Will the minister make a commitment to give the  resources to the commission and to encourage it to make challenges under the Human Rights Act 1998? Until we have full control over the necessary legislation in dealing with discrimination, we will not deliver real social justice—it will be nothing more than a mantra. That is why we need control of all the legislative levers to deliver it.

I welcome the tone of the debate set by all parties, in recognition of the complex drugs misuse problem in Scotland. I also welcome the minister's recognition that the issue of drugs courts was a Scottish National Party manifesto policy commitment. Rumour has it that the Executive, as part of its on-going review of policies, is about to steal one of our other core policy areas: that of independence. I look forward to it bringing that motion before Parliament in due course. [Laughter.]  Iain Gray, in his opening remarks, referred to the blight that drugs misuse casts on Scottish society. A number of members have highlighted the true cost of the drugs problem in Scotland. The cost is not only to the individual, but to their family. It affects the individual's life, leading to loss of friendships and dignity, and a day-to-day existence that is based on feeding their habit. It is a lifestyle based on survival. When I was at school—more recently than Kay Ullrich—my school had a drugs problem, which reflected the part of Glasgow in which it was located. The school ran a drugs awareness programme, during which a number of workshops were held by former drug addicts. The girl who took our workshop had suffered from a heroin problem for some years. She had lost contact with her family and was so desperate that she returned to her mother's house. Her mother had not let her into the house for years because of her problem, and she refused to let her back in, saying, "I'm not  letting you back in until you give up drugs." At the door, she told her mother that she was home in order to give up drugs, and, on that basis, her mother allowed her back into the house. When her mother went out for the messages, the girl stole her television and video in order to pay for more drugs. That is an example of the blight of drugs on society, individuals and families. A number of members touched on the problems that exist in the wider community. Day in, day out, we hear from people whose houses have been broken into, whose cars have been stolen and whose children cannot play in the back court because drug addicts use it for injecting, leaving the needles behind. Often, those people are not directly involved in drugs but suffer as a result of the continuing drug problems in the community. As Roseanna Cunningham mentioned, the cost is not limited to the individual, their family and community but affects society as a whole. The Scottish Executive has indicated that in the region of £330 million a year is spent on dealing with Scotland's drug problem, £120 million of which goes on policing alone. Given the financial implications for society, it is in our interests to assist individuals who have drug problems and the communities that suffer as a result. There is a complex drug problem in Scotland to which there is no single solution. However, as is always said in politics, it is important that we do not just bang the table and say, "We must deal with the problem." By proposing drugs courts, the SNP is genuinely attempting to bring to the table an idea that we believe offers a constructive way of dealing with the problem. As Hugh Henry said, a balanced drug policy is important. There must be a balance between the important issue of enforcement—the Executive has established the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency—and the education of young people, in order to ensure that they do not take up drugs and, at the same time, that we provide rehabilitation services to those who have a drug problem. Even that approach must be balanced, because, as Hugh Henry said, we must ensure not only that drug addicts who commit crimes have access to rehabilitation services, but that those who do not commit crimes and who are looking for support also have ready access to those services. The pressure for more alternatives to custody is not just political. Roseanna Cunningham mentioned a number of organisations that are committed to the idea of drugs courts and that believe that such courts will benefit Scotland. The Executive also mentioned the alternatives to custody that are already in place. We heard about the arrest referral scheme, about which there is confusion. The Executive department that is  responsible for that scheme is clear that there is no set strategy for developing it. I welcome the minister's statement that the arrest referral scheme will be extended in the Aberdeen area, but there are different approaches in different parts of the country. We must ensure that we do not end up going down the route of a two-tier system and that we tackle the problem of drugs in a uniform way. Members also touched on the issue of DTTOs and the way in which they can be used. I recognise that the minister is committed to extending the pilot project on DTTOs. However, it must also be recognised that fewer than 50—

Yes, but only briefly.

Yes, but our responsibility should be to ensure that, if someone presents at court with a drug problem in any part of Scotland, they should still have access to services. The problem is the piecemeal approach that exists at present. I was talking about DTTOs. Why is it that, for nearly two years, fewer than 50 DTTOs have been issued? If we are to extend the use of DTTOs, we must consider why such limited use has been made of that disposal. Last Friday, I visited HM Young Offenders Institution Polmont and spoke to the prison officer who is the prison's drugs co-ordinator. She said that, of 15 new young offenders who presented at the institution in the past month, nine tested positive in drug tests. It is estimated that between 70 per cent and 80 per cent of all young offenders at Polmont have a drugs problem. Although there are limited resources within the prison system to deal with that problem, the institution is desperate to see the introduction of a mechanism to ensure that, because of their drugs habit, people do not start down the route of a life leading from one prison to the next. Drugs courts are one of the vehicles that can help to break that vicious cycle. Although I welcome the fact that the Executive is willing to take on board the establishment of drugs courts, I share Donald Gorrie's concerns that its amendment makes no reference to that. We need a clear, focused and determined attitude to dealing with the drugs problem in Scotland and on that basis I ask members to support the SNP motion.

Not even in history.

I congratulate Tricia Marwick on securing this debate. As someone who worked with MS sufferers for a good number of years in a professional capacity, I was pleased to see so many of them coming to the Parliament today to lobby MSPs. During my discussion with MS sufferers and carers from Lanarkshire and Falkirk, it became clear that they have had to deal with some difficult situations and that they have a strong case for improvements being made in services. I was interested to hear that the Forth Valley Health Board area has one of the highest incidences of MS in Scotland. However, the area does not have an MS nurse. When I worked in the area, I dealt predominantly with young MS sufferers. The Forth Valley Health Board area does not have any form of respite for young disabled people. I have seen a case in which, because of a lack of suitable facilities, the mother of young children had to go into a nursing home or hospital when the family were desperate for some respite. It was inappropriate for those young children to have to visit their mother in such a setting, given the client group there. If a more appropriate setting had been available in the area, that would have helped the children to cope with the situation. Respite and the availability of MS nurses are important in providing support and assistance not only to the individual sufferer, but to their carers. Those facilities can also provide support to the professionals who, as Richard Simpson  mentioned, do not always have the necessary expertise or information to support and advise a family or individual sufferers. Earlier today, the Minister for Health and Community Care referred to 22,000 extra weeks of respite for older people. Let us please avoid a situation in which a 64-year-old MS sufferer who desperately needs a week's respite will be denied that respite on the basis that they do not qualify for the new money. It is essential that any money that is provided for community care services is allocated flexibly enough to address needs and is not allocated to someone because of their age. There are also real problems in securing proper respite for young disabled people. It often proves to be extremely expensive, as people have to go further afield to special units. Such units charge a premium because of the limited number of places and the specialist nature of the care that they provide. If we are to provide a coherent and cohesive service for MS sufferers, we must break down the barriers to accessing services and ensure that individuals and their families receive the support and assistance that they require from social services and the health service. I ask the minister to address those points.

There might be a need for some filibustering. It is good to see everyone that I have not seen for some time. Jim Wallace might have to speak slowly when he winds up. There is no major disagreement between the parties on this serious issue about the need to improve provisions for dealing with sexual offenders via legislation here in Scotland. We have a responsibility, as a Parliament, to ensure that in Scotland we provide sufficient safeguards for children and women against those who commit sexual offences. As Roseanna Cunningham said, we should not fall into the trap of thinking that we must follow suit whenever laws on this matter are changed in England. We have a responsibility to provide suitable safeguards, but we also have a responsibility to legislate in a manner that is appropriate to the needs of Scotland. Roseanna Cunningham talked about cross-border, transnational traffic of such offenders. We must take that issue seriously in relation to sexual offenders coming into Scotland from other countries. This Parliament should be prepared, when necessary, to work on an international basis to address those matters. In her speech, Kay Ullrich drew on her considerable professional experience in this matter. She highlighted several issues that must be considered, not necessarily through legislation but in relation to how the system now works. One such issue is the transfer of information between social work, the procurator fiscal and the police. There is insufficient time for social workers to complete their social inquiry reports because of pressures on the court. The social worker will often be given only two to three weeks to complete a detailed social inquiry report. The evaluation of work that has been undertaken with offenders should also be improved. Another issue that Kay Ullrich highlighted was that of disclosure of information to employment services. If we tackle those issues through legislation, we must ensure that it is comprehensive and there are no loopholes. Although legislation is important, it is also essential that we provide the necessary resources for the appropriate services so that the legislation can be responsibly implemented. We must achieve a balance between the need to have statutory provision to deal with those who have committed an offence and the need to address  offending behaviour. If we do not break the cycle of those who are repeat offenders, we can legislate for as long as we like but the crimes will continue to happen. Roseanna Cunningham highlighted that point. When Jim Wallace sums up, I hope that he will address the need to achieve that balance and consider the possibility of introducing a measure such as lifetime supervision for repeat offenders so that we address the possibility of someone committing an offence in the future.

In his statement, the Minister for Justice said that local authority revenue funding for the police would increase by £26 million over three years. However, by my calculations, the increase will be only £11 million over that period. Will the minister assure me that we will not have a repeat of the situation that we have in Central Scotland police, where the lack of expenditure available for capital projects is forcing the police to consider private finance initiative funding for the desperately needed Falkirk police station? Will he also assure me that, with regard to the prison budget, there will be no further PFI-financed prisons in Scotland and that the budget will cover the provision of any additional prison space that is required?

As a member of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I would like to begin by thanking the clerks for their tremendous efforts in assisting the committee and in ensuring that the bill proceeded on time. I have some concerns about the way in which the bill was rushed through Parliament, as that limited the amount of time that we had to consider various of its provisions. As the Deputy First Minister has said, the need for the rush was to ensure that the legislation was in place for 2 October. However, several members have raised concerns about the timetable. During the stage 1 debate, Robin Harper told us that several organisations were unable to give evidence to the committee because the time scale for evidence taking was too short to allow them to be fitted in. That is a matter of regret. When the bill was first introduced, like many members I was rather suspicious of it. I am on record as saying that any bill that has the abbreviation "RIP" should be treated with suspicion—particularly when it deals with  surveillance. However, as the Deputy First Minister has outlined, the intention of the bill is to achieve a balance between civil rights, human rights and the ability to carry out surveillance. The bill achieves that to some extent, although I have reservations about several areas. Before I started to consider the bill, I had no knowledge of the process of undertaking surveillance. I have been on a steep learning curve over the past couple of months, particularly in relation to how the legislation applies to the surveillance world. I am not sure whether that has reduced or heightened my suspicion of the way in which surveillance is undertaken. I regret that it may be the latter. The Deputy First Minister mentioned the constructive manner in which members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the political parties acted in dealing with the bill to ensure that it was passed on time. The SNP has acted constructively in ensuring that the bill passes with the best scrutiny possible within the limited time that we have had. The Executive has not experienced the same problems that its counterparts in Westminster did during the passage of the UK Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill. There is general recognition that this bill regulates an area that was formerly unregulated. That is to be welcomed. As I outlined to the minister, there are concerns about aspects of the bill. I regret that amendment 8, moved by Christine Grahame, was not accepted. At some point in the future, there is likely to be a case against the bill regarding compliance with the European convention on human rights. Time will tell. As I said, the SNP supports the bill. We do so in the spirit of creating a more open and accountable society.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. (S1O-2156)

When I wrote to the Deputy Minister for Local Government earlier this year on behalf of a constituent who was attacked by a dog, he advised me that one of the pieces of legislation that could be used against dangerous dogs was the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. I took his advice and pursued the matter with Central Scotland police, but the police's legal advice was that the relevant section of that act is not compliant with the European convention on human rights. Will the minister undertake a review of the relevant section of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, in order to ensure that there are proper provisions in place to deal with dangerous dogs and, in particular, that those provisions are ECHR compliant?

Amendment 7 refers to section 27 on interpretation. The bill provides no definition of what should be classed as a large group when a warrant is issued. As the bill stands, one of the tests for serious crime is "that the conduct involves the use of violence, results in substantial financial gain or is conduct by a large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose." In committee, we had a wide-ranging discussion as there was concern that the bill did not provide a definition of a large group. A large group could be considered to be three people, standing outside Faslane, demonstrating on nuclear disarmament. I also understand from my colleagues on the committee that, in criminal law, a mob is classed  as a group of between two and three individuals. To ensure that we remove the arbitrary aspect of the bill, we should provide a definition of a large group. The minister will say, I am sure, that six is an arbitrary figure, but the bill is arbitrary in providing no definition. That arbitrariness would be removed by stating a figure and it is reasonable to state that a large group consists of six or more individuals. Several members of the committee were sympathetic on the issue, in particular Gordon Jackson, who highlighted the fact that a situation could arise in which after a warrant has been granted, the matter goes to court and a serious argument ensues about whether the warrant should have been issued for a large group of people. Courts could be delayed as a result. That is why we should remove the arbitrary nature of the bill by including a definition of the number of people that constitutes a large group. If the Executive refuses to accept the amendment, we may have to wait for case law to determine what constitutes a large group. I see no harm in defining in the bill the number of people at which a group is considered to be large. I move amendment 7.

I take on board the minister's comments on the definition of serious crime. However, I do not know whether he is aware that a number of experienced individuals misinterpreted this section of the bill, in particular section 27(7)(b), which they thought might apply to a large number of people not committing a serious crime but acting politically or in some other way. Concern was expressed about the need to tighten up this section of the bill. The minister referred to the fact that a case-by-case approach would be used. The problem with that is that we would end up with a succession of arbitrary figures, as each case might result in a different number being used: a large group for one case might be 10, while for another case it might be seven. The amendment provides a figure for the definition of a large group and removes, rather than creates, any problem relating to making the judgment more arbitrary. I hope that the minister will be persuaded of the need to set such a figure in the bill. On that basis, I press my amendment.

If one found oneself before the tribunal, which—given the debate we have just had—is unlikely, one might choose to have some form of legal representation. However, under the bill at present, one would have no entitlement to legal aid to pay for that representation. Very few people are likely to be able to go before the tribunal, as they will not be informed if they have been under surveillance, so I assume that the Executive would not refuse the amendment on the grounds of cost to the Legal Aid Board. I believe that anyone who is before a tribunal should be provided with the legal representation they require. However, in the light of information that was presented to the committee this week about action that is currently being taken in court, I do not intend to move the amendment.  Amendment 6 not moved.

I have some sympathy with Phil Gallie's amendment, because it is similar to the amendment that I lodged at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee during stage 2. I would like reassurance from the minister, because I recall that he stated at stage 2 that the provision to which he referred would be made under the codes of practice. I will be grateful if he will confirm that that will be the case.

I will speak to amendment 62. I understand what the minister said about these being technical amendments. However, I see that the amendment would introduce a change to the terminology in relation to how the chief surveillance commissioner will give information to the tribunal. As it stands, section 17 states that the chief surveillance commissioner shall give information to the tribunal "as the Tribunal may require." The amended section would state that the chief surveillance commissioner shall provide such information as "is appropriate". I could envisage a situation in which one chief surveillance commissioner thought that certain information was appropriate to pass to the tribunal and another thought that it was not. I am concerned about whether guidance will be issued to chief surveillance commissioners or whether guidance on what should be considered appropriate will be included in the codes of practice, so that there is consistency in what chief surveillance commissioners think is appropriate for the tribunal process. Does the minister think that the amendment could impede the role of the tribunal if there is no guidance in the codes of practice or elsewhere?

I thank the minister, and congratulate him on showing such humility in accepting the amendments and denying himself such wide-ranging powers. The purpose of the bill is to strike a balance between the need to undertake surveillance and the protection of individuals' civil liberties. By removing section 3(3)(d) we will maintain balance and ensure that the civil liberties of individuals in Scotland are upheld. I welcome particularly the fact that—given  that the amendments were lodged by the SNP—our legislation will be altered so that the powers that will be available will be different from those that are available under the Westminster act. On that basis, once the bill is passed I believe that our act will be better than theirs.

I take on board the minister's comments, although I confess that when I saw amendment 34 I was somewhat surprised that it should have been lodged at such a late stage, given the level of debate that has taken place. I do not know whether the lodging of the amendment was a result of the way in which the legislation has had to be rushed through Parliament. Will the minister indicate why it was lodged at stage 3, given the consideration of the bill that was undertaken at stage 2?

I warmly welcome the amendments. I must respond to the minister's comments by saying that I was in good company. If my memory serves me correctly, Gordon Jackson supported me in committee in saying that "believes" should be replaced by "is satisfied".

The minister will be aware of the background to the two amendments, as the issues to which they relate were debated at length in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. There is concern about the section in the bill that amendments 3 and 4 seek to change. They would remove a catch-all provision that will allow ministers to make authorisations for direct surveillance on a range of issues. In evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, organisations such as the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland were unable to define why that power was required and for what reasons it might be used. When the minister defended his position before the committee, he was somewhat unconvincing in explaining why an all-encompassing provision was required.  The bill as it stands defines the grounds for authorisation of direct surveillance. I do not believe that the general power with which the minister would be provided is either desirable or healthy in a modern democracy. I hope that for that reason the minister will see fit to accept the amendments second time round, to ensure that ministers are not provided with wide-ranging powers that they have so far been unable to justify in debate. I move amendment 3.

I take on board the minister's comments, in the sense that the amendments do not make any fundamental changes to the bill, but amendment 27 states that ministers will be responsible for appointing the given number of chief surveillance commissioners or surveillance commissioners. That will not require any form of parliamentary approval. I seek assurance from the minister on the required number of surveillance commissioners and chief surveillance commissioners. I am sure that, from one Government to the next, there may be a difference of opinion on how many such commissioners are needed at any given time. Amendment 27 requires the removal of a chief surveillance commissioner to be approved by the Scottish Parliament. I welcome that, but I am concerned that subsection (10) of the new section that amendment 27 would insert states that there shall be no appeal mechanism to challenge any decision of a chief surveillance commissioner. I would like the minister to comment on the ECHR implications when someone seeks to challenge the decision of a chief surveillance commissioner, but cannot do so as a result of amendment 27.

Is the minister aware that the proposed reconfiguration of health services in Forth valley could have a financial impact on the local health trusts? In light of the decision by Forth Valley Primary Care NHS Trust to sell off its Bellsdyke site, will the minister assure me that the money that is raised will be reinvested in the local health service to ensure that we improve the overall health service in the Forth valley area and, in particular, that we have the necessary mental health services?

From Phil Gallie's comments on amendment 25, he seems to intend that councillors who are appointed as JPs in future should be only signing JPs. Furthermore, amendment 26 seeks to ensure that people who are currently councillor JPs can continue as full JPs. As members will be aware, one of the primary purposes of the bill is to deal with problems that could occur with the ECHR. Although the evidence that was given to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on whether councillors being full justices would contravene the ECHR was ambiguous, there was a view that the position could be challenged. On that basis, and given the previous problems that we have had with incorporating the ECHR into our domestic law, it is appropriate that we should be prudent and err on the side of caution. If there is the potential for a challenge, we should move in the direction of preventing it. In addition, concerns have been raised about the effect on the work of district courts of the reduction in the number of councillor JPs, who would no longer be able to practise as full justices. However, in the evidence that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee received there was a view that although there would be some localised difficulties initially, such difficulties could be dealt with by the other serving justices.

Given Mr Gallie's views on the ECHR, I am not sure if his view on whether it will be contravened carries much weight. The evidence that was given to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee did not indicate that, as a result of this bill, district courts would not be able to cope. Only around 10 per cent of JPs are councillors, so there are plenty more JPs who will be able to take on the work in the district courts. If we are to work on a short-term basis, we could only do so until the beginning of October. We  should act now, be prudent and make sure that we do not find ourselves, or JPs who are councillors, being challenged in October. On that basis, we will not be supporting amendments 25 or 26.

I congratulate Phil Gallie on his conversion to open government and to the Scottish Parliament's having greater powers of scrutiny. Chapter A1 was amended by the Executive at stage 2. Having considered the proposed subsection (8), I have sympathy with Phil Gallie's comments about the role Parliament could play in scrutinising the number of senior judges in the Inner House. The current Executive may have made it clear that it has no intention of changing the number of senior judges, but I am concerned that that could change further down the road. It is appropriate to consider any decision that would lead to a reduction in the number of senior judges in the Inner House, because it would give us an opportunity to scrutinise that decision. I support amendment 14.

I am sure that the minister is aware that the interim report could have major, wide-ranging implications for the Scottish criminal justice system. Can the minister indicate how many cases may now be affected as a result of the interim report? Given that the McKie case happened three years ago, could it be that all court cases in which fingerprint evidence has been used in the past three years might have to be reviewed? There could also be implications for cases that predate the McKie case. I understand that this may be a matter for the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, but that body has heard only one case so far and there would be major implications for its resources if it were to be inundated with reviews. Will the minister clarify how the commission is expected to deal with an influx of such reviews? The report highlights fundamental failings in the management structure of the fingerprint bureau in the Scottish Criminal Record Office. It raises questions about training, quality assurance and other forms of testing. Given that Mr Taylor has taken the unusual step of publishing an interim report, will the minister confirm that he is willing to take interim measures to restore public confidence in the fingerprint bureau, if necessary by taking action against those at senior management level? I also remind the minister—

I have only one more point to make.

I would like to remind the  minister that a memo from the head of the fingerprint bureau indicated that he was "satisfied with the integrity of the experts . . . in this case". On that basis, there is a need to act now, rather than waiting for the full report to be published.

In Tory debates on law and order, members are often left wondering what the Tories will do. Their motion for this debate was confusing and unclear, and some of the points that are raised in the motion have not been addressed. This debate illustrates the fact that there is no simple way of tackling the problem of crime in Scottish society. Unfortunately, the Tories are trying to pander to the prejudice of the headline, and are calling for tougher sentencing while ignoring the root causes of crime. Phil Gallie's main explanation for the increase in crime in Scottish society centres on the problems  in the remand system. Although there are problems in the remand system, the issue of crime in our society is much more complex. He also mentioned that people have been acquitted on procedural grounds and that the justice system is failing people. In 18 years of Tory Government, was no one acquitted? Were no mistakes made? Let us be honest: mistakes will be made in the future as well. We must try to limit them as far as we can, but it is folly to kid on that mistakes have started to occur only in the past couple of years. I have sat next to Phil Gallie in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee in recent weeks, and I have noticed, as Euan Robson has noticed, that his manner seems to have mellowed somewhat towards crime issues. That may be the commonsense revolution arriving at Phil Gallie's door, although I never saw Phil Gallie as the new face of the Tories' justice policy.

Maybe. One of the major causes of crime is the misuse of drugs. It is shameful that, after securing this debate on crime, the only issue that the Tories have raised, in relation to the drugs problem in Scotland, concerns the confiscation of assets. That is only one part of the equation; a multitude of other measures must be deployed—some of which Keith Raffan has touched on—to deal with the drugs problem.

No. I have very little time. Although the confiscation of assets is a useful measure, we must try to deal with the root causes of crime. Let us be quite clear: we have to deal with enforcement; we have to consider getting prisoners with a drug problem off drugs; and we have to improve our rehabilitation services. There are question marks over whether the policies that are being pursued by the Executive sufficiently address getting the balance right. In my view, the balance may be tipped too much towards enforcement and not enough towards rehabilitation and support services, to break the cycle of people continually committing crime. People go to prison because they have committed a crime due to a drug problem, and when they get back out, they do exactly the same thing. The causes of crime are often linked to people's poverty, to their social circumstances. If we are to be realistic in our efforts to address the problems of crime in our society, we must also be committed to being holistic in our approach. If we are to reduce crime in Scotland, we must do so from a platform that is based on facts and not on headlines.  I ask members to support the amendment in Roseanna Cunningham's name.

You have been.

I begin by congratulating Robert Brown on obtaining this debate. He is a colleague of mine in the cross-party group on disability and I am very aware of his interest in this field. I, too, have a particular interest: as a community occupational therapist, I was formerly one of the professionals who were responsible for adapting properties for disabled people. The vast majority of housing for disabled people,  with which a number of problems have been identified, is provided by local authorities or housing associations. From my experience, when disabled people required some type of adaptation to be made to their property, many of them found themselves waiting on a list. It could take months for someone to assess their need for the work to be undertaken in the first place; when we had undertaken that assessment, we then had to go through the process of obtaining the finance to ensure that the work was carried out. Once the work had been carried out, it was necessary to keep the situation updated. Once a property has been adapted, one cannot just turn one's back on it. Often, the situation moves on, a person's condition progresses and further adaptations are required. A situation that used to frustrate me, as someone who used to work within the system, was when a new tenant moved into a property that had been continually adapted and stripped out the adaptations. Level-access showers, which cost £1,500 to £2,000 to install, were removed and a bath was reinstalled. At the same time, there were people on our waiting list who were waiting for that very adaptation. As Robert Brown highlighted, we must ensure that the resources that we deploy in adapting houses for disabled people are used effectively. We must have a sensitive allocation policy, ensuring that local authorities track properties that have been adapted and that they try to match up those properties to individuals who have a disability. In my view, such steps could be undertaken readily, but they have been ignored for years. When we consider the adaptation of properties for disabled people, it is important that we also consider safety issues. People may install a stairlift so that they can reach their bedroom or toilet upstairs but, if a fire breaks out in their property, the electrical circuit may go and they will be unable to escape. Central Scotland fire brigade has developed a domestic sprinkler system that could be installed, which would give additional protection to disabled people should a fire break out in their property. The device is very simple and would provide disabled people with additional reassurance. I hope that ministers will consider not only adaptations of houses for disabled people but the safety issues. I also hope that they will consider ensuring that properties that are either built or adapted by local authorities or housing associations have such safety devices installed as a matter of course, in order to provide disabled people with additional security. I welcome this debate. I hope that the minister will show today that the Executive is committed to an inclusive society and that housing for disabled  people is a mainstream provision rather than something that we have to go round in circles to try to achieve through adaptations.

Does the member agree that one of the best ways in which to manage the incorporation of the ECHR is to establish a human rights commission for Scotland? Would the member support the establishment of such a commission in order to address those problems, given that Lyndsay McIntosh suggested that she would support such a step?

I am sure that, at first, many MSPs viewed this bill with suspicion and wanted nothing to do with it, particularly as its title abbreviates to RIP. However, as the minister has said, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and Subordinate Legislation Committee have spent some time examining the bill. As it stands, the bill has wide- ranging implications and there are still a number of concerns about some of its provisions. The bill seeks to achieve a balance between the European convention on human rights and the need to make provision for suitable investigatory powers. However, the question for this Parliament is whether the bill effectively does that. I must confess that, from the outset, I have been more interested in ensuring that the bill does not erode human rights than in ensuring that it provides greater investigatory powers. However, I was somewhat reassured by the evidence given by the Deputy Minister for Justice, Angus MacKay, to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee that the bill does not introduce any new powers for the police. As the bill provides a legal framework for an area of policing and intelligence service work for which there has been no previous legal structure, it represents a step in the right direction. In our debate on the Sewel motion in April, my colleague Roseanna Cunningham raised a number of concerns about the handling of the bill. The minister alluded to some of those concerns in his speech. Members will be aware that a similar bill is going through Westminster; it received its second reading on 6 March. However, the UK bill not only legislates for reserved matters, but covers several devolved areas. Having incorporated the ECHR in Scotland, this Parliament must ensure that all legislation is compatible with the convention; Westminster, on the other hand, does not have the same responsibility. As a result, this Parliament must remain vigilant to decisions made by Westminster so that we are suitably satisfied that provisions in the UK bill do not erode human rights in Scotland.

There is an issue about the way in which we have planned for incorporation of the ECHR—Mr Gallie has made known his views on that. I view the ECHR positively. If we had not incorporated the ECHR, we might not be having this debate. The convention has necessitated regulation of a system that was not previously regulated. We should also remember that the UK has a poor record in relation to surveillance and in relation to compatibility with the ECHR. The principle that is applied in Scotland is that the ECHR should serve as a safety net. Parliament should try to raise its standards above those that are set by the convention, but I imagine that Phil Gallie will not necessarily agree with that. The minister has acknowledged the pressure that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has  been under, although I speak not on the committee's behalf, but merely as a member of it. We have had only limited time to take evidence on the bill and I am aware that there are many organisations and individuals who might have wanted to bring issues to the committee's attention but have been unable to do so because of time constraints. Although the minister has acknowledged the concerns that were expressed by the committee, it is important to recognise that Parliament has a responsibility to balance the way in which we deal with legislation. Perhaps the Executive has the right to see its legislative programme to a conclusion, but that must be balanced by sufficient time being made available for scrutiny of legislation. We should all be mindful of the fact that rushed legislation is likely to be bad legislation.

That certainly is regrettable, but it was the result of time constraints that were faced by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. There is, however, no reason why that organisation could not write to the committee with evidence that could be circulated to members with a view to lodging amendments at stage 2. The minister said that lessons have been learned from the way in which the bill has been handled. It is therefore essential that we do not allow a precedent to be set by the route that we have taken so far. Particular concerns that were expressed in evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee centred on the independence of authorisation for surveillance under the bill. As it stands, the bill would allow Scottish ministers to grant an individual in a public authority in Scotland the power to authorise surveillance. It is likely that the police would be the public authority that was granted such powers, but the police are often the same people who will be responsible for undertaking the surveillance. There are concerns, therefore, about potential conflicts of interests. Such surveillance operations involve considerable intrusion of privacy, so it seems appropriate that greater safeguards should be available to address that problem. It has been suggested that the surveillance commissioner—there is a job title for you—should be the person who is designated by Scottish ministers as being responsible for the authorisation of surveillance operations. That might help to address any conflict of interests. There are also concerns about the grounds on which authorisation for surveillance would be  granted. Section 3(3) of the bill sets out the grounds on which authorisation can be granted, but it gives no grounds on which authorisation can be revoked. Authorisation can be made "in the interests of public safety" or "for the purpose of protecting public health". In answer to questions from the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland was unclear about the distinction between those areas and was unable to give examples of what would fit under the headings.

In no way do I imply that ACPOS was hostile to the bill. However, when concerns about definitions in the bill were put to the ACPOS witnesses, they were not very clear about how the definitions would apply. The example that was given in committee was whether the spread of E coli in the general population would come under the heading of public safety or public health. We need to consider that point, given that such a senior organisation has found it difficult to be clear about it.

We discussed aspects of the definition of serious crime with ACPOS. I refer Robin Harper to the evidence that was taken by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, which can be found in the committee's report—he will be able to read there exactly what the association said. There is some concern about the definitions. They appear broad and, to some extent, unclear, so there is room for misinterpretation, which it is essential that we try to avoid. Section 3(3)(d) contains an interesting provision, which allows ministers to authorise a form of surveillance that is outwith the bill's definitions. I confess that it was not clear to me why ministers required that general additional power. Even ACPOS, when it was asked for examples of why ministers might require that power, could not come up with anything. If there is no clear justification for  such a power, why should it be contained in the legislation? I look forward to receiving an explanation from ministers as to why they require the power. The minister addressed concern about the definition of serious crime in the bill. Serious crime is referred to as such on the basis that it "results in substantial financial gain or is conducted by a large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose." Those are very general terms. Although the minister referred to the current legal standing of the definition of serious crime, concern was expressed about it in evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. Does "substantial financial gain" mean £100, £1,000 or £10,000? How do we quantify that term? How will anyone who issues authorisation for surveillance be able to determine whether there are sufficient grounds for authorisation if they do not have guidance on what "substantial financial gain" means? There is also the question of what is meant by "a large number of persons". Does it mean five, six, 10 or 20 people? There is concern about the lack of a clear definition in the bill of serious crime. I take on board what the minister said, but I think that that point should be considered, given the concern that has been expressed. The minister talked about the tribunal for which the bill provides. A key aspect of the bill is the need to balance the rights of the individual with the need to undertake surveillance. However, the way in which the bill is drafted gives rise to concerns about whether the tribunal will be effective. In Scotland, there is concern that the tribunal could be challenged under article 6 of the European convention on human rights, which ensures the right to a fair trial. That point was highlighted by Professor Miller and the Law Society of Scotland. Under the bill, the tribunal will not be able to examine the merits of a decision to undertake surveillance; it can consider only the procedure and nature of that surveillance. The tribunal is covered by the UK part of the legislation; that highlights the need for us in Scotland to be vigilant to ensure that the legislation is compatible with the European convention on human rights—there are concerns that it may not be. To some extent, the whole purpose of the tribunal could be undermined by the fact that, under the bill, a person has no right to be informed that they are under surveillance or have been under surveillance at some time in the past. If someone is not aware of being under surveillance, how can they be in a position to make a complaint on the basis of what happened during the surveillance process?

I would always acknowledge Mr Wallace's expertise in surveillance matters. However, I would say that the bill seeks to strike a balance between the need to undertake surveillance and the need to protect the rights of individuals. There are cases where surveillance has been undertaken, where nothing has been discovered and where it was inappropriate for the surveillance to have taken place; in such cases, the individual could be informed. Ben Wallace might currently be under surveillance, as might the minister. The minister does not know whether any MSPs are currently under surveillance. If Ben Wallace or the minister were currently under surveillance, they might want to know why. If they did know and were unhappy about it, they could make a complaint. As the bill stands, there is no provision for that. I recognise that there are on-going individual investigations where it would be inappropriate to inform someone that they had been under surveillance. However, there is also room in cases where surveillance has been inappropriate to allow people to be informed so that they can bring a complaint if necessary. I have made it clear that the bill is a step in the right direction, providing regulation on a previously unregulated subject. However, it is worrying to think that this form of surveillance has been going on for so long without any form of regulation. Many questions remain unanswered. I hope that, at stage 2, the minister will lodge many of the amendments to which he has referred to address the concerns that have been expressed.

I also welcome the opportunity to have this debate. I worked previously with people with disabilities, including people with learning disabilities. There is nothing that is more frustrating to professionals in the field than the fact that politicians appear not to be interested, so I welcome warmly the fact that we are examining the issue and discussing the report. Some of the language that has been used has, however, been a little unfortunate—I believe that one of my colleagues used the term "incarceration". Many people were in long-stay hospitals who should not have been in such places. They were there because they had had to be there at a particular time. Many members of staff in long-stay hospitals who have worked with people with learning difficulties provide dedicated care to individuals to this day. We should record that in the debate. Although I respect Mary Scanlon greatly, I feel slightly differently from her. She referred to today's debate as an historic occasion, but in my view, the historic occasion will come when the last long-stay hospital for people with learning disabilities closes and the services and resources that the former patients require are available in the community. Unfortunately, for too long, services for people with learning difficulties have been not merely the cinderella services, but the cinderella of the cinderella services. That has needed to be addressed for a long time. When I read the report, one of the points of interest that I picked up was the idea of local area co-ordinators. They could have a valuable role to play in the design and provision of local services, but there is a need to examine how that would be done at a national level. Will there be national guidelines to ensure that services are developed and to ensure that the role of the co-ordinators is the same throughout Scotland? We must ensure that co-ordinators are not doing one thing in one local authority area and another thing in another  local authority area. We must take a strategic view of the role of area co-ordinators and I like to think that that will be done at national level, so that those concerns are addressed. The role of local area co-ordinator is also interesting because it is a departure from the present system of care management. As someone who used to provide care management, I think that that raises a few questions about whether the present care management model is working, not just for people with learning difficulties but for people with mental health problems and other disabilities. The area co-ordinator will have an important role in putting forward plans for change funding. However, we must examine what the details of that change funding will be. Johann Lamont made a good point about empowerment. It is important that any new service provision for disabled people should be about empowerment. The policy of direct payments provides the opportunity to empower disabled people as much as possible. Iain Gray will probably recall a written answer that he gave to me earlier this year, which highlighted the extent of the failure of direct payments. Only about half the local authorities in Scotland implement direct payments, and of those schemes about half are pilot projects. Direct payments are a policy that could be developed further. If we are to grasp the issue of empowerment, particularly for people with learning difficulties, we have to overcome the current problems in the way the system is implemented. I welcome the fact that the review sets down a time scale for the closure of our last long-stay hospital for people with learning difficulties. In my previous job, I regularly visited the Royal Scottish National Hospital. Richard Simpson made a valid point about the way in which resource transfer works, which links into what Dennis Canavan said. The RSNH has patients from all over Scotland. When a care plan is prepared for an individual to move back into the community, the bun fight starts. It is said that the individual came from Kirkcaldy or Glasgow; Stirling or Falkirk say that they are not providing the money for them to move back into the community, and Kirkcaldy or Glasgow say the same. We have to overcome that. The one thing that must come out of the review is truly joined-up policy making. As several members have highlighted, if we close the hospitals, we must have the right services in the community. Those services must develop at the same rate as hospital discharges take place. I hope that time scales will be set for community services development as well as for the closure of hospitals, so that when the last hospital closes in  2005, the right services will have been developed at the right time to match up with that. I ask the minister to consider the issue of employment and the way in which therapeutic earnings affect people who are in supported accommodation. Being able to take up purposeful employment has a major impact on people with learning difficulties. If we address that issue, not only will people be able to go back into the community, they will be empowered and will be able to integrate into society and play their rightful role in our community. Finally, our amendment reflects what the report says. Johann Lamont is right about empowerment, but the report mentions inter-agency co-operation. Our amendment is intended to show that the Parliament is committed to taking forward the whole report.

Is the minister aware that the therapeutic earnings regulations on benefits cause difficulty for disabled people in gaining employment—especially for disabled people who live in supported accommodation—as they restrict the amount of time people can work and the level of wage they may earn? In his commitment to ensure that disabled people have an opportunity to be involved in the employment market, will the minister make representations to social security ministers to have those regulations either relaxed or removed so that disabled people will have full opportunities to gain purposeful employment?

Will the member give way?

rose—

I welcome the opportunity to consider the Race Relations Act 1976, as it is a matter that I have raised in Parliament in previous debates on equalities issues. The Scottish Parliament allows us to debate racism in greater depth in a forum that we have never had before. Across the chamber, there is recognition that we must be united in our determination to tackle racism in Scottish society. Modern Scotland has a wide diversity of cultures, linguistic and racial, which serve as a source of enrichment in all aspects of our society. Although Scotland has a multicultural population, racial incidents are unfortunately far from uncommon; indeed, the number of them is increasing. The experience of racial harassment and violence is all too often a common experience for those who come from an ethnic minority background. We have only to consider the statistics of racial incidents recorded by the police here in Scotland to see the nature of the difficulties. In 1988, there were 299 recorded racial incidents. By 1998-99, that figure had increased to 1,271. In the Strathclyde area alone over the past 10 years, the number of racial incidents has increased by two and a half times. Although there are a number of reasons why more racial incidents are being recorded—partly because people are now more likely to come forward to the police to make a complaint—it is undeniable that racism is on the increase in Scotland. This Parliament has much to do in dealing with that problem and we should be prepared to take whatever action is necessary to tackle that rising tide, whether through strategies or legislation. The Race Relations Act 1976 has played an  important role in tackling racism in society. However, we should be mindful of the fact that the act has required amendment for some time. In 1985 and in 1992, the Commission for Racial Equality undertook reviews of the act and stated that it needed to be toughened up. Unfortunately, the Home Secretary at the time—a Conservative Home Secretary—chose to ignore those recommendations. The CRE undertook another review in April 1998, when it came up with around 50 recommendations on how the act could be improved. Although the Home Secretary accepted a number of those recommendations, he delayed acting on them—mainly as a result of a lack of parliamentary time. Concern has been expressed about the way in which Westminster has delayed improvement of the Race Relations Act 1976. However, we welcome the fact that the Queen's speech last November indicated that a bill would be brought forward to address the CRE's recommendations and the issues in the Macpherson report into the death of Stephen Lawrence. The SNP welcomes the amendments to the act, especially the removal of the exception of indirect discrimination. That will ensure that the act will apply in full to all functions of public authorities. That change will make it clear that public authorities must not discriminate directly or indirectly in carrying out their functions. Although the Race Relations (Amendment) Bill, if passed, would make the Race Relations Act 1976 apply to public authorities, immigration services will still be excluded. In effect, discrimination on the grounds of nationality or ethnicity will not be unlawful when it is carried out with ministerial authorisation or by officials who are acting on immigration laws or rules. The SNP is not alone in being concerned about that. The CRE described the Government's decision to allow that to happen as giving higher priority to immigration control than to good race relations. The Scottish Refugee Council is also concerned. It has stated: "No matter what, discrimination on grounds of national origin or ethnicity is unlawful." I regret that the Government in Westminster has chosen to follow that route. Section 71 of the Race Relations Act 1976 has a particular effect on the situation in Scotland. It places a greater duty on public authorities to promote racial equality and it enables the Secretary of State for Scotland to make regulations that impose specific obligations. Although the general thrust of the section is to be welcomed, members may have serious reservations about the way in which the  Government proposes to define and impose duties on public authorities. Public authorities will be required only to "make arrangements". The bill makes no mention of whether a minimum level of arrangements that authorities must put in place will be specified. Another concern about the section is that it merely enables ministers to make regulations. As ever, ministers will leave and others will take their place; some will choose to exercise that power to make regulations and others will not. The section should place a mandatory responsibility on the minister to act. That view is supported by the CRE, which is concerned that ministers might act purely on the basis of their own political will. In conclusion, although the SNP welcomes the Race Relations (Amendment) Bill and the impact that it will have in Scotland, we have serious reservations about whether the changes are strong enough. In particular, we do not believe that the decision to exempt immigration services is acceptable. The SNP believes that equal opportunities policy should be the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. The Parliament, which has responsibility for tackling racism, is limited by its legislative powers in the matter. Most people accept that, although the problems of discrimination are the same for people throughout the world, particular circumstances in different countries make legislative needs different. The problem of discrimination in Scotland can best be addressed by Scotland's Parliament. I move amendment S1M-887.1, to insert at end "but regrets that discrimination on the grounds of nationality or ethnicity will not be unlawful where it is done by Ministerial authorisation or by officials acting within immigration laws or rules."

It is important to recall Roseanna Cunningham's opening remarks on what this debate is not about. It is not about boxing, in which I do not have a marked interest, and it is not about whether Jack Straw has the power to make this decision. Furthermore, I resent the implication that our opposition to this boxing match is somehow based on the fact that Mike Tyson is a black American. Such a suggestion neglects the issue of violence against women. Violence against women knows no international boundaries. The problem is not new to our society; our society has suffered from it for centuries. Although there is no magic solution for eradicating violence against women in our society, we should never relent in our commitment to tackling the problem and must always be prepared to use  every avenue to do so, even judicial review. If we are honest, the message that we want to send out about the type of society in which we want to live is at the heart of this debate. There are currently various campaigns to change people's attitudes—particularly young people's attitudes—to violence against women; the decision to allow Mike Tyson into this country sends out the wrong message at the wrong time. By stopping Mike Tyson and others like him entering this country, we send out a strong message that his attitude problems towards women and the violence that he has perpetrated against them are unacceptable. Such a message would resonate throughout the country. When Helen Liddell—whom I do not quote very often—launched the domestic violence helpline, she said that, over the past couple of decades, we had been able to change people's attitudes to drink-driving and now we had to do the same to people's attitudes to domestic violence and violence against women. We must continue to campaign on that principle and to ensure that we achieve the objective that she set back in 1998. This Parliament might not have any powers over immigration and might not be able to change Jack Straw's decision, but it is responsible for dealing with domestic violence issues in Scotland and for introducing strategies to help people who have suffered from domestic violence to pick up the pieces. We must use every possible avenue to send out a strong message that domestic violence will not be tolerated and that Jack Straw's decision is wrong.

I welcome the publication of the learning disability review last week, even though it was slightly late. I understand that it should have been out at the end of last year. Some important recommendations have been made, and I hope that the minister will make progress on them, especially for people who suffer from autistic conditions. There is considerable concern about the lack of services for such people. I am sure that the minister is aware that the Autism-Europe congress will be in this city tomorrow. More than 1,000 experts and parents from all over the world will come together to discuss the whole issue of autism. I am sure that all members will hope that the congress is successful here in Glasgow. Having worked in community care for seven years prior to the elections last year, I resent the  implication of the comments of Conservative members that, in some ways, it is the staff in the community care services who are letting the system down. Unfortunately, Keith Harding seems to have disappeared. When I worked in the council that his party controlled, £400,000 was cut from three community care budgets. The results of that were extensive waiting lists for assessments and for nursing and residential home places. Two of our local authority residential homes were closed—two of the best that we had. Such are the results of the Conservatives' spending commitments, the decisions of the council in Stirling and the Labour Government's decision to continue with the previous Conservative Government's spending plans. That is what staff in local authorities have to put up with. Staff are having to deal with the crises in funding brought about by the spending commitments both of the previous Conservative Government and of the present Labour Government.

It is all very well to be in denial, but there is treatment for it. The member may want to look into that. I would like to discuss the needs of disabled people, and especially equipment and adaptations for disabled people. Getting access to the equipment that they require is a minefield for many disabled people because such equipment is supplied by many different agencies—social work departments, the health service and education departments. The complexity of identifying which department they should go to for equipment creates many difficulties for disabled people. Having worked in the system for seven years, I know that it was confusing for us at times to know whether it was our responsibility in the social work department to provide the equipment, or whether it was the responsibility of the health board. That issue has to be addressed. There is a lack of joined-up thinking in policy making across those agencies. I would like to give an example of a way in which the system fails. A young girl with cerebral palsy was assessed by her education authority as requiring a special computer to help her with her education. The computer had to be specially adapted for her needs. When she left school, she could not have the computer. It was of no use to anyone else, as it had been adapted for her needs, but the equipment belonged to the  education authority so, when she left school, she could not have it. That lack of joined-up thinking in policy making must be addressed so that disabled people receive the equipment that they require, no matter what their age or who is providing it. The extensive delays in getting the equipment that is required are largely linked to funding. The consequence of many disabled people not receiving the equipment that they require is that they become more dependent upon their carers. The carers then often require greater periods of respite. If we provided disabled people who are being cared for with the right type of equipment, they would be able to lead a much more independent life and their carer would be under less stress. In that sense, it is a false economy not to provide them with the equipment when they require it. There is an increasing inconsistency across local authorities in the way in which equipment is provided by means of charging for it. I have heard of instances when people have been told to go to Argos because they would get the equipment quicker than they would from the local authority. Some local authorities means-test for every piece of equipment and others do not charge for anything. We must address that inconsistency so that we do not have service delivery for disabled people based on their postcode. I ask the minister, in summing up today, to ensure that there is a clear commitment to joined-up thinking across all the agencies and that there is consistency in the way in which equipment for disabled people is provided across all local authorities in Scotland and it is not based on postcode.

I will begin by offering Mr Gallie an apology that Mr Connery cannot make it today. However, Mr Gallie will be aware that Mr Connery is taking an active interest in the bill, given that it may have a bearing on his future employment. I am sure that the minister recognises that some suspicion surrounds this bill and the purposes for which it is intended. Earlier this week, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee tried to consider it but came unstuck when it found that the Executive had not published the bill pertaining to Scotland. The minister should reflect on the amount of work the committee is devoting to Executive issues, as opposed to undertaking scrutiny of its own and introducing its own legislation. My colleague Roseanna Cunningham mentioned that we have been supportive of Sewel motions when appropriate. She referred to the fact that a Sewel motion may be being applied in this case to relieve the Justice and Home Affairs Committee of some work. I believe that it is more a case of trying to give Westminster a free hand on the bill than any particular concern about the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's work load. I am particularly concerned that, given the time scale that has been set for this bill, the committee and this Parliament will not have sufficient time to consider the details of the bill and the implications for Scotland. Let us be clear: this bill has major implications for civil and human rights in Scotland. It is not only that in some instances an exception will apply to Scotland; many aspects of the Westminster part of the bill will have an impact on our civil rights in Scotland.

I have only a short time. Among other things, the bill addresses interception of communications, intruder surveillance and covert surveillance. They are complex matters that require time to be properly considered. As members have highlighted, there is concern at Westminster not just among Liberal Democrats, but among Labour back benchers, who feel that the bill takes too many civil liberties from the citizens of England and Scotland. Jack Straw made a comment similar to that made by Jim Wallace in his opening remarks today—that many of the measures that the bill will introduce will create a framework around what is already taking place. That is an admission that some of the services in Scotland are already  acting outwith their legal rights and it equates to the argument that as people's civil liberties are already being broken, we should legislate to ensure that they are broken in a consistent manner. The SNP will, when appropriate, support Sewel motions, but in this case we are concerned about how the bill will infringe upon civil liberties and human rights in Scotland. It is for that reason that Parliament should examine the bill in an appropriate time scale. I ask the minister to take that on board. Parliament should be given the right amount of time to consider the full implications of the bill so that we can ensure—as all members have a responsibility to do—that we stand up for the civil and human rights of the people of Scotland.

In relation to amendment 55, I welcome the fact that the minister has taken on board the issues raised at the time when I lodged my amendment in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. At that time, I sought a time scale of seven days. I would not wish to put my ex-colleagues under such pressure, so seven working days is more appropriate.

The amendment is similar to one that I put forward several weeks ago at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee during stage 2. This afternoon, Lyndsay McIntosh has articulated many of the arguments from that discussion. There are continuing concerns about aspects of the bill. Although it does not spell out that euthanasia will be legalised, the combination of the interpretation of the bill and the interpretation of the common law could allow passive euthanasia. The Executive has advanced no compelling argument for not including in the bill a clear statement of what the bill is not intended to do. Such a statement would provide the clear safeguard that people have been asking for. The amendment would serve that purpose. The Executive should be willing to accept that point; I hoped that it would accept it at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. As the amendment concerns a matter of conscience, our parliamentary group will be extending a free vote to all SNP members on the issue.

I will be brief. Malcolm Chisholm makes a strong case for amendment 139, as he did when he moved his amendment on the same issue at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. This is a classic example of the balance going too far in the direction of the professional and moving away from being in favour of the carer or person who has hands-on experience of dealing with an individual who is incapacitated. It is to be regretted that the issue has become entangled in the debate on euthanasia, an argument that was deployed by the Executive when the issue came before the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. To some extent, that is a red herring, to say the least. It is time to change the balance back in favour of those who are responsible for caring for individuals with incapacity. They know what the caring needs of that individual are and know what that individual would or would not like to see done. It is important that we begin to realise that professionals do not always know better than carers—if any person knows what an individual requires or what treatment they should receive, it is the carer. Carers provide care 365 days a year, 24 hours a day. Should Malcolm Chisholm's amendment fall, the Scottish National party will support amendments 140 and 141. We will do so because those amendments would extend consultation to proxies so that their views are noted.

I am disappointed that the minister has asked me not to press my amendment, because he has not yet heard what I have to say. Amendment 129 seeks to do the same thing as amendment 128, but my amendment is more concise. [Laughter.] I never said it was better—only more concise. Amendment 145 is intended to deal with the medical part of the bill and to ensure that the benefit of medical treatment is assessed by focusing on whether such treatment will either safeguard or promote the adult's physical and mental health. At it stands, the bill would allow for benefit to be interpreted for use in deciding whether it is in the patient's interest to continue with treatment. It is important to emphasise that the amendment does not seek to change the present position regarding clinicians' decisions on those who are terminally ill. If it is not appropriate to intervene with aggressive treatment in the end stages of such a person's life, that should not take place. There are three basic reasons why I think amendment 145 is necessary: first, because of the term "benefit", which is used in the bill; secondly, because of the British Medical Association's current guidelines; thirdly, because of relevant  common law. Given that the bill does not define benefit, present common law could be used to define it. That might apply to the Law Hospital NHS Trust decision, which redefined feeding and hydration by artificial means as medical treatment. It redefined benefit to include an assessment of the benefit of continued existence of the patient, rather than strictly treatment itself. The judgment concluded that a doctor did not have a duty to give assisted feeding and hydration to a patient whose continued existence was considered by  "a large responsible body of medical opinion" not to be of benefit. It is here that the British Medical Association guidelines come into play. Last year, the BMA issued guidance on withdrawing and withholding treatment in which it indicated that, in line with the Law hospital decision, patients with advanced dementia and stroke may fall into the same category as those involved in the Law hospital case. In effect, the guidelines allow a doctor to withdraw treatment by means of artificial nutrition and hydration from an incapable adult because he does not consider it to be of benefit to that patient. The decision by the doctor and the proxy as to whether such treatment is of benefit is essentially subjective. We have taken independent counsel advice on this matter. Two senior counsel have given their independent view. They have highlighted that the benefit test is entirely subjective. Due to the lack of a definition of benefit in the bill, a court or doctor will have to use the subjective test: the Law hospital decision. There is no other definition of benefit for them to refer to. One senior counsel, who specialises in human rights legislation, is particularly concerned that because of a lack of definition in the bill, the bill could contravene article 2(1) of the European convention on human rights, which states: "Everyone's right to life shall be protected by law. No one shall be deprived of his life intentionally". Article 15(2) of the convention provides that there shall be no derogation of rights under article 2 except in respect of deaths resulting from an act of war. Fortunately, we are not in that position. Overall, the opinions of the two senior independent counsel highlight the need for the bill to be amended to address those specific concerns. There is a need for a positive definition of benefit, which should ensure that the physical well-being of an adult is safeguarded and promoted. This is a matter of conscience; it is a matter over which all parties should respect their members. Parties should give their members the right to vote with their conscience, as opposed to with any form  of whip.

I will concentrate on the effect of the Government's financial policy on vulnerable members of our community—especially the elderly and the disabled. As I am sure members will recognise, many of our elderly and disabled are dependent on public services. In particular, I will talk about housing and the provision of community care for our elderly and disabled in local communities. There are major difficulties in providing suitable housing services, especially for the disabled. That situation has arisen principally because of the capital finance restraints on local authorities, which affect their ability to invest in local housing stock to provide housing for the disabled. That vacuum has now been filled, largely by local housing associations. Christine Grahame mentioned aids and adaptations for elderly and disabled people in our communities. I am sure that there is no MSP who has not received a complaint from a constituent about the waiting lists for those aids. There is a waiting list for assessment by the social work department to determine whether the adaptation or equipment is required in the first place. After that, the person finds themselves on a second waiting list for the adaptation to be undertaken or the equipment to be provided. Before the election, I was one of the public servants who were responsible for providing services to our elderly and disabled. Prior to that, I worked in a service that had to sustain a cut of £400,000 across three community care teams. That resulted in cuts not only to staff numbers, but to resources, and affected the allocation of nursing and residential home beds and the provision of basic services such as aids and adaptations. When I was in that job, the average waiting time for someone to see me had been around two to four months. When I left that job, as a result of the cuts, the average waiting time for assessment by the team was more than nine months. People then had to wait on secondary waiting lists for the adaptation and the equipment to be provided.

I thank Mr Davidson for that, because the council used to be under Conservative control. In fact, Stirling Council started under the Conservatives, but—as I am sure Mr Davidson is aware—it is now under Labour control.  To substantiate the fact that the problem is not isolated to one local authority, I refer to a written answer that I received from Iain Gray on services and funding for disabled people and services provided by local authorities. His answer showed that, during Labour's first two years in government, the amount spent by local authorities on services for the physically disabled fell from £620,000 to £450,000. By my reckoning, that is in the region of a 28 per cent drop in funding for local authority services for that vulnerable group. The real effect of the Government's financial policy is to hurt those who need such services. Andy Kerr may say that when he goes round his constituency people tell him that everything is okay—

—but I have been on the receiving end of the Government's policies and I see people who suffer day in and day out because of the cuts that result from his Government's financial policies on, and attitude towards, local government.

I touched on that. It is interesting that Mr Kerr chose not to take me up on funding for adaptations for disabled people in his area. If he chooses to do so, I will be more than happy to meet him in a public forum in his area to debate that matter. I could present the figures that show how Labour is hurting disabled people and the elderly in his community. Local authorities are also struggling, because of limitations in capital expenditure, to meet the criteria of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. Many local authority public buildings will have to comply with that act by 2004. However, because of the constraints under capital budgets, local authorities cannot adapt those buildings or build new ones. I want to hear the minister talk today about the real politics of change. I want to hear what she will do to address the waiting lists and to ensure that local authority public buildings will comply with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 by 2004. Will she give local authorities the money either to provide facilities by adaptation or to build new facilities?

For a fleeting moment during Gordon Jackson's speech, I was of the mind that the problem is not with the ECHR, but with lawyers. We might not be having today's debate if it were not for the intervention of lawyers. Having said that, I would like to focus on the issue of a human rights commission, because I hope that something positive will come out of the problems that we have had with the incorporation of the ECHR into Scots law. Although this is the first time that we have debated the issue in Parliament, it is by no means a new issue. For some time, a number of organisations have pressed for the establishment of a human rights commission. I will deal briefly with the Conservative motion. Although I welcome the suggestion that the Executive should consider the benefits of a human rights commission, the idea that that commission should be responsible solely for providing "expert advice and guidance on the impact of the ECHR" is extremely limited. As I will show later in my speech, the role of a human rights commission is much wider than that. The first human rights commission in western Europe was recently established in Northern Ireland. The Irish Republic is not far behind—its Human Rights Commission Bill is due to be passed in the next two months, and in the next year it expects to have a human rights commission up and running. There are similar commissions throughout the world, notably in Canada, Mexico, South Africa, India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Australia and New Zealand. All those countries have established human rights commissions to date. There is a perception that human rights commissions are associated with emerging democracies, particularly countries where there has been considerable civil unrest and some social upheaval. The human rights commission in South Africa is a good example of that. In such countries, human rights commissions play an important role in developing a human rights ethos and in healing the divisions that caused the problems in the first place. In other countries that are considered to be more stable democracies, human rights commissions play an extremely important role in considering issues of common law and in ensuring that human rights are both protected and promoted. Those human rights commissions have both a proactive and a monitoring role, to ensure that human rights are not violated. The Minister for Justice said that he would like to  hear more about how a human rights commission would work and what its structure would be. Considerable work has already been done on that, particularly in relation to the Paris principles, which were drafted in 1991 and endorsed by the United Nations General Assembly in 1993. The Paris principles are not specific on the model for such a commission—we do not have to dwell on that—but are clear about the principles that would underpin any human rights commission. The principles state that the key role of such a commission is both to promote and to protect human rights. They leave considerable discretion to the nation state with regard to the model, but say that the commission not only should be able to ensure that human rights are promoted and protected, but should be provided with powers to recommend to Government that general and specific violations be investigated and reported on. Under the principles, the commission must be independent of the Government, to ensure that its position in undertaking that role is not compromised. I welcome the fact that the Executive is open to considering the benefits of a human rights commission and I hope that it will pay regard to the Paris principles, to ensure that any human rights commission is truly independent of the Government, so that it can promote human rights effectively. The Human Rights Act 1998 will be implemented this October; its provisions are considerably wider than those of any other anti-discrimination legislation that deals with race, religion or disability. We have commissions to deal with those specific areas of discrimination. Given that, a massive vacuum has been left in relation to human rights in Scotland and that vacuum must be filled. The most effective way of achieving that would be by establishing a human rights commission in Scotland. To Hugh Henry, I would say that we are not ahead of the game, but we could be if we established such a commission in Scotland.

The way in which this vacancy has come about raises a number of questions that have already been asked by several members. It was interesting that a few members tried to depoliticise the whole issue. However, Roseanna Cunningham illustrated the fact that not only was Lord Hardie a member of the Scottish Executive, but he was more than happy to take the party line when he was in the chamber. Members should cast their minds back to the emergency legislation debate on the Noel Ruddle affair during which Lord Hardie was more than happy to launch a political attack against Kenny MacAskill. There is a conflict in the present system in that the Lord Advocate is head of the Crown Office and he also serves in the Scottish Cabinet. That conflict of interests has resulted in the problems about temporary sheriffs in Scotland. That is why there is an urgent need to press ahead with the introduction of an independent judicial body that will appoint sheriffs and judges. Let us be clear: the responsibility for the problems that we have had with incorporation of ECHR into Scottish law lies with Lord Hardie. The First Minister gave the impression in his comments that Lord Hardie was not solely responsible and that other individuals were involved in that decision to incorporate ECHR. I would like to refer to a briefing document from the Scottish Parliament information centre. With regard to the Lord Advocate, the briefing states: "In particular, he is responsible for advising the Scottish Executive on constitutional and legal matters including the operations of the Scotland Act" and "the European Convention on Human Rights." He is ultimately responsible for the decision on ECHR. The First Minister's friend Andrew Hardie carries the can for the mistakes that have been made. I wish the new Lord Advocate more success than his predecessor had in dealing with the European convention on human rights, but I fear that there are more pitfalls round the corner. I hope that he will be able to identify them more quickly than his former colleague did. I had a discussion with several sheriffs  yesterday and they consider that there are probably more problems along the road. They highlighted the fact that further problems will result from the enforcement of the Human Rights Act 1998, which will be in force from October. They also wondered whether sheriffs are being given appropriate training that takes into consideration the implications of that act. A number of contributors to today's debate have a certain standing in the legal world through having practised law at solicitor level or at the level of the High Court. I have never worked in the legal system, but patronage surrounds the system and I am sure that many Scottish people will ask why we have such an arcane system in the new millennium. In the spirit of freedom of information, which his deputy is so keen on, I would like the First Minister to give me a straight answer to a straight question. Why did Lord Hardie resign?

Don't hold your breath.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this issue. The Minister for Communities said that three parties were committed to repealing section 2A as policy. I can confirm the Scottish National party's commitment to that policy. However, I must correct the minister and tell her that five parties are committed to the repeal. Due respect should be accorded to that. The debate serves as an important marker. It allows this Parliament to underline its commitment to create a fairer and more equal Scotland. However, it arises not from the Conservatives' new-found enthusiasm for a fairer and more equal Scotland, but from the fact that they have chosen to use this sensitive issue to their own narrow political advantage. [Interruption.] I must say that the members of the public in the galleries behave better than the members of the Conservative party. Let us examine the position that the Conservatives have taken on this issue. It has been extremely unclear. When the ministerial statement was made, David McLetchie talked about his concern about the repeal of section 2A, but made no mention of the proposals contained in the motion that is before us today and of the need for a Cubie-style committee. On 16 January, Brian Monteith stated in the press that he planned to lodge an amendment to allow teachers to deal with homophobic bullying but to stop the promotion of homosexuality within the school. If that failed, he said, the Tories would vote against repeal. That seemed a credible position for the Conservatives to hold at that stage. However, later that week, he appeared on the "Holyrood" programme to tell us that he wanted to establish a Cubie-type committee to investigate the matter. Before the Conservatives could gather round that commitment, Keith Harding was telling the press that, if appropriate guidelines were put in place, the Conservatives might support the repeal of section 2A.

I would be more than happy to pass the clipping on to Mr Harding. Mr Harding is a member of the Local Government Committee, which has considered the ethical standards bill on at least four occasions. Not until the fourth occasion did he indicate that he had some concern about section 28. That seemed a little late in the day.

Mr Harding's comments in the Official Report tell another story. The motion that we are considering today is fairly ambiguous. It does not mention whether the Tories want to keep or repeal section 2A. It says that educational material should to be appropriate to age, experience and maturity. I would point out that two 16-year-olds can have different levels of experience and maturity. The Conservatives have shed no further light on the matter today. There has been considerable public anxiety around this issue. That has occurred because of the way in which the Executive has handled the issue and because of the misinformation that some organisations have promoted. The Executive could have handled the matter in a better way. The Minister for Communities gave evidence to the Local Government Committee on 27 October and outlined her plans for the ethical standards bill. However, she made no reference to the repeal of section 2A. The next day, we read in the press that she planned to repeal section 2A. That is not an appropriate way for an announcement to be made on a sensitive issue. The SNP welcomes the Executive's new position, which is that it will consult on guidelines and have them in place before the repeal of section 2A.

I accept what Jackie Baillie says. However, there is a difference between what the Minister for Communities has done and what Jackie Baillie said to the Equal Opportunities Committee. Although she said that the Executive wanted to address the issue, the way in which the Executive's actions were announced by the Minister for Communities was unacceptable. The SNP welcomes the fact that the Executive has moved to a new position on consultation, which is broadly in line with the position that we called for. Had ministers moved earlier towards consultation, it is possible that we would have been able to move away from some of the concerns that now surround the issue. Like the Executive, the SNP fully supports the need to repeal section 2A. Our amendment demonstrates the considerable common ground that exists between us. It illustrates our determination to make Scotland a fairer and more equal society. Having pressed for full and proper consultation on the guidelines, we believe that it is essential that that consultation is as open and inclusive as possible. That is why we believe that there should be a consultation exercise to examine the status of the guidelines. We believe that this matter should not be prejudged. We should keep an open mind on whether it is desirable, necessary or practical to give guidelines a formal status.

I stress the point that this matter should not be prejudged at this stage. We recognise that guidelines should reflect the need to trust our teachers in dealing with this sensitive issue in the classroom. I hope that members will support the SNP amendment and reflect on our commitment to the repeal of section 2A and to a wide-ranging consultation exercise. Section 2A promotes discrimination and singles out a minority in our society as unacceptable. If any other policy that proposed such discrimination was brought before the Parliament today, it would not be tolerated.

No thank you, I am winding up. To argue that the repeal of section 2A would allow the promotion of homosexuality in our classrooms is, at the least, misleading. We must recognise that people do not choose their sexual orientation. To say that homosexuality can be promoted is equivalent to arguing that blue or brown eyes can be promoted, or that people can be encouraged to be tall or short.

Our children have a right to learn about the society in which they live and which they will inherit. They have a right to be protected from mental, physical and emotional harm. No amount of prejudice or hysteria should allow those rights to be removed. Some of our people—some of our children—will be gay. Whether as parents or concerned citizens, it is our duty to care for, nourish and support all our nation's children without exception. If we do not teach the acceptance of difference, we foster intolerance.

If we cannot accept those who are different, we can only expect them to reject us. I ask members to support the SNP amendment and confirm my support for the repeal of section 2A.

Does the minister agree that the elderly and disabled are particularly vulnerable to fires in the home? We already have classifications of housing for them, such as sheltered housing and amenity housing. Does the minister feel that it would be reasonable for building regulations to be amended to ensure that houses that are classified as amenity or sheltered housing have sprinkler systems installed, so that some of the most vulnerable members of our society have reasonable protection if there is a fire in their property?

I note, in relation to Sam Galbraith's announcement last week about the working group, and in particular about the materials to be used in sex education in classrooms, the First Minister's comments about the organisations or representative bodies that will be involved. Can the First Minister be more specific about which organisations and, in particular, which bodies from the teaching profession, will be involved in the working group? It is teachers who will be responsible for using the material the working group may provide.

I welcome the minister's announcement this afternoon in relation to the repeal of section 2A. I am sure that he will welcome the opportunity to address any issue of ambiguity around the guidelines which will be in place after the repeal of section 2A. Can we be clear that those guidelines will be in place prior to the section's repeal? Does the minister recognise that this is a sensitive issue and that it is time for the parties in this chamber to work together on this issue in as constructive a manner as possible?

The Deputy Minister for Justice will recognise that all parties should be united in trying to tackle the drugs problem. We should work in as constructive a manner as possible to find solutions, although where we have genuine differences we should express them during debate. The Executive should keep an open mind about initiatives proposed by other parties that may be worth considering and about questions, such as those raised by Roseanna Cunningham and Tommy Sheridan, on how different strategies may work. The Deputy Minister for Justice commented in his opening remarks on enforcement. I recognise that the drugs enforcement agency is an important part of the Executive's holistic approach to the problem. The agency was announced last year and at that time there was only limited information about it, about the number of officers involved and how it would relate to Customs and Excise or local constabularies. Although the Deputy Minister for Justice has put flesh on those bones over recent months, there was concern in other agencies on how they would work together and what the  demarcation lines would be. The Deputy Minister for Justice said in November that the agency would have 200 officers and that it would have a budget of £5 million annually for the next two years. I am sure that he recognises that those officers will have to be experienced in this field and that recruiting officers from local police forces will have a local impact. Many constabularies are concerned that it will have consequences for their policing numbers. I look forward to the director of the drugs enforcement agency clarifying the lines of demarcation and giving the drugs enforcement agency's targets. Angus MacKay said that among the agency's purposes was to stem supplies coming into Scotland and to smash organised drug crime at street level. We all support that and I hope that the agency is successful in doing that. However, it is important for the other agencies, such as Customs and Excise and local police drug teams, to be involved and to know what their roles and responsibilities are. When we consider that Customs and Excise has had major staffing cuts, we should question whether we are being as holistic as we should be in tackling enforcement. I hope the drugs enforcement agency is a success, but it is difficult to know whether it will be until we see the full details. If we are to create good inter-agency co-operation, it is important to have clear lines of accountability and responsibility and to set targets, which I look forward to seeing soon.

I, too, welcome the minister's statement. I wish to touch on the issue of mediation services, which was raised by Richard Simpson. Will the minister confirm that the figure to which he referred constitutes an increase in funding for mediation services in Scotland, which have an important role  in protecting the rights of children of divorcing couples? Will he also ensure that the new grants system and the targeting of grants will not result in larger grants being provided to one area of service to the detriment of another? Does the minister have any plans to examine the court reporter system in order to see whether it can be improved? That is another important service that protects the needs and rights of children.

Many members have welcomed the opportunity to have this debate on the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill. However, given the comments that have been made by the Conservatives, it appears that on the issue of sexuality they remain somewhere in the ice age. The bill tries to balance the need for equal treatment and the need for equal protection for all young people, which is endorsed by many well-respected children's organisations, to which several members have already alluded. In his opening remarks—underlining the fact that the bill is about dealing with the reality of modern  society—Jim Wallace mentioned that many young people are involved in some kind of sexual relationship at the age of 16. It is the role of any responsible society to act on that and to ensure that its values and laws reflect it. We must end the criminalisation of young people and, in particular, young men because they are 16 and choose to enter into a homosexual relationship. Unfortunately, the bill could have been further advanced, if not enacted, had it not been for that last bastion of democracy, the House of Lords. In my view—I mean no disrespect to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton—the House of Lords served as probably the most expensive form of day care for the elderly for some time.

As he takes the chair, my microphone is switched off. If anything shows the need to abolish the House of Lords, it is the fact that it delayed such an important bill. Mr Gallie and Lyndsay McIntosh pointed out that the House of Lords first raised the issue of breach of trust, something that everyone here has welcomed. However, we must also reflect on the sentiments that were expressed in the debate in the House of Lords on the breach of trust amendment and that were behind its being brought forward. Those centred on the notion that adult homosexuals were more likely to breach young people's trust. The amendment was not introduced because members of the House of Lords were committed to the values of equality. If they had been, they would also have accepted the need for equalisation of the age of consent. However, the breach of trust provisions in the bill provide our young people with greater protection from exploitation by older individuals.

I should like to hear how Phil Gallie squares the circle. If the House of Lords is so committed to the idea of equality, why did it not support the need to equalise the age of consent? If the member reflects on the debate in the House of Lords, he will see what hidden sentiment motivated members to raise the issue of breach of trust. It is disappointing that the Conservatives choose not to support the bill today, given the additional benefits and protection that it would offer young people.  Although it is important to recognise that there are strongly held views on both sides of any debate, it is essential that the debate be informed by fact. I am sure that many of the organisations that signed up to the bill did so on the basis of the facts surrounding the case for change. Those who have concerns about the equalisation of the age of consent need only consider the international comparisons. Other countries have done the same thing. Often in the United Kingdom, people resort to scaremongering on that matter, some of which has come today from the Conservative benches. There is no real need for concern about the equalisation of the age of consent. As Roseanna Cunningham pointed out, even if the age of consent in the UK was equalised at 16, it would continue to be above that in many other European countries. As a number of my colleagues have mentioned, the Scottish National party supports the aims of the bill and recognises the benefits of its enactment. I want now, however, to refer to the Conservatives' amendment. I confess that I am not entirely sure of its purpose. Mr Gallie's decision in his speech to mix the debate on the bill with the issue of section 28 is regrettable and does not serve the debate well. Alongside that, John Young's assertion that our support for the bill and for the repeal of section 28 will do our prospects in the Ayr by-election no good is also regrettable. Some of us have principles that we believe we should stand up for; we believe that we should be honest and face the electorate. That is what we are doing by supporting today's motion. I am also intrigued by the Conservatives' new-found faith in the Scottish people, which was lacking for some 17 years. I listened to what Michael Russell said about the matter. He mentioned the Conservatives' consultation on the poll tax and their consultation with the Scottish people on the decision to have a Scottish Parliament. I will be a bit more generous. I thought that the Conservatives had perhaps lodged their amendment as a result of the common-sense revolution. I thought perhaps that they now realised that the Scottish Parliament should be able to enact policies itself and should not need to wait for Westminster to lead the way. However, when I saw the full text of the Conservative amendment, I realised that common sense is never quite as common as some people think it is. As a number of members have said, the equalisation of the age of consent is a matter of human rights. It is a question not only of providing young people with greater protection, but of  protecting their right to have a homosexual relationship at the age of 16. It is time to end the criminalisation of people for their choice of lifestyle. The Government has already admitted that if it had not chosen to act on the matter, it would have been in violation of articles 8 and 14 of the European convention on human rights. Given that the ECHR has been incorporated into the Scottish judicial system, that would have been unsustainable. I am sure that the Conservatives' answer would be—as they are on record as saying—to ditch the ECHR and all the rights that come with it. I mentioned earlier a number of the major organisations that have supported the bill. Mr Gallie seems to have some concerns about the issue of consultation. In closing, therefore, I recommend that he examine Stonewall's document, which lists a variety of major organisations that work with young, gay people and outlines what they think should happen. Those organisations support the bill as it stands. I will finish with a quotation from Barnardo's, which states: "While the age of consent is different for homosexual and heterosexual young people, we are unable to work in a full and frank way with young people who are gay, or who are struggling to work out their sexual identity. Far from protecting them, the current law makes young men more vulnerable and alone at an age when they most need social support." That comes from an organisation which does not make up its views, but which works with and listens to young people. That is the view which I believe the Parliament should endorse today.

It would be easy for the debate to become bogged down in the issue of whether the Parliament has the power to change the Act of Settlement, or whether the act is a burning issue among Catholics in Scotland. However, by seeking to have the debate, we seek to address the fundamental issue of discrimination. I cannot agree with Michael McMahon that this is an irrelevancy to many Catholics. Many Catholics may be ambivalent about it, but that does not mean that they think that things should not change. We can always be selective in our use of quotations. Both he and Elaine Smith quoted Monsignor Tom Connelly, but the monsignor also stated, in the Daily Mail of 15 November, that he was very pleased that Scotland was taking the lead in this matter. The monsignor is not here to defend himself or to settle our differences, but we should bear in mind the fact that we can be selective in trying to give a set impression. This debate allows us to deal with a fundamental issue of discrimination; it enables us to state clearly that discrimination is unacceptable and will not be tolerated in a modern Scotland.

This is not about whether the act impinges on people directly or indirectly; it is about a fundamental principle of standing up against discrimination. I was brought up with the same views as Elaine Smith has described. I understood that, because of my religion, I could not be king or queen of this country— [Laughter.] —not that I wanted to be. It is important to recognise that this debate is not about defending the Catholic Church; it is about standing up against discrimination on the ground of religion. I am conscious that, given my religion and my enthusiasm for the act to be repealed, some could say that I had a registrable interest. I may be a Catholic, but at this stage I have no plans to marry a member of the royal family, although one never knows what is waiting round the corner. There is no reason why I or other Catholics should accept the Act of Settlement, regardless of whether it affects us indirectly or directly. Many have said that this Parliament does not  have the competence to amend the act. However, the Parliament was established to protect the principles of fairness and equality in a modern Scottish society. That process was set in motion by the consultative steering group. We acted on its recommendations by establishing a mandatory committee on equal opportunities. The Equal Opportunities Committee is responsible not just for highlighting unfairness in our society, but for tackling the fundamental problems that lie behind that unfairness. By having this debate, we are standing up for those principles and confronting the discrimination that lies at the heart of the Act of Settlement. No community or individual should be treated as a second-class citizen by virtue of religion, race or other standing in society. The Act of Settlement serves as nothing other than a form of institutional bigotry. I sincerely hope that Westminster will take the views of this Parliament seriously and will see this debate as a catalyst for a change that should take place. Westminster must set that process in motion. Cardinal Winning called the Act of Settlement a blot on our justice and integrity. Justice and integrity are two of the founding principles of this Parliament—the words are engraved in the head of the mace. By having this debate, and by collectively showing that every member of this Parliament is united against the provisions in the Act of Settlement against Catholics, we are standing up for the principles of integrity and justice. That is exactly what we were elected to this Parliament to do.

I am aware that, as the last person to speak before the minister closes the debate, I am in acute danger of touching on some points that have already been made. I hope that you will forgive me, Presiding Officer, if I cover some territory that has already been covered. Given Phil Gallie's last remarks, I am not sure what influence Lyndsay McIntosh is having on his politics these days— [Laughter.] —but his comments are welcome none the less. It is clear that all parties support the general principles that underlie the bill. As several contributors to the debate have pointed out, moves to introduce a bill for adults with incapacity began in the 1980s and we should give credit to those who started that campaign. I congratulate the members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on their work, and I do not say that simply because I am Roseanna Cunningham's deputy. As this is the first time that a committee has had to take a bill through the legislative process, they should be congratulated on the way in which they have handled that task. It gives me some pleasure to be able to wind up this debate for the SNP, because I was the person who moved this issue as party policy at our national conference in Inverness two years ago. We recognised the growing campaign for the introduction of this measure, and it is good to see that the Executive has chosen to introduce this bill early in the Parliament. I would like to refer back to my own professional experience and to the disadvantages that result from the present legal system. Those disadvantages have to be dealt with not only by professionals who work with adults with incapacity, but by some of the most vulnerable members of our society. That problem has been mentioned by several speakers, including Jim Wallace and Scott Barrie, who referred to the freezing of joint bank accounts when one person in a couple develops dementia. In my area, one of the most common problems concerns young people with acquired brain injuries. Because of the legal difficulties, the relatives have found themselves struggling to deal not only with the trauma of a young member of the family having a head injury, but with that person's personal and financial affairs. Unfortunately, that is a problem that some people experience day in, day out, and that is why most people recognise  the value of the bill. The burden that those legal difficulties create often falls upon the shoulders of a relative or carer who may have little understanding of the legal problems. Very often, those people have had to resort to seeking expensive legal advice to address those problems. Karen Whitefield made that point in her contribution this afternoon. In my experience, the relative or carer was often an elderly person who had to cope with the trauma of their child's condition and the legal problems associated with it. A couple of members have mentioned the fact that myths have built up around the bill. It is important to highlight the fact that this bill does not focus entirely on the issue of incapacity. That point was initially raised by Nora Radcliffe, who was taken somewhat by surprise when she was called to speak this morning. The bill seeks to empower individuals to make decisions on their own behalf where they have the capacity to do so. I fear that there is a growing impression that those who have learning difficulties, mental illness or a head injury will somehow automatically fall under the provisions of the bill. The bill is not about removing rights; it is about providing greater safeguards for individuals in managing their affairs. We must provide protection where it is required. I want to raise a point that has not been mentioned in the debate so far. From my discussions with organisations with a particular interest in the bill, it has become clear that considerable misunderstandings exist about the bill. Organisations such as the Scottish Association for Mental Health and ENABLE, to mention only two, find themselves dealing every day with people who may benefit from the bill's provisions. They report that there is a clear lack of understanding amongst local organisations about the legal technicalities that may arise from the bill. I believe that information needs to be provided on that specific area. I find a clear willingness on the part of organisations with an interest in the client groups who may be affected by the bill to work with the Executive to produce an information guide. The guide could be distributed to local organisations to disseminate information to field workers, who may be someone's first port of call for advice on the issue. Concerns exist that some of the people who may get the greatest benefit and security from the the bill may not receive it because of a lack of information. When the bill has passed through Parliament, I ask the Executive to consider the possibility of producing a public information leaflet that can be disseminated to local organisations to help them pass on the valuable information that will be required. Several members have mentioned ECT and  neurosurgery for mental disorder, an area where there appears to be some ambiguity over the impact of the bill. Jim Wallace said in his opening speech that he is trying to clarify that area, but there is some confusion about how the bill will apply to a person who is either an informal or formal patient, who may have incapacity and who ends up in hospital. A distinction exists on the type of treatment that that person can be provided with in hospital. I hope to see that addressed at stage 2, although I recognise that the matter may cross over to the Millan committee's considerations. It is clear from the debate that the major area of controversy centres on the medical areas in the bill. That was also clear from the evidence that was given to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. I do not intend today to rehearse all the concerns that have been raised, but Roseanna Cunningham highlighted in her opening speech the need to address that subject at stage 2. The definition of intervention needs to be clarified. I ask that the Executive give serious consideration at stage 2 to Roseanna's point about the inclusion of such a definition in the bill. Tricia Marwick raised a number of important points on nutrition and hydration, in particular with regard to the BMA's evidence. Gordon Jackson made the point that the words "ventilation, nutrition and hydration" in section 44(2)(b) of the bill have created fear and uncertainty. I welcome the Executive's commitment to amend that section, but I must add that the jury is out—until we see the Executive's amendment—on whether the clarification will be sufficient. The concerns on this part of the bill focus primarily on the possibility of back-door euthanasia. As several members have pointed out, the Executive has no intention of providing for that, but it will have the opportunity, at stage 2, to ensure complete clarification. The assessment and certification of incapacity also requires clarification. The explanatory notes state that the bill makes "assessment of capacity . . . a matter for the medical practitioner in charge of the patient's treatment." Although that is fairly clear, the definition in the bill is "any person who is responsible for the medical treatment". That definition is slightly wider. It relates to a point that Richard Simpson raised earlier, when he pointed out that in modern medicine, decisions are often made by teams. The definition needs to be amended to recognise the change in medical practice. Christine Grahame made a point about the right of appeal over the renewal of guardianship orders. That issue is of particular concern to the Mental Welfare Commission. I hope that the minister will  heed those concerns and, if necessary, amend the bill at stage 2 to take account of them. A number of aspects of this bill require clarification and amendment, especially those sections that deal with medical provision. I believe strongly that the Executive is committed to addressing those problems, and I hope that amendments will address those concerns adequately, so that the bill will be recognised for its good aspects, not its bad aspects.

It is rather disappointing that the Conservatives should propose an amendment on which the only Tories to speak are the person who moved it and the person who is closing the debate for the party. I thought that a larger number of the parliamentary group would have been able to contribute.

This debate illustrates the need to continue to address the issues of inequality in Scottish society. Given the amount of equality legislation that remains reserved to Westminster, however, the question remains as to whether inequality issues will be tackled to the extent that they would be if this Parliament had full powers in that legislative area. A number of issues have been highlighted during the course of the debate that clearly illustrate our limitations. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am well aware of the pressing demand from organisations to deal with inequality. It is also important to recognise the limitations of the committee as a result of the major pieces of legislation that govern this area being reserved matters. One of the strongest arguments for having a mandatory Equal Opportunities Committee in our Parliament was that Westminster had failed to deal adequately with inequality. However, having established the committee in Scotland, Westminster keeps the legislation. Important pieces of legislation, such as the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, the Equal Pay Act 1970, the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, are all reserved to Westminster, although they are key in tackling inequality in Scotland. Roseanna Cunningham has highlighted the fact that the issue of religious discrimination is being investigated in England and Wales by the Home Office, although nothing is being done in Scotland. Fiona Hyslop highlighted the inequalities created by the new Immigration and Asylum Act 1999,  which amends four Scottish acts on devolved matters, and yet there was no consultation with this Parliament about it. Jackie Baillie mentioned discrimination in the workplace, particularly in relation to wages, but the matters covered by the Equal Pay Act 1970 are reserved. Lloyd Quinan pointed out that the Northern Ireland Assembly is able to deal with all forms of discrimination under its own powers. For some reason, however, it has been decided that this Parliament should not be given that responsibility. It is not just the SNP that is disappointed by the lack of control over equal opportunities; our disappointment is shared by the trade unions and other interested organisations. The Equality Network has said that "it seems that the Scottish Parliament, despite its wide legislative powers, will be more limited in what it can do for equal opportunities than the Welsh Assembly will be." Many other organisations have joined in criticising the reserved status of equality legislation. Kate MacLean made an interesting point, saying that, although she did not object to our amendment, she thought that it was rather negative. I am not sure whether that amounts to conditional support for further devolved powers over equal opportunities, but perhaps she can enlighten us about her opinions later. I will return to an issue that was highlighted earlier, and which I have raised with Jackie Baillie in written questions, and that is the Race Relations Act 1976 and the impact that it has on the work of the Commission for Racial Equality in particular. After 14 years—years of shame during which the Tories ignored the need to amend the act—finally, the Labour Home Secretary decided that he would amend the act and accept a number of major recommendations in doing so. However, his official response in the past couple of weeks was, "Yes, we accept the recommendations on the need for a new definition of indirect discrimination, for the CRE to embark on informal investigations on its own, for the CRE to secure changes in discriminatory practices promptly, and to give the CRE the power to issue new codes of practice without further amendment of the act. Yes, we accept the recommendations unconditionally, but there is no time in Parliament to deal with them." The Government has also accepted conditionally another 10 recommendations, but there is no time to deal with them in committee or to amend the act. What sort of message does that send out about tackling inequalities in the UK as a whole? Let us be honest: Westminster does not have the time, but if we can afford a whole morning debating the millennium bug, we do have the time. If we had the power to amend the Race  Relations Act 1976, we would do it in the manner in which it should be amended. We need to end the war of words. On Saturday, Wendy Alexander shared a platform with me at a Trades Union Congress rally. The people there said clearly that they want to see action. The time for warm words has gone. The message from this debate should be that if we are serious about tackling inequalities in Scotland, we need the powers to create the just and fair society that we all desire.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve local authority service provision for disabled people. (S1O-782)

Can the minister explain why, in his written answer of 20 October, he detailed that the expenditure on services for those with a physical disability, in the first year of a Labour Government, had decreased by 26.2 per cent? What action does he plan to take to address that situation? Why was there a reduction of 26.2 per cent? Will he tell me on what page of the social justice document that fact appears?

I am sure that the Deputy First Minister is aware of Kevin Murphy's visit to Scotland last week. He is the information commissioner for Ireland, who is responsible for the Freedom of Information Act there. He made specific reference, when he was here, to the experience in Canada, which has had a freedom of information act for about 16 years. The greatest difficulty that the Canadians have experienced has been breaking down the culture of secrecy within public services. What action will the minister take to break down the culture of secrecy, which often exists within public services?

I welcome the opportunity to consider crime and the Scottish criminal justice system. We all recognise that the criminal justice system has come under considerable scrutiny in recent weeks, in relation to policing levels, Scottish Prison Service closures and the implications of the European convention on human rights. The Conservative motion contains an implied criticism of the European convention on human rights. I was not too sure whether Phil Gallie, in his reply to Angus MacKay, said that he welcomed the incorporation of the European convention on human rights into our criminal justice system, or whether he is happy just to refer to it.

I thank Mr Gallie for clarifying that, although I do not think that most people in Scotland will welcome it. We welcome the incorporation of the European convention on human rights into our criminal justice system. The convention is not the problem. The problem is the advice and the manner in which the Executive has handled the implications of the convention. Responsibility lies with the Executive. Jim Wallace correctly pointed out that Clive Fairweather, in the annual report on prisons, recognised that some prisons could be closed. However, Clive Fairweather's views were predicated on the assumption that the prison population would remain stable. Unfortunately, the evidence is that the prison population will rise, which brings into question the thinking behind the Executive's closure programme. I want to refer to our amendment and, in particular, the issue of policing. For several years, pressure has been growing on police budgets. The problem for our police service is twofold: financing  and resourcing. While the pressure on budgets has increased, recorded crime has also increased in constabulary areas across Scotland. It is increasing in Strathclyde. It is up by 9 per cent in Central, and by 3 per cent in Grampian, Lothian and Borders, and Northern. Only Tayside, and Dumfries and Galloway have shown a decrease. It would be wrong to give the impression that things are improving or will improve in the short term. The concerns of the Scottish Police Federation have been mentioned. Earlier this month, it gave a clear warning that the Government's proposed budget for policing in Scotland in 2000-01—£741.9 million—means that there will be a cut in real terms. I quote James Fraser, chairman of the Scottish Police Federation, who said:  "We are in a dire situation as far as the police budget is concerned, and if that situation is not greatly improved very quickly then it will become a crisis." We should listen to that voice. Although members might argue that it is a cash increase in real terms, effectively, it is a cut in real expenditure. We politicians can easily get caught up in the argument about figures and the allocation of budgets, but we must also remember that the individuals who are responsible for policing our streets, day in, day out, are under ever increasing pressure, because of growing problems of manpower, demands on services and sickness levels. The most recent annual report by the chief inspector of constabulary highlighted that the sickness level in the police force is increasing; it is currently running at more than 7 per cent. There is little doubt that one of the major contributing factors to the growing problem of sick leave is stress-related illness. The real danger, with decreasing numbers of officers, rising crime and more police officers on sick leave, is that greater pressure is placed on officers still in service. I refer to the Government's reallocation of £13 million of the Prison Service budget. Not only is our police service under considerable pressure, but as a result of that decision there will be increasing pressure on prisons and prison officers. The announcement on the closure of Penninghame and Dungavel prisons, alongside the reallocation of that funding, is seen by those working in the Scottish Prison Service as a betrayal of their efforts. That is nothing more than a short-term approach to dealing with the prison problem in Scotland.

My primary concern about the Executive's action relates to whether there is appropriate medium to long-term thinking behind it. There are major questions to be asked.

I refer to the comments about Clive Fairweather's earlier statements, which were that his views are predicated on the basis of reducing numbers. However, the evidence that has been given to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee is that prisoner numbers will increase. On that basis, I have grave concerns as to whether the closure programme will cause overcrowding. It is also clear from the Scottish Prison Service press release that the service anticipates that there will be overcrowding as a result of the reallocation of funding and the closure of two prisons. The consequences of the Executive's actions will be job losses in the Prison Service, which will be another blow to the morale of prison staff. An issue that seems to have gone somewhat unnoticed during that change in policy is the mothballing of the special unit at Peterhead prison. I am sure that no one in the chamber would disagree with getting drug dealers off the street, but we also have to accept our responsibility to ensure that prisoners who have a drug problem are provided with the support and rehabilitation that they need. The mothballing of that unit will stop the rehabilitation work that is being undertaken. I refer members to the views of the Grampian Addiction Problem Service, which has a close working relationship with the unit at Peterhead. In a recent press release, it stated: "At present many of the prisoners housed within the unit, are as much victims of drug misuse as they are the perpetrators." The statement continued:  "Without rehabilitation, such as that supplied at the unit, released prisoners will undoubtedly quickly re-offend." Where is the long-term thinking in dealing with the drug problem in Scotland? This is purely a case of robbing Peter to pay Paul.

I do not dispute the views of Clive Fairweather, but I also accept the views of people who work with the unit—the Grampian Addiction Problem Service, which clearly has grave concerns about the closure, or the mothballing, of the unit. The Executive has unfortunately decided to mothball. That will inevitably lead to further problems and the vicious circle of crime and drugs. I return to the issue of providing a comprehensive justice system, and to the issue of supporting the needs of victims. The needs of victims are not given the priority that they deserve. In Scotland, victim support services deal with almost 40,000 referrals each year, the vast majority of which come from the police. The services, yet again, have found their modest budgets under increasing pressure. As a result, they have had to limit the service that they can provide in some areas of Scotland. Support to victims is not just about the level of service that is provided by victim support groups; it is about the way in which our criminal justice agencies deal with victims. Several months ago, along with other MSPs including Lyndsay McIntosh, I met a lady called Molley Godley, whose son Ian Godley had been killed back in February 1998. Although I do not want to go into specific details of the case, I am concerned about the way in which the family was supported by the criminal justice agencies. The family was unable to find out why the Crown Office had decided not to proceed with the case that had been referred to the procurator fiscal. The family is not only the victim of a son being killed, but the victim of a criminal justice system that has acted insensitively. At no time was the family informed of the possibility that the case would be dropped by  the Crown Office, until a call came from the procurator fiscal to say that it had been dropped. What way is that to deal with a family that is dealing with the trauma of losing a son? I am sure that other members could refer to such individual cases across the country. I return to the issue of improving services for victims of crime. In England and Wales, the Home Office's victims charter has been in place for some time. Lord Cullen recommended such a measure in his report on the Stephen Lawrence inquiry. However, the Executive's action plan contains very little to meet victims' needs. A victims charter would help to set national standards that stated clearly the level or nature of service that criminal justice agencies should provide. A charter would help families such as the Godleys. At such a time, the Executive has an opportunity to improve services for victims of crime, and I urge it to consider the possibility of introducing a victims charter in Scotland. Our criminal justice system requires action on several fronts. Any further delay will inevitably lead to increased crime and an impending crisis, if not in the police service, in the prison system. The Executive has been warned not only by political parties but by those who work in the service, and I hope that it will listen to those views and act on them. I move amendment S1M-316.2, to leave out from "expresses" to end and insert: "notes with concern the decreasing numbers of serving police officers; expresses deep concern at the prison closure programme, as a result of the Scottish Executive's re-allocation of £13 million of Scottish Prison Service funding, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to recognise that effective criminal justice is one in which adequate resources are provided for the police and the prison service as well as victims of crime, none of whom are well served under the present system."

Will the minister give way?

I have a very important point to make.

Cathy, you had several meetings with Falkirk Council that you did not inform me of and it was Falkirk Council itself that informed me about the European funding. I understand that Michael Connarty MP was dealing with it—I would like to think he kept you informed.

I welcome the opportunity to raise this important matter here this evening. I thank the minister and the First Minister for staying behind to debate this important issue. That is extremely gratifying, and I am sure that it will be noted by the constituents and residents of Bo'ness. I also welcome the residents who have come here this evening, along with local councillors who are concerned about the issue. Particularly, I would like to highlight the efforts of Mr Grant, who has pursued this issue for some 10 years. Unfortunately, as he is unwell, he cannot be with us this evening. I am sure that the problems of the domestic water supply in the Bo'ness area are new to most of the members who are here, but for the residents of Bo'ness and the Angus Road area, the issue has been a long-standing concern. Although both members and ministers may be unfamiliar with the issue, I am sure that they appreciate that it is important to have a safe and reliable water supply. It is something that we often take for granted. Unfortunately, in Scotland—or perhaps I should say fortunately, in Scotland—we do not suffer from a lack of water. We have so much of the stuff that we are in the proud position of being able to export it to our very good neighbours. However, the residents of Angus Road in Bo'ness have had their confidence in their domestic water supply undermined considerably. The authorities that are responsible for the water supply have been nothing short of secretive, and obstructive to residents who have tried to raise complaints. The problem did not start just a few months ago, or just last year. It started on 17 July 1989. At that point, Mr Grant in Angus Road contacted his  district and regional councillor to complain about discoloration to his domestic water supply. Tests were undertaken by Central Regional Council district water and drainage department, which found that there was a high level of iron in his domestic supply. However, at that stage, the department did not consider the problem worthy of any action. The residents in the area continued to have persistent problems with their water supply and continued to complain to the authorities about it. Throughout that period, residents were particularly concerned that they were being exposed to heavy metals such as iron, manganese and aluminium in their household water supply. I emphasise that, at that point, the residents had no confirmed knowledge about whether they were being exposed to such heavy metals continuously, because they were unable to find out the facts of the case. However, they held a natural suspicion that they were being exposed to them at some point, if not every day. We must also recognise the uncertainty that the residents were experiencing at that time, which naturally eroded their confidence in their domestic water supply. We need only consider the incident that occurred at Camelford in 1988, where some 20 tonnes of aluminium sulphate were poured into the domestic water supply. Although that case is by no means comparable to the problems in Bo'ness, I draw members' attention to the study that was undertaken by the British Medical Association, the results of which were published last September. That study highlighted the fact that residents in the Camelford area suffered from health problems that included brain damage resulting from exposure to aluminium in the water supply. Aluminium is one of the metals that have been identified in the water supply to the Angus Road area of Bo'ness. I point out to the Minister for Transport and the Environment that Tony Blair, when in opposition, committed himself to a public inquiry on the Camelford incident. The residents of Camelford continue to wait for that public inquiry. I hope that the residents of Angus Road in Bo'ness will not have to wait as long for a review of what happened there. This week, I received a letter from Forth Valley Health Board, which referred to the finding of aluminium in water sample tests. It states: "Dr Breslin has been told that around the time of the sample East of Scotland Water were scouring the local supply pipes, which could have resulted in raised iron and manganese levels. It would not explain the aluminium levels as East of Scotland Water have indicated to us that they were not using aluminium during the treatment of water supplies in that area at that time." In June last year, a resident had complained about continued discoloration of the domestic  water supply. After persistent complaints, the tests to which Forth Valley Health Board referred were undertaken. The tests reveal that in one case there was a high level of aluminium, iron and manganese. The laboratory report states: "The Iron, manganese and aluminium are above their respective 'Significant Medical Risk Value'." Two further tests highlighted the fact that iron levels were also above the statutory limits. When one of the local residents contacted Falkirk Council environmental health department to request copies of the sample report, the council responded: "we consider if you had been given a copy of the sample results you might have misrepresented them and caused yourself and others undue harm." East of Scotland Water took a further four samples at the end of last year. One of the residents requested a copy of the laboratory reports but was given copies of only two. The two he received showed that the water supply was fine. When East of Scotland Water was contacted for the other two, it said that the matter had been discussed with Falkirk Council and with Forth Valley Health Board and that there was no significant risk to public health. One of the residents then asked the Scottish Office for copies of the two missing reports. The next day an official from East of Scotland Water turned up at his door with the two reports, which—surprise, surprise—showed that there were levels of iron above the statutory limits. Once, one of the residents found freshwater shrimp in their water supply. Another filled his bath with water, drained it and used a magnet to collect the metal that was left. The whole affair has gone on for 10 years. I ask the minister to undertake a review of the matter for several reasons. It should establish whether East of Scotland Water and the other authorities have dealt with the matter adequately. Given the prolonged nature of the problem and the residents' lost confidence in East of Scotland Water and the other authorities, it should try to restore their commitment and residents' confidence in the service. It should ensure that no other community in Scotland has to suffer the same problem. I ask the minister to use this opportunity to draw a line under the issue by undertaking a review and by doing so to restore the confidence of residents of Angus Road in Bo'ness.

To ask the Scottish Executive what provision will be made in order to enforce any future freedom of information legislation. (S1O-648)

Last week, Jim Wallace spoke about the pros and cons of a human rights commission in Scotland. Does the Lord Advocate agree that one of the pros would be that a commission could enforce such legislation so that it actually worked rather than ending up on the shelf? Will he ensure that proper consultation takes place with Scottish bodies on freedom of information? Will he confirm that he will not take on the responsibilities or take the actions that Jack Straw proposes to take at Westminster?

I am very pleased to be part of a cross-party alliance, with Dennis Canavan and Cathy Peattie, that is addressing the issue of Falkirk. I hope that that will emphasise for the Minister for Finance the concern in the Falkirk area about the present proposals for objective 2 funding. Objective 2 funding has served the area well in recent years. Cathy touched on several of the projects that have benefited from the funding, such as the routes to employment initiative, Falkirk Enterprise, the business parks and business development. It is important that we recognise that  objective 2 funding has been an important building block in the regeneration of a community that was very dependent on traditional industries. However, there should be no doubt that the Falkirk area has suffered major setbacks in the past year. As Dennis Canavan mentioned, over the past year there have been several closures and many redundancies in major industries in the local community. I want to take a moment to draw together some of the points made by Dennis and Cathy. The loss of 500 jobs at Wrangler has been followed by the loss of 160 jobs in support businesses in the local community. That was followed by the loss of 400 jobs at BP-Amoco in Grangemouth. It is estimated that a further 2,000 jobs will be lost in support services in the local community as a result of that downsizing. So far this year, almost 3,000 jobs have been lost—both directly and indirectly—in the area. I recognise that objective 2 status has been awarded to the area where the Wrangler factory was based. However, the wards covered by the BP-Amoco refinery in Grangemouth have not been awarded objective 2 funding. I am conscious that the minister may say that such matters were considered when the objective 2 map was being drawn up. I would like to point out to the minister that things have moved on since then—matters have got worse. Cathy Peattie and Dennis Canavan also mentioned the plans for closures at Baird Clothing and Russell Athletic, both of which are clothing manufacturers. About 560 jobs could be lost directly and it is estimated that another 180 indirect jobs may be lost. Almost 750 jobs may be lost in the area—in addition to the 3,000 that have already been lost this year. The areas where those losses will be felt the most, particularly Bo'ness and Grangemouth, do not have objective 2 status. One of the Department of Trade and Industry's key principles in the award of objective 2 status is that an area has high unemployment. Unfortunately, that does not appear to have been applied in this case. I have particular concerns that several wards, including Dawson, Inchyra, Dunipace and Victoria, have the highest levels of unemployment in the district but do not have objective 2 status. I must tell the Minister for Finance that now is not the time to abandon communities that are suffering severe job losses. It is time to help local communities rebuild and to ensure that they can address their current problems. I urge him to meet officials from Falkirk Council to consider the matter, bearing in mind the developments in the past year.

I welcome the minister's announcement today and recognise her commitment to dealing with domestic violence. I am conscious that I am the first male speaker in this debate. It is important that males speak out about the problems of domestic violence. I am sure that there will be others. Several members have touched on the unacceptable level of domestic violence. We must examine how domestic violence shatters the stability of a family, placing not only the woman who has been subjected to violence at considerable risk, but the children and young people in that household. The fact that there is no such thing as a typically abused woman has been well documented. Equally, there is no such thing as a typically abused child or young person. Last year alone, 8,500 children and young people sought help from Women's Aid projects—often with their mother or carer—but less than half were provided with the refuge and shelter they required. That highlights the desperate shortage of provision for young people and children and, alongside the estimated 100,000 children who live with the experience of domestic violence in Scotland, the desperate need for additional resources to meet their needs. We should also consider the fact that around 60 per cent of children in a household where there is domestic violence are abused by the person who abuses their mother or carer. The impact of domestic violence on children and young people can not be understated. Domestic abuse, along with other forms of abuse, is one of the most common reasons for young people  becoming homeless. Young men aged 16 plus are particularly vulnerable, as Nora Radcliffe pointed out when she referred to the inability of Women's Aid projects to provide them with the accommodation they require. I hope that, in her summing up, the minister will address directly what can be done to ensure that there is provision. Proper co-ordination between agencies is also important. A child or young person who has to take refuge with their mother or carer often has to go to a shelter and, at the same time, leave their school, leaving behind their friends. That not only disrupts the child's or young person's education, but can result in their leaving behind the friends that they need most during such a traumatic time in their lives. I recognise that many statutory and non-statutory agencies work together where they can, but it is important that they work together in an appropriate manner. I ask the minister to address what guidance will be issued to statutory agencies to ensure that they work in proper partnership with Women's Aid refuge organisations. The role of Women's Aid organisations is frequently undermined by the continual constraints under which they work, often as a result of standstill budgets year upon year, so I welcome the additional funding to address that issue. However, just as our education departments require the right funding to provide children with the right education, Women's Aid projects require the right funding to provide children with the protection they need when in difficulty. It is also important that services are provided equally across the country. That is why it is important that we have co-ordination on a national level, to ensure that children, no matter where they stay, will be provided with a reasonable service in their time of need.

I wrote to the minister on 3 September, having had representations on the issue of the Football Trust in London about the weighting mechanism that still works to the advantage of premier league teams and to the disadvantage of first and second division teams. I received representations from a number of Falkirk Football Club fans about the weighting mechanism that works against clubs such as Falkirk, which is thinking about building a new stadium. Can the minister tell me when she will respond to my letter, which she received more than 23 days ago, on this important issue—if she gives it such importance?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions have taken place with the Scottish Prison Service in relation to women offenders. (S1O-360)

Is the minister aware that, in the Prison Service annual report, the chief inspector of prisons raised concerns about the number of women who are being placed in prison and that he raised particular concerns about remand prisoners? In light of the fact that the previous justice minister, Mr Henry McLeish, stated that one of his key tasks would be to reduce the number of women being placed in prison, what new action is the Executive prepared to take to ensure that this issue is addressed urgently?

I am guilty of having played no part in stopping Tommy making a speech, although I recognise that some members' speeches went on for some time.

Third time lucky. In considering today's debate, and having seen the minister's motion, I thought that there would be cross-party support, particularly in relation to the guidance document. However, I was not prepared for the Conservative approach to crime prevention of, "Shoot them and hing them." If there is anything that the minister should take from the debate, it is that no party has a monopoly of ideas on how we should tackle crime and remove it from the streets of Scotland. Several members highlighted a variety of successful crime prevention schemes that are either running in their own areas at present or have done in the past. The issue of mobile police stations has been highlighted—they were a success for the police in the Dumfries and Galloway area. We have heard about the success of Fife Council's domestic violence programme. Karen Whitefield referred to credit unions and the impact that they could have on reducing crime on our streets. There are many good ideas, which should be promoted. One of the key features of the guidance document is that it focuses on finding local solutions to local problems and ensuring that local communities are consulted in the process of establishing strategies. I stress to the minister that it is essential that any form of consultation with local communities is worth while and effective. We all recognise that, where possible, local communities should be empowered to tackle their own problems. However, there can be nothing more demoralising for those in a local community who go through a consultation process than to feel at the end of it that their views have not been listened to or acted upon. I stress that the minister should ensure that the strategies that are implemented lead to genuine consultation—I am conscious that, for a variety of reasons, that word has been abused. Several colleagues mentioned the fact that the concept of community safety partnerships is not new. Yesterday I was having a chat with a gentleman from Victim Support in Lanarkshire, who told me that he was involved in a community safety strategy in Kilmarnock back in 1975. As was said, if Victim Support is to have a key role in the strategy, its funding must be addressed. Karen Whitefield highlighted the issue of a victims charter. Members should know that I lodged a motion for a members' business debate on Victim Support and the provision of a victims charter. I hope that Karen and other colleagues who support that will sign the motion in the chamber office. The post of local authority liaison officer, which is covered by the guidance document, is not new. To my knowledge, the first local authority liaison  officer was in place almost eight years ago in Falkirk as part of Central Scotland police. It is essential to recognise that much work has been done in the past by a variety of organisations, both statutory and voluntary. We do not have to reinvent the wheel. In effect, the document formalises that process, rather than creating a new one. I hope that the minister will recognise that to talk about preventing crime is insufficient. To prevent crime, we must look beyond that, at the causes of crime, which, as the minister said, are often based in social disadvantage—unemployment, poverty and a feeling of hopelessness. That is why we must recognise that the guidance document must work in partnership with social inclusion strategies. How will the minister ensure that that will be done in the implementation of the crime prevention strategy? I want to highlight several points that have been raised. What additional resources will be provided to ensure that the strategy is put in place and will have the funding that it requires? There is concern about the use of CCTV and the need for regulation. Although we recognise the benefits of CCTV, there are concerns about the present code of practice and about whether the code is being adhered to. I would welcome the minister's assurance that that will continue to be monitored—not with a CCTV camera—so that public confidence in CCTV is maintained. I return to Roseanna Cunningham's point about the need to monitor the community partnership strategy effectively, to ensure that it works and that failings are addressed early on. It will have been wasteful for us to have a three-hour debate to discuss the document if people end up still living in fear because of crime in their neighbourhood. Will the minister ensure that there is an adequate system to monitor the strategy's effectiveness and that any failings are addressed early on?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve services for those who suffer from terminal illness. (S1O-300)

Does the minister recognise that there is considerable confusion among health boards, local authorities and health trusts about whose responsibility it is to provide palliative care, often leaving someone who has been diagnosed as having a terminal illness in an extremely vulnerable position? Does he recognise that very few hospitals or NHS trusts have a discharge protocol for arranging services with local authorities when individuals are discharged from hospital? Does the minister agree that it is inappropriate that, when someone is in the final stages of life, they should be financially assessed for social services and the care that they may require to remain at home during that final stage?

Section 3 of the bill seeks to widen the definition of mental disorder in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 to include personality disorder. The 1984 act states that "'mental disorder' means mental illness or mental handicap, however caused or manifested".  I believe that the definition in the bill is too wide-ranging and could have unacceptable consequences. In the Parliament's debate last week, members throughout the chamber raised the issue of how to define personality disorder; they were concerned that the bill would classify personality disorder as a mental illness. Unfortunately, ministers failed adequately to deal with those concerns. Amendment 28 would address some of those issues by providing greater clarity in defining personality disorder.  In recent years, psychiatric thinking on personality disorders has changed; as a result of  that change, the 1984 act is now clearly inadequate. However, the bill fails to take account of the new thinking. That was a concern for Richard Simpson in last week's debate. He stated:  "I have no difficulty with the definition of personality disorder as a mental disorder, but psychiatrists have great difficulty with it being placed in the category of mental illness, as is proposed in the bill."-[ Official Report , 2 September 1999; Vol 1, c 117.]  I see that Dr Simpson-who is, I understand, a psychiatrist-is here today and can stand by his remarks. The purpose of amendment 28 is to bring the bill into line with the psychiatric thinking that Dr Simpson highlighted last week. I hope that, in the light of his statement, he will join us in agreeing to the amendment.  Dr Jim Dyer, for whom I have considerable respect, having been a student in acute psychiatry under him at the Royal Edinburgh hospital, is the director of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. He echoes the concerns about the wide definition of personality disorder in the bill; he, too, wants the bill to be brought into line with current medical thinking. He has gone on record and has written to all members of the Scottish Parliament to indicate his concern on this issue. Given his public statement and his statutory responsibility to highlight such issues to the Scottish Executive and the responsible ministers, I hope that the Executive will recognise that this amendment seeks to address the same concerns as those highlighted by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland.  Amendment 28 also seeks to focus the bill on those individuals with a particular type of personality disorder who are a marked risk to society. In last week's debate, several members expressed the concern that the bill fails to take account of the fact that the majority of those with such a personality disorder pose no risk to society. Dennis Canavan remarked that if we did not tighten up the bill's definition of personality disorder, this chamber could be rather empty. In my view, it is likely that the press benches will be even emptier. [Laughter.] I am sure that I will get good copy for that tomorrow.  Even the Government agrees that many individuals with a personality disorder pose no risk to society. The Government paper, "Managing Dangerous People With Severe Personality Disorder", which was published in July, states that "the overwhelming majority do not pose a risk to the public and live reasonably ordered, crime free, lives".  The Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland and the Law Society of Scotland have highlighted that point, but the bill fails to make the matter clear. I understand that the commission has written to ministers to inform them of its concerns.  The amendment would enhance the bill in three ways. First, it would bring the bill into line with current psychiatric thinking and clarify the view that personality disorder is not a mental illness. Secondly, it would ensure that the bill is precisely focused on those individuals with a personality disorder who pose most risk to society. Thirdly, when an organisation such as the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland raises concerns about the bill, it should be listened to-the amendment goes some way to addressing those concerns.  Jim Wallace made it clear that he had given the Mental Welfare Commission the responsibility to review service provision in the state hospital at Carstairs because it was the appropriate body. The commission, which Iain Gray said knew most about this issue, has expressed its concerns, which is why this amendment has been lodged.  I, therefore move amendment 28.

A number of members have highlighted the importance of public safety. That is reflected by the fact that the minister has chosen to include public safety in the title of the bill. However, we must ensure that we achieve a balance between public safety and the human rights of the individual.  The bill is a major departure from the thinking that was current when the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 was introduced. If we create additional legal measures to detain people in hospital, it is essential that we provide those people with treatment while they are in hospital. I recognise that there is considerable tension between ensuring public safety and protecting the rights of the individual. There is also considerable tension between assessing risk and maintaining public confidence. Those may be difficult issues, but it is important that they are addressed during the bill's passage through Parliament.  A number of important issues have been raised, both in the earlier debate and by several speakers in this one. One issue was that Mr Noel Ruddle had for some time been recommended for a specific form of treatment, yet did not receive that treatment during the years in which he was in hospital. There would be a public outcry if that happened to someone who was waiting for a hip replacement in the Edinburgh royal infirmary. Too often services provided to those who have a mental illness are seen as second class and of a lower priority. I hope that the Minister for Health and Community Care will address that when she sums up.  The role of the responsible medical officer is essential in the process of ensuring the protection of someone's right to treatment while they are detained in hospital. In the Noel Ruddle case, the responsible medical officer seems to have recommended for some time that Mr Ruddle should be provided with a particular form of treatment. Is the process whereby the responsible medical officer has to inform formerly the secretary of state and now the First Minister being adhered to? Is notice being taken of what the medical officer is stating? I want an assurance from the minister that the specific form of treatment recommended by the responsible medical officer will be provided during a person's detention.  I want to ensure that the provision of appropriate therapeutic intervention for individuals in a hospital is not necessarily given with the view that the treatment must be provided within that hospital setting. The individual should have the opportunity  to go to another establishment for the required treatment. As it has been decided to allow the Mental Welfare Commission to examine treatment within Carstairs, I ask the minister to confirm that appropriate resources will be provided to implement any recommendations that the commission makes.  A number of members have raised concerns about the definition of personality disorder. The definition is extremely general in the bill. Does the minister intend the bill to cover all individuals who have a personality disorder? As has been highlighted, many people who have a personality disorder pose no risk to society or to themselves. It is essential that individuals who suffer from a personality disorder do not find themselves on the wrong side of the law as a result of the powers in this bill.

The minister mentioned consultation. I am sure he is aware that there was extensive consultation on the Westminster bill. Were any organisations in Scotland that have a keen interest in the subject not included in that consultation exercise? The danger of such an open-ended consultation process is that it might delay the introduction of a bill in the Scottish Parliament.

My concern is not so much about the materials or cost of the building, but that we ensure that we have a Parliament that is open and accessible to all members of our society, no matter that they have a disability. It seems, however, that some  members think that if we say that the Parliament is accessible, it is. I am afraid that there are a number of concerns about access for the disabled and to the Holyrood site.  At Tuesday's meeting with the architect and Scottish Office officials, I raised the issue not of access within the Parliament, but of access to the Parliament site. The transport problems that will undoubtedly occur will have a disproportionate effect on people with a disability. We know from comments made by one of the Scottish Office officials that one of the ideas that is being considered to ensure that disabled people can get to the Parliament is a shuttle bus service. I am sorry, but that is an unacceptable standard to set for a new Parliament from the start.  The Parliament will have a secure area for dropping off VIPs, but there are no plans for an area near the Parliament to drop off disabled people or the elderly. I am sure that many members of this Parliament will agree that it is more important that disabled people can be dropped off at the Parliament than that the odd dignitary who may choose to visit us can be.  There are also concerns about the interior of the building. It will be a cambered chamber, like this one. The same access problems will exist as here. How does someone with a wheelchair go from this end of the Parliament to the other end of the Parliament, without having to go down to the front or round the back? On Tuesday, that question could not be answered.  The Presiding Officer's area will be elevated and will be accessed by stairs. At the heart of our Parliament, there will be an area that someone with a disability will be unable to access. When that point was raised, Scottish Office officials stated that they were aware of the problem and were looking into the possibility of an elevating platform. When I heard that suggestion, I must confess that the vision of the Blackpool organist coming up through the stage floor went through my mind.  Already we are considering adapting a building that should be built to the standard that anyone with a disability, whether they be the Presiding Officer, a member or a member of the public, can access any part of. The Parliament should be built to ensure that, during the next 200 years, every member of our society, no matter that they have a disability, can access the building and every part of the building. We are talking about a Parliament that may last for 200 years. What is two months if we ensure that we provide a Parliament that includes all members of our society?

I want to address the issue of equal opportunities, which has been raised by several members. In particular, I want to mention annex H in the CSG report, entitled "Mainstreaming Equality in the Scottish Parliament".  During the past week, I have had the opportunity to visit all the main buildings in the parliamentary complex and to assess them for access for disabled peopled. Although some good work has been undertaken, much work has still to be carried out. I ask the Minister for Justice, in winding up, to give me an assurance that the further adaptations that are required to the Parliament's buildings will  be undertaken as soon as possible.  I shall give some examples. Cannonball House does not have any form of disabled access. The microphone consoles that we use have no indication for someone with a visual impairment. The swipe card points in the building are too high for someone in a wheelchair. Those are basic issues that could readily be addressed, and I ask that they be carried out, given that we will be here for at least the next two years.  Should this Parliament decide to move elsewhere, the new Parliament should be barrier free. Unfortunately, disability is a social construct; it is society that puts barriers in the way of people with disabilities. Before we start talking about equal opportunities and telling other people what to do, we should sort out our own back yard.

Will Dr Simpson give way?

Will Dr Simpson give way?

The people of Scotland elected the Scottish Parliament to reflect their needs and aspirations. As the elected members of this Parliament, we have the responsibility of ensuring that we have a Parliament that is open, accountable and, above all, democratic in its decision making.  During the early days of this Parliament, and from the publication of the partnership document by Labour and the Liberal Democrats, it was clear that a sell-out was taking place for the sake of ministerial office rather than of reflecting the needs of the people of Scotland. A majority of members were elected on the basis of manifestos that committed them to abolishing student tuition fees and lifting the beef-on-the-bone ban.  In February 1998, Charles Kennedy-that well-known Liberal Democrat face and the man who is now one of the front runners for the leadership of that party-led the Opposition debate in the House of Commons. He led the debate against the Government and its ban on beef on the bone. Now what do we see? We see Mr Finnie and his leadership colleagues doing a U-turn on the issue. They now tell us that they will wait until they receive the right medical evidence before making such a decision. Why did they not take the same medical evidence before they made it their party's policy to lift the ban? The words "envelope" and "the back of it" with regard to policy making come to mind. The Liberal Democrats have clearly failed to think through this process and have concerned themselves more with ministerial office.  It is all very well for people such as Mr Finnie to sell out on their party policy, but selling out on the farmers who voted for the Liberal Democrats and on the people who live in rural communities that depend on farming is not just selling out on their party policy, it is a betrayal of the supporters who elected them to this chamber.

I must point out to Dr Simpson that the majority of members were elected on a commitment to get the ban lifted. Mr Lyon-who has disappeared and has not remained for the debate-was one of the leading members of the National Farmers Union who campaigned against the Government's imposition of the ban.  Let us consider how Mr Finnie, the new Minister for Rural Affairs, will operate and the areas that he will be responsible for. Issues relating to rural transport and the environment will be the responsibility of the Minister for Transport and the Environment, not Mr Finnie. The issues of Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Gaelic will be the responsibility of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, not Mr Finnie. Mr Finnie will be left with agriculture, and we have already seen that he sold out on the farmers in regard to the beef-on-the-bone ban.

I am winding up.  We have also seen recently how Westminster has ignored this chamber.  Mr Finnie will be left with forestry. I am sure that that is high on the agenda of the people of Inverclyde, but it is hardly justification for the creation of such a senior ministerial portfolio-it smacks more of creating a portfolio to keep the Liberal Democrats on side. I have two key reasons for opposing Mr Finnie's appointment-