I hold strongly to what seems to have become a rather unpopular concept, which is that every individual, of any age, ethnic or religious background, sexuality or gender, is entitled to be treated fairly and equally. Rabbie Burns espoused that idea profoundly, writing, “That Man to Man, the warld o’er, Shall brothers”— and sisters, if I may add in my own wee bit— “be for a’ that.” Although the issues have become unfashionable in Westminster, fairness and equality remain deeply embedded in the Scottish psyche. The failed austerity agenda is holding Scotland back. This budget is proof that decisions about Scotland are best taken by the people who live here. Our commitment to delivering free school meals for all children in primaries 1 to 3, and our transformational childcare policy, show where this Scottish Government’s priorities are. Our priorities are not those of the Westminster Tories. What has gone wrong? Why is it that the children of Scotland whom we were pulling out of poverty are again being condemned to it? Why is this Scottish Government, committed as it is to providing universal benefits and a decent living wage, being forced to follow an alien inequality agenda? The Scottish Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee recently received an independent study that was undertaken by the centre for regional economic and social research at Sheffield Hallam University. Its findings warned that welfare reforms alone will take more than £1.6 billion a year out of the Scottish economy. That equates to around £480 a year for every adult of working age in Scotland. In Glasgow, the amount rises to £650 a year. Down south, in Tory constituencies such as Hampshire and Berkshire, the impact falls to about £200 a year. That might be good for David Cameron’s voters but it does not follow my idea of fairness and it certainly does not follow this Government’s idea of equality. The gap between rich and poor is increasing on a UK-wide basis. Only with independence can we really set about changing that in Scotland. As is inevitably the case under the coalition Government’s misnamed welfare reforms, it is the most vulnerable who suffer. That means, especially, the women and children, older people and those with disabilities of any kind. People are considered to be living in poverty if they live in households with less than 60 per cent of the median household income. That is the key measure that is used by the UK and Scottish Governments, and by the European Union. Using that measure, and after housing costs are taken into account, the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland found in 2012 that 910,000 people here still live in poverty. That is 18 per cent of our population. It means that 220,000 Scottish children—21 per cent of all our children—live in poverty. Real progress was being made in reducing those figures until the UK coalition Government’s tax and benefit policies started coming into the picture. CPAG now warns that “there will be massive rises in child poverty in the coming years. In Scotland alone, forecast trends would suggest between 50,000 and 100,000 more children being pushed into poverty by 2020.” In countries such as Denmark and Norway, fewer than 10 per cent of children live in poverty. Although that figure is alarming, it is much less so than the current UK figures. The Scottish Government is determined to change the situation but, without the powers to make our own welfare policies, we can only try to mitigate the disasters of the bedroom tax and cuts in child benefit. The virtual elimination of the disability living allowance and the introduction of the so-called personal independence allowance will make the poverty picture far grimmer over the next months—far grimmer for a friend of mine who suffers from motor neurone disease and has been told by Atos that he is fit for work. Of course, poverty impacts on health and mental wellbeing. It pushes people out of the workforce and stops them from becoming economically active. That has a negative impact on the more general condition of the Scottish economy. People with no money cannot spend it, which means that they cannot contribute to the growth of the nation. Contrary to the George Osborne school of economic theory, Government commitments and policy actions that boost pensions, benefits, tax credits and wages, and the removal of some of the barriers to work, have had a positive impact in Scotland. Cutting back on benefits will not contribute to a healthier economic environment. Mr Osborne’s approach is, indeed, a false economy. This Government’s commitment to a living wage; to free school meals up to primary 3; to the energy assistance package; to improved access to debt solutions; and to investment in new council housing are all important moves forward. However, we cannot move as far forward as we would like without independence. Progress on child poverty is stalling, not because of the Scottish Government’s policies, but because of the welfare policies that have been inflicted on us by Westminster. We stand not only to lose the gains that have been made so far but to see a reversal in the progress that has been made. That is a travesty. Westminster political campaigners have revived moral scapegoating, painting sizeable elements of Scottish society as broken. The language of worklessness has become commonplace, bundling together a range of reasons why people are not in paid work, including disability, ill health and caring responsibilities. That oversimplification has led to increasingly punitive welfare policies and an increase in the risk of people falling into poverty. We are not, and will not be, the broken society of the Tory mindset. We will preserve and protect our fundamental values of care, compassion, equality and fairness and we will do it in an independent Scotland—a Scotland of the commonweal, where all of us are first.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what response it has received from the United Kingdom Government to its request that money collected from the opencast coal industry in Scotland should be made available to fund the legacy of Scotland’s unrestored opencast sites. (S4O-02780)

The minister will understand that the Westminster Government has taken around £15 million from the opencast industry and that there has been no return to the industry or the environment in respect of those payments. Does he agree that that money could make a significant contribution towards the restitution of opencast sites?

We all know the quote: “There is no greater love than to lay down one’s life for one’s friends.” In this case, it is for one’s nation, but do we really know the sacrifice that we ask of our armed service personnel when we ask them to pay the ultimate price for our freedom and democracy? Do we truly understand the impact on any human being who has witnessed the horror of war? Do we take account of the impact on the families left behind to face an uncertain future, either without their loved one or with the duty to look after a damaged or injured loved one? Do we really understand that, for some, the battlefield becomes civvy street? Citizens Advice Scotland has published a report called “Civvy Street: The New Frontline”, which states: “The recent wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have led to an increased focus on the support needs of veterans and those still serving. In turn, this has led to better advice and training for those leaving the Armed Forces and better support for those who experience problems after doing so.” However, as the minister said, there remain some who slip through that net. Many veterans continue to experience real difficulty, especially in that transition period, and some experience it for decades. My involvement in the firm base forum in Lanarkshire has shown me clearly how problems can arise years later. One of the things that I support is the armed services advice project, which was established in 2010 following a very successful pilot in my constituency of Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse. It provides advice and support for all members of the armed forces community, whether serving personnel, veterans or their families. ASAP is delivered by the Scottish citizens advice bureaux service—a highly trusted network with decades of experience of delivering free, independent, confidential and impartial advice and information to the general public. In its first two years, ASAP was extremely successful. It assisted nearly 1,800 clients with over 6,000 issues, 84 per cent of whom were either veterans or their dependants. Some of them were still serving and needed support with the transition out of the forces, which they were finding very difficult. ASAP was able to deliver that support, too. I was honoured to have a debate on the project a number of months ago. We saw from case studies that armed forces veterans have similar issues to everybody else but that things for them seem to be 10 times more difficult. If they have a mental health problem or an on-going injury—sometimes issues are not diagnosed until years later—they can find it extremely difficult to go and ask for help. ASAP provides that help. It gives it on an informal basis and supports people in the measures that they want at the pace that they want. However, to truly accept the responsibility and duty of care that we have for our armed services personnel, we must ensure that they have the best of care and that when they come to the end of the service that they have given—irrespective of the reasons for going to war and whether we agree with them—they should get the highest standard of care. That is why I welcome the minister’s announcement today. In my opinion, a commissioner can make the difference between standard local authority care and high-quality, consistent healthcare. As an active member of the firm base forum, I have seen a lot of the issue and I have seen how needs are addressed. The minister will remember visiting with me Remploy’s veterans employment project in Hamilton last year, when we heard at first hand about the challenges faced by veterans in gaining support and, in some cases, the challenge of actually admitting that they need support. He will remember that consistency of service was one of the biggest challenges faced, and I believe that the commissioner will take steps to address any inconsistencies. I believe that, like the other good partnerships and collaborations that the Scottish Government has with veterans organisations in Scotland, the new veterans commissioner—a first in the United Kingdom—will add to the successful approach taken by our minister in Scotland. Our commitments paper demonstrates clearly that the SNP Government understands the sacrifice that veterans have made and that we will do all that we can to provide the highest quality of care and support.

11. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met local authorities and what education issues were discussed. (S4O-02757)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that short answer. I draw to his attention the continuous issues with poor support and organisation for children who require autism primary education from South Lanarkshire Council—in particular, the council eventually granting a placing request only for the parents to be told that it will not provide transport. I add that the delivery of the primary education is good. I ask the cabinet secretary to meet me and some of the parents who have raised those issues with me in relation to autism education services and support from South Lanarkshire Council.

The Scottish Government recognises that Scotland’s future lies ultimately in the children of today and future generations still to come. That is not rocket science, and yet I sometimes sense that some of my colleagues on the opposite side of the chamber do not quite believe the truth of that statement. Our independence is not some kind of end in itself, but the opening of a door to a better future for forthcoming generations. Although I thank Willie Rennie for a thoughtful speech, I tell him that independence is not a barrier but a gateway. As we make the journey towards that gateway and the referendum, we are presenting to Scotland’s voters a choice of two futures and the concrete realities of an independent Scotland. We have learned from our experiences of being subjected to laws that we did not support by Governments that we did not elect. I remind Johann Lamont who it was who employed Lord Freud to bring about his welfare reforms. The new Scotland will be accountable to the people who elect its Government. Whatever that Government’s colour or political persuasion, it will need to do something that Westminster can never do: create policies that respond to the needs of the people of Scotland. That is not rocket science. The Scottish Government operates on that premise already, as far as it can given the current constraints on budgets and decision making. Really good provision of early learning and childcare is a hallmark of some of the most advanced and successful countries in the world. The announcements today on childcare and school meals take us ever closer to the dream of the common weal. Those policies not only benefit the children themselves, but provide a key support to participation in the labour market, particularly for women. Denmark has excellent childcare provision, and 79 per cent of mothers with children under six are working, whereas in the UK the comparable figure is approximately 59 per cent. Of mothers who cite childcare as a barrier to working full time, more than 70 per cent say that it is because of the costs. It is small wonder, then, that, as the Deputy First Minister recently noted, parents in Scotland spend approximately 27 per cent of household income on childcare, in comparison with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average of 12 per cent. The Scottish women’s budget working group is led by Ailsa McKay, professor of economics at Glasgow Caledonian University. Professor McKay is acutely aware that our current place and time is opening new and exciting doors—I point out to Willie Rennie that it is a gateway. The group has grasped the relationship between economic growth and equality of opportunity, and its submissions have made a real impact on budget planning and policy. Professor McKay knows that there is significant inequality in Scotland in spite of the efforts that we have already made. Choices in highers and modern apprenticeships, and various types of occupational stereotypes, have worked against women. In the same way, welfare changes such as the bedroom tax work disproportionately against women because they are more likely than men to make use of public services of every kind. Gendered occupational segregation continues, as we know. It is long past time we bust the myth—very few occupations need to be gender specific. Our changes to childcare will allow more women to recognise and fulfil their ambitions. That in turn means that they will contribute more to the overall Scottish economy and help to create new jobs in the process. Cuts in welfare benefits impact disproportionately on women. Why? Because tradition dictates that they tend to be the carers, whether for elderly parents, children, including those with special needs, or a spouse who needs 24-hour care. Of course men take up those challenging roles as well, but not as frequently as women. The Scottish Government has invested £68 million to try to mitigate the impact of these so-called reforms—brought in by Lord Freud, employed by the Labour Party—and to provide support and protection for the most vulnerable in our communities, including through a £33 million Scottish welfare fund, a council tax reduction scheme, support in relation to housing benefit reform and third sector investment to build the capacity of communities and voluntary organisations to respond to the impact of these reforms. There is a great deal more to be done. In an independent Scotland, we can do it; under Westminster rule, we cannot. It is as simple as that. If we want to see a gender-friendly, balanced economy that encourages everyone’s talents outside fixed stereotypes, we must vote yes. Let me make a wee comment on universalism. I believe that Johann Lamont does believe in supporting universalism: universal Tory rule at Westminster; universal austerity; and, under a future Labour Government, as detailed by the shadow Cabinet, universal welfare reform—but maybe that is only an excuse to get Tory votes. If we want to see a fundamental fairness underlying everything that we do, not only economically but socially and in education and career structures, this is our chance to change the assumptions that have governed us for so long. Let us be that shining light towards a new enlightenment. Let us show the world that Scotland can and will again lead the way—the way of the common weal.

I add my thanks to those of my colleagues to Jackie Baillie for bringing this important debate to the chamber, especially at this time of year. Yesterday was international migrants day, and we celebrated the day in the Parliament on Tuesday night when, with the Scottish Refugee Council, Migrants Rights Scotland, Migrant Voice and a number of eminent academics, we debated with Humza Yousaf, the Minister for External Affairs and International Development, the very positive impact that new Scots have had on this land. The warm stories of the welcomes that they received were tinged with the harrowing stories of the treatment that was meted out by the Home Office and the UK Border Agency. Let us get one thing straight: as members have stated, migrants in Scotland contribute far more to our society than they take out—that is a plain fact. Yesterday, when we were celebrating the positives of migration, David Cameron and his anti-EU pals in UKIP were heading to Brussels to tell the EU what to do. How confrontational and nasty can they get? Some people describe UKIP as the tail wagging the coalition dog, but I would describe it as an irksome flea on the tail wagging the dog. We saw how nasty they can get with their go home campaign vans and posters on billboards. What a disgusting exercise. Using the language of the far right in such a campaign is absolutely abhorrent. Today, the Migrant Voice website carried a blog post by Pinar Aksu. Its headline uses one of the tag lines of the Home Office’s campaign: “Is life here hard? Going home is simple.” The post continues: “Once again, here I am—outside the Home Office at Brand Street in Glasgow. This is where I used to come with my family every Monday after school to let UKBA know that we are here and not running away. This is where I witnessed how some people on this planet have no feelings. Their hearts have been replaced with cold stones. They don’t believe you. They don’t listen to you. THEY treat you as a number. By ‘they’ I am referring to those who work for UKBA. If they were part of this world then they could understand the reasons why people seek asylum: Not for fun, but for their safety. It has been 7 years that I have been involved with campaigning for asylum and human rights. Every time I come to Brand Street, I feel different. It brings back memories when I was an asylum seeker and how my family was treated. Nothing but a piece of paper. Sometimes it hurts being here, knowing that this disgusting treatment is continuing. Many families being sent back, many dreams being locked away: trust me UKBA you are not helpful at all. Once again this is why I am here again, standing shoulder to shoulder supporting those that must witness posters saying ‘Go Home’ in Glasgow and London. I find this disgusting and humiliating and I am not alone in thinking this. The Scottish Deputy First Minister Nicola Sturgeon (and others) mentioned how she was unhappy with what was going on, meanwhile the Minister for Immigration, Mark Harper replied back to Ms Sturgeon saying ‘it was for failed asylum seekers to return home easily and with dignity’. I want to clarify something here, why would someone who runs away from a war zone or from any other difficulties want to go back? Why would someone want to leave their homeland and face difficulties in another country? I suppose no one will understand this unless they carry a brain and a heart with them. I only ask for one thing: bin those posters! It is disgusting to see such a thing happening in a country with ‘human rights’. Let me tell you one final thing, no one in this world would want to leave their sweet home out of nowhere and move to another country to be treated like an animal. For those who came up with this clever idea saying, ‘Is life here hard? Going home is simple’, why don’t you go and see if ‘life is hard there’?” To return to Christmas, would the UKBA have turned away Mary and Joseph if they had sought asylum in this country? I wonder. I know that Jackie Baillie will not agree with me on this point, but the only way to move away from the anti-EU, anti-migrant, right-wing danger that is Westminster is to vote yes next year.

Will the cabinet secretary set out the steps that have been taken to ensure that NHS staff are supported and given the opportunity to escalate concerns about risks to the delivery of safe patient care? What further steps will he take locally to ensure that that is the case in NHS Lanarkshire?

There are two distinct but entwined threads in this debate. The first is that men’s violence against women continues to blight our country and to cause immense misery and suffering; it destroys its victims and their families and it lurks like the malevolent Gollum underneath the surface of normal life. The second thread is about justice but more particularly about access to justice; hundreds and perhaps thousands of women in Scotland are being denied the right to see alleged attackers stand trial in court. Abuse of women comes in many guises, and we have heard of many of them today; they range from verbal degradation, rape, beatings, revenge porn and ritual humiliation, to the ultimate evil of murder. I am, with my colleague Malcolm Chisholm, co-convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on men’s violence against women. We have heard a great deal from groups such as Rape Crisis Scotland, Scottish Women’s Aid and Police Scotland about the kinds of evil abuse that certain men enjoy inflicting, mainly on their own partners but sometimes on their relatives or innocent strangers. It is not likely that members in this chamber would think that that happens only to a small minority of women living in very deprived areas of inner cities who fall victim to the Saturday night syndrome of the favourite football team losing the game and the alcoholic binge that usually comes with that, with the anger getting taken out in the privacy of the home. Have such women less right to justice? No, I do not think so. We in Scotland have little idea of how much violence against women takes place. We know that almost 30,000 domestic offences took place between 2011 and 2012—that includes 307 attempted murders and 12 homicides, plus 485 sexual offences—and domestic common assaults made up 14,154 of the total. However, that is just the tip of the iceberg, and those involved directly with victims believe that the reality could be 10 times worse. We know that at least one in five women has suffered domestic abuse, but it might be more like one in three. That is a really scary thought. We are not talking about a small section of society here, because men of all ages and backgrounds inflict abuse. I know from shocking and distressing stories that I have heard—I have heard some of them today—from women to whom I have spoken that marital rape is frequent and that the clichéd “I walked into the wall” story or the “I walked into the cupboard door” story are far more common than we might imagine. Women’s Aid says that together we can change it. That is the crux, because it is only together that we can and must change it. Violence of any kind is wrong, but violence carried out on someone because they are female, physically weaker or can do nothing to hit back is exploitative in an even more extreme way. The law and those who practice it are sometimes viewed by society at large as antiquated, out of touch, resistant to change and restrictive. However, the new Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill is progressive and focused on human rights, and entitlements through the bill for both suspect and victim will improve access to justice. Lord Gill, the Lord President of the Court of Session, said last month that the requirement for corroboration was a “good rule” that was the result of centuries of deliberations by the country’s finest legal and political minds. We used to think that capital punishment and burning witches were sensible, too, but perhaps we have moved on. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice and Lord Carloway argue that the requirement for corroboration is an outdated rule that has failed Scotland, and the Lord Advocate, Frank Mulholland, agrees with that. He has pointed out that in the past two years alone more than 2,800 cases of domestic abuse have been unable to proceed to court because they could not satisfy the requirement for corroboration. Research by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service shows that 268 out of 458—58.5 per cent—of criminal cases over 12 months were dropped after the initial court appearance even though they would have had a reasonable prospect of success had there been no corroboration test.

A further 141 cases were reported to the national sex crimes unit but had not been in court. The situation creates a double negative, in that judges do not see the cases in court and the victims do not get justice. Lord Carloway could find no other criminal justice system that operates like this. An end to this blatant discrimination against abused women, who have the right to justice, will be an important statement that together, as Women’s Aid says, we can change it.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how the written constitution outlined in the white paper on independence would protect and promote equality. (S4O-02690)

As we all know, equality comes in many forms. I take the opportunity to welcome the commitment in the white paper to end detention and to close Dungavel. Given that it is migrants’ rights week next week, can the minister tell us what provisions will be put in place to make refugees and those who seek sanctuary feel welcome in an independent Scotland, as outlined in “Scotland’s Future”?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Scottish Water on its flood prevention plan for Hamilton and surrounding areas. (S4O-02659)

I would like to make the minister aware of an on-going issue with flooding in the Chatelherault and Waterside Gardens area of Hamilton in my constituency. It is a long-term issue that I have pursued the council, Scottish Water and the feuars association to resolve. What action can the minister take to resolve the issue to the satisfaction of my constituents? What is his opinion on meetings that are being held between the council and Scottish Water, from which I have been deliberately excluded?

This is the day. It is our day, Scotland’s day, the day that we can cradle in our arms “Scotland’s Future” and hear the infant cries of a new country. On 18 September 2014, we will dispatch our child off to a new kind of school—one that recognises the worth of every infant and gives her wings to fly. “The greatest gifts you can give your children are the roots of responsibility and the wings of independence”, says Denis Waitely in “The Psychology of Winning: Ten Qualities of a Total Winner”. Perhaps some of my colleagues should read it. In an independent Scotland, with 1,140 hours of free childcare, we will not be clipping any wings. We will be giving children the power to fly with confidence. In the white paper, we have set down the structures to make it work. We are shining a torch on our ambitions and showing everyone what a prosperous, fair and equal society would look like. That prospect excites me. It represent the values that I hold dearest and tells me not only that an independent Scotland can work, but that it will work. That is no vague concept or woolly notion. The 670 pages of the white paper are of intricate detail. Perhaps some people should read them. “Scotland’s Future” is not a quick bedtime read; it is a blueprint for a future and every one of us should study it. Now we can see in concrete, verified terms what we can do as an independent nation, and I am immensely proud to see it projected out to every citizen in Scotland. We can have a space at the world’s tables of power. We can be heard in Europe, at the United Nations and on international matters. We can build a successful economy out of our own resources. We can be a caring and compassionate country. We can be exemplars to the rest of the world. With the power to make all our own decisions, we can prove that we are innovative, thoughtful and strategic long-term thinkers. Above all, we will be able genuinely to reflect the electorate’s demands. They will give us the power to succeed. No longer will the people of Scotland be ruled by Governments in Westminster that they did not elect. Never has the future of our country been so well considered and carefully planned. The white paper is a piece of history. There is a strong argument that it is the most important political document to be produced since our country’s nobles appealed to the Pope in the declaration of Arbroath in 1320. All of us here are included in that history and in making that history, and each of us is honoured to play a part in building the new and liberated Scotland. Is that not an incredible feeling? At this landmark on our journey, we are joined together not only by a common purpose but by a common surge of hope and anticipation. We will bring about the birth of a new heritage of our new Scotland. “Scotland’s Future” is a modern, hard-headed and realistic blueprint of our nation that is ready and waiting to be put into action. In every way, the white paper reflects our values as people and the growing confidence that we have in ourselves. It points us to the new Scotland, which will be built on compassion, equality, tolerance, prosperity and innovation. It is a Scotland that offers every person in this land respect and dignity; which prizes free education and the right to improve ourselves; which generates wealth; and which encourages economic growth. It is a Scotland that treats immigrants with respect, which will close Dungavel and which will end the practice of dawn raids—I am immensely proud that we will do that. We will end the inhumane treatment of those who have exercised their legitimate right to seek asylum. Westminster has diminished many such rights. It has also diminished key aspects of workers’ rights. On independence, we will restore the 90-day consultation period for redundancies that affect 100 or more employees. The right to that was taken away by the Tories, backed by that lot over there—Labour. What will that add up to? A Scotland that is free of the stifling hand of a Westminster Government that says that it wants us on the one hand but ignores our needs on the other. We will be able to dump the policies that have been inflicted on us and which do not reflect our priorities. We will be in charge of our own destiny. We will have a future with our own place in Europe—with at least 11 MEPs instead of the current six, a commissioner and a greater voice in Brussels and Strasbourg to protect and grow our interests there. Europe has been good for smaller member nations. I cannot stand the people in this Parliament who think that it is okay to slag off smaller nations. We have proof that Europe has been good for smaller nations from Ireland, Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia, Lithuania—which currently holds the EU presidency—and Croatia, which joined us only this summer. They are young, independent nations that prove that playing an active part in a global bloc of more than 550 million people is working. I do not notice any of those countries seeking to go back to the old days of being part of a larger big brother. I spoke at the radical independence conference at the weekend. That group has a declaration that sums up the position perfectly. It says that yes “is a hope fashioned from knowledge. We know a better economy is possible because we have seen it in other nations.”

“We know greater equality among citizens is possible because we have seen that in other nations. We know that ending poverty, reviving democracy and respecting our environment are possible because we have seen these things too. And we know how to bring these things to Scotland. We must abandon 30 years of the” Thatcherite “politics of exploitation, the damning, corrosive exploitation that makes a few rich” and “the many lose. We must replace it with the politics of sharing, where we all gain from the riches of our land and the fruits of our labour.” [Interruption.]

“It is a fine Scottish tradition; to find what works, to find out how it works and to make it work better. For centuries Scotland’s ingenuity has been a gift to the world. Now let it be a gift ... to ourselves. Let us gift ourselves an economy ... Look at the forces that stand behind NO. Look at the forces that stand behind YES.” I tell people today to “Choose your side.” We have a solid case. We have the self-belief and the confidence, now let us make it happen.

It was full of socialists—none of you lot was there.

Given that women in Scotland need to worry just as much about the sticky floor as the glass ceiling, what proposals does the white paper set out to increase female participation in the workforce? What impact would those proposals have on the economy of an independent Scotland?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the UK Government on the decision to refuse visas for Chinese teachers working in Scotland through the Confucius hubs system. (S4O-02573)

I commend to the cabinet secretary the work of the Confucius hub at Hamilton Grammar school, and I welcome the successful efforts of this Government to secure the reversal of the UK Government’s initial decision. Does the cabinet secretary agree that this Home Office fiasco, along with all the other ones that we have to put up with in Scotland, underlines precisely why this Parliament should have control of immigration policy as it affects Scotland?

The minister will be aware that I have written to the Prime Minister twice about the impact of the bedroom tax on people who suffer from motor neurone disease. Can the minister give any comfort to MND sufferers—many of whom will have only 14 months to live—who have been told by the Labour-appointed Lord Freud to work longer hours and take in a lodger?

6. To ask the First Minister what the average financial benefit for households is from the council tax freeze. (S4F-01649)

I thank the First Minister for that answer; I am sure that that information provides much-needed relief for families in Scotland who are struggling with the better together parties’ commitments to continue to squeeze their budgets. Can the First Minister take some comfort from the commitment that Labour published last week to support the universal benefits that the SNP Government has protected, or does he think that what Labour says in elections is different from what it says in the chamber?

Scotland’s young workforce has the future of the country in its hands. That may be a bit of a cliché, but I am the mother of a young man who has benefited from an apprenticeship and I can see that his future is rosy. Young people have the potential to be major economic contributors in developing a fairer, more prosperous and more caring society—working for the common weal, if you will. The school, college and university leavers of today have the opportunity to move away from the restrictions brought about by a Westminster government that has little understanding of the challenges that they face and, it seems, even less commitment to doing anything to help our young people tackle and equip themselves to meet those challenges. We know that university is not necessarily the best path for everyone. Employers want young people who understand the importance of basic skills such as team working, respect for colleagues, being able to communicate effectively, understanding the digital economy, and all the essential work skills that go with the responsibility of just having a job in the first place. Those skills for the job will be absorbed because the individual will be well placed to have the commitment to deliver for his or her employer, because that employer has invested in them. Young people recognise that and organisations such as Young Scot and Skills Development Scotland and tools such as the my world of work website are striving to help match employment and apprenticeship opportunities with those basic skills to work. That we now have 25,000-plus apprenticeship opportunities every year for the duration of this parliamentary session and the increased certainty of a job on completion must be recognised as a major step forward. The Wood report consultation examines how best we now need to develop our skills base. We know that, as a Government, we can provide the best possible opportunities to significantly enhance vocational education and pathways for young people in schools through partnerships with third-level institutions. In my previous employment I was a social work learning and development officer and I took people from having no qualifications all the way through to the target of having a social work degree. To see people blossom in that way is absolutely amazing. I place a lot of value on vocational education. Sir Ian Wood sees clearly how we need to shed the notion that if you have not gone to university, you are somehow less valuable. We know that that is not true, but that culture runs through many countries and is far from being a Scotland-only issue. We still fail to recognise that different people with different kinds of skills require different paths to progress. They are not better or worse paths—they are just different. Across the UK as a whole, between May and July this year the unemployment rate for those aged 16 to 24 was running at 21.7 per cent and 960,000 young people were unemployed—up 9,000 on the previous quarter. Worse still, 1.7 million 18 to 24-year-olds were economically inactive—NEETs as they have disparagingly become known: not in employment, education or training. That was an increase of 58,000 on the previous quarter and 65,000 higher than in the same period last year. The overall unemployment rate in the UK for 18 to 24-year-olds is 18.9 per cent, but for 16 and 17-year-olds the rate is 38 per cent. Scottish unemployment has fallen for several months in a row. Youth unemployment remains too high—we have recognised that here today—although it has decreased by 2.7 per cent over the last year and currently stands at 21.6 per cent. The Scottish Government is making an impact and employment here is higher than in any of the other three UK nations, while unemployment is lower than in any of the other three: 57.2 per cent of our young people are employed, against 49.8 per cent in the UK as a whole. If that is the big vision, what about the local one? The trouble with UK-wide statistics—including those that I just gave, which the House of Commons library produced—is that they never tell the whole story. They give no indication of what life is like for someone who is 17 and unemployed and cannot see a future for themselves. In South Lanarkshire, there is a range of support and guidance options that are backed by the Scottish Government and the EU, such as the youth employment Scotland fund and the South Lanarkshire jobs fund, the remit of which is to match employers to young unemployed people—we have heard a lot about how important that is. In June, £800,000 of the £90 million Scottish Government investment package went to South Lanarkshire Council to support 250 jobs for our young people. The unemployment rate among young people runs at 10 per cent, which is a lot lower than the UK average, although it is still too high. I see the challenges that those young people face every day. I have had job fairs across my constituency to remedy and tackle some of the challenges. Such young people are not lazy, uncaring or without ambition—far from it. David Cameron might want to dress them in high-visibility jackets, label their activity as community payback and then deny them jobseekers allowance, but those young people have determination. There is no school or training organisation that any of us has gone into where we have not seen determination and commitment from the young people. Marrying the needs of employers to the available workforce is a two-way process, as Sir Ian Wood recognises. Through his consultation, we have a clearer picture of the positive factors, which concern the overall nature and value of the provision to the young workforce; ways of working; the roles of and role modelling with particular stakeholders; and the forms of provision that work best. One size does not fit all—that can never be the case—but the Government is doing what it can to bridge the gaps. In Lanarkshire, we have suffered the ravages of the blind dismantling of once vibrant industries. Now we need to work even harder to bring in jobs and investment and to ensure that we have the right structures in place for young people to get the training and advice that they need to get into work. We are moving in the right direction. Now we need to accelerate the action and invest further in young people. I look forward to Sir Ian Wood’s final report.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to protect young people using the internet. (S4O-02449)

The minister will be aware of the parliamentary debate that I led a few weeks ago that raised awareness about revenge porn and its devastating impact on people affected. We now have a frightening emerging situation of young people being groomed, threatened and bullied into performing sexual acts or dangerous self-harming on the internet. These images and videos are then being used to blackmail young people into doing more extreme acts, which is driving some young people to consider and even attempt suicide. Does the minister agree that this is a very alarming situation indeed? Does she welcome the advice that the child exploitation and online protection centre released this week saying, “Please tell someone. You are not to blame”?

As a co-convener of the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children, I have seen a great deal of evidence from agencies and individuals who support victims of domestic violence. It sends a shiver of terror down my spine to think that one in five women are victims of domestic violence. Almost 30,000 domestic abuse offences took place in 2011-12, including 307 attempted murders, 12 homicides and 485 sexual offences. Domestic common assaults made up 14,154 of the total offences. I suggest that we are being naive if we refuse to recognise that reality. Just as misogyny and the dismissal of women at work and at home continue to be a reality, so there remains a section of stakeholders who do not welcome changes to the law. It is clear that corroboration is virtually impossible for a woman who is brutally attacked in her home by her partner. She might be raped, battered and humiliated, but how does she prove that when she must have two independent witnesses to uphold her complaint? Violent and abusive partners do not normally carry out their crimes in the view of others, with the possible exception of their children, who might be very young and who would in any event be unable to provide disinterested evidence to a court. Lord Carloway does not suggest that the use of corroboration should be abolished and neither does the bill. Police and prosecutors will seek the best evidence that is available and will—rightly—trust judges and juries to weigh the evidence that is put before them.

No. Lord Carloway could find no other criminal justice system that operates a general requirement for corroboration and there is no evidence to suggest that the rule prevents miscarriages of justice. For victims of abuse, the corroboration requirement inevitably results in fewer genuine complaints reaching the courts. That is not good for our Scottish criminal justice system, which so clearly discriminates against women—who are usually the victims in cases of domestic sexual violence—in following the current codes. Scottish Women’s Aid points out in its submission to the Justice Committee that where domestic abuse cases do not go forward due to technicalities, the removal of the corroboration requirement would allow them to seek redress more readily through the courts. Scottish Women’s Aid adds that that would help to redress the balance where there are “all the hallmarks of exposure to prolonged domestic abuse ... only”

Hear, hear.

Our everyday language is peppered with phrases rooted in the technology that we constantly use. There is a preponderance, though, of fruit: Apple, Orange and BlackBerry. It all sounds rather cosy and friendly, but there is a much blacker selection of terms that we have all become more aware of: online porn, online grooming and cyberbullying. More recently, we have become conscious of revenge porn. Social media and all the photo message apps that go with it mean that an image can go viral in minutes. That is fine and a great idea. It is an ideal way for someone to share their holiday snaps with friends back home or to send family pictures to their children in Australia. I do not imagine that there is anything sinister in the minds of the developers who create the apps. However, in every positive piece of technology there seems to be a built-in backlash, and this time it is revenge porn. A couple, in the privacy of their relationship, may choose to take private pictures or make videos for their own viewing. There is no question of exploitation, assuming that they are both over the age of consent, or of an act that is involuntary or exploitative. However, the couple may break up, and separation can bring out ugly and vengeful emotions. Putting private pictures on display across social networking sites requires a particularly malicious and abusive mindset. Members should make no mistake: revenge porn is every bit as abusive as any other kind of domestic violence. Freedom of speech and freedom to protest cannot be translated into cyber abuse, as some would try to argue. Those actions are exploitative and cruel; they ruin lives and cost people their self-respect, their jobs and, in some cases, their lives. Twitter and Facebook may give us all the right to express an opinion, however bizarre or unpopular it may be, but they give no one the right to post pictures of ex-partners without either their knowledge or consent—it is not a licence to abuse. Personal use of technology in its many forms is very difficult to police. It is so easy to press that button and post that picture, but the sad and tragic tales of those who have been exposed to revenge porn tell us how utterly devastating the effect can be. Victims are humiliated and controlled, just as they are in a physically abusive relationship. Scottish Women’s Aid is to be commended for its innovative campaign against revenge porn. A mini-site within the SWA main website was launched in July. Its purpose is twofold: to reinforce the fact that sharing private moments with a partner is not offensive but making them public without the partner’s knowledge is; and to encourage more victims to come forward and tell their stories so that more people understand what is going on and just how abusive it is. Decades ago, domestic abuse was not talked about or recognised—women walked into doors or fell downstairs. Things have moved on, although sadly there are still people in abusive relationships who are too frightened to come forward. Their confidence has been eaten away by their partners so effectively that many end up convinced that somehow the abuse is all their own fault. It is therefore vital that the new stop revenge porn Scotland site gains the maximum profile. That is why I am having this debate in the chamber.

My friend and colleague Elaine Smith will know that my answer to that is yes. She will not be surprised about that—it is something that we have agreed on for many years. As prevention worker Ellie Hutchinson from Scottish Women’s Aid puts it, “Domestic abuse is about the purpose of such behaviour. It’s about control and humiliation. It’s about power. Like a punch or a kick, the threat of or actual distribution of images is purposeful. It has meaning and intent: to retain and gain power and control.” Members will have heard the argument that women somehow bring abuse upon themselves. It is said that they present themselves to be kicked and abused or even raped, or that it is their own fault that they allowed those pictures to be taken or that they did not leave their partner after the first incident of abuse. That kind of shaming and humiliation feeds perfectly into the mind of the abuser: “She asked for it.” Of course she did not. Trying to force the responsibility on to the victim does not work any more effectively in cyber terms than it does in physical terms. Ellie Hutchinson has seen that issue come up time and again. She says that one of the most consistent questions that women are asked is, “Why did you send or take those pictures?” To me, that is just a variation on the “Why does she stay?” theme, with added shaming around female sexuality. It places all the responsibility on the victim rather than the perpetrator. It keeps his actions hidden and normalises his behaviour. That is not an accident. This is sexism: those victim-blaming statements prevent us from talking about the men who do it, from challenging the websites that host the images and from exploring ways to prevent it. It is up to all of us to speak out against victim blaming and to change the conversation. The question that we really need to be asking—and answering—is not “Why did you do it?” but “Why does he think it’s okay?” Revenge porn is a harmful form of bigotry and sexual harassment. It exposes victims’ sexuality in humiliating ways. Their naked photos appear on slut-shaming sites. Once their naked images are exposed, anonymous strangers send email messages and threaten rape. Some have sent vile messages such as, “First I will rape you, then I will kill you”. Victims internalise these frightening and demeaning messages. I heartily commend Scottish Women’s Aid for fighting revenge porn and making sure that the message is loud and clear: “You did nothing wrong having private moments with a partner. They are wrong for sharing those moments with anyone else without your consent.” Revenge porn is a new crime and it will take time and consultation to work out the best legal response. For the moment, there is a Scottish legal framework that can help victims using existing legislation. Discussions are on-going in the US, where revenge porn is now illegal in New Jersey and the state of California is considering introducing similar legislation. If we work together, this Parliament could consider that approach if it feels that it is appropriate. I urge everyone to look at www.togetherwecanstopit.org, put up their story and their picture, and tell people, “You are not to blame”. I commend the motion to the Parliament.

The UK is currently the fourth most unequal country in the world. Will the First Minister tell us how an independent Scotland will reverse such an iniquitous situation?

I bring thanks from the workers to whom I have spoken in the Hamilton plant, which is in my constituency, for the action that the Scottish Government took within hours of the announcement last week. Will the minister give us an update on Scottish Development International’s work and what it is thinking about? Across the whole company globally, 7,000 workers have been affected by the announcement, and it seems that the Hamilton numbers are disproportionate to the rest of the global market.

12. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to help people into employment. (S4O-02333)

I thank the real cabinet secretary for that answer. To come back to the Philips situation, the team there is facing challenges right now because Westminster has imposed on us a 45-day consultation period. The workers to whom I have spoken have said, “That’s my next month’s mortgage payment,” and they are very worried about having only 45 days in which to go through the process and about the dangers that that poses for the workforce.

As we look on, virtually helpless, we see Iain Duncan Smith and his coalition colleagues damning the most vulnerable to a future of hopelessness and financial misery. While the bankers and Tory donors are bought off with tax dispensations and bonuses, the poor, the sick and the struggling must be made to pay for that. In the post-war years, with the national health service and family allowance coming on stream, there was a belief that Government was beginning to turn around the great divide between rich and poor and north and south. Now, we should look at what has happened in the space of just a few months. Not only has any sort of movement towards equality and a real diminution of child poverty—an issue that the Scottish Parliament has made good efforts to tackle since its instigation—been arrested but the tide has been reversed. It can hardly come as a surprise to the UK Government’s leaders that women and families are disproportionately affected by that Government’s benefit reform programme.

Patrick Harvie makes a relevant point, but the points that I will go on to outline are about the changes in the past few months. I take on board completely what the member says about the past decades, but the changes that I will talk about have happened in the past few months. Last week, a National Children’s Bureau report showed that up to 1.5 million more children are growing up in poor households now than in 1973. That is UK progress for us. We have the freeze on child benefit; the benefit cap; the reduction in the proportion of childcare costs that are covered by working tax credit; the increase in the taper rate for all tax credits; the removal of the baby element of child tax credits; the requirement for lone parents on income support with a youngest child aged five to move to jobseekers allowance; and the abolition of the health in pregnancy grant. That is all before the assault of the bedroom tax on families who have the audacity to give their two children separate rooms or, for those with disabilities, space for special equipment. Those are all attacks on equality for women in our society. As the Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said last week, the Scottish Government is doing all that it can to mitigate the problem using the resources and powers that are available to it. So we have the tale of two Governments and the choice of two futures. We are at a crossroads for our nation. One choice is an SNP Government that is providing an extra £9.2 million towards the new £33 million Scottish welfare fund. That fund has already helped more than 20,000 people and it has the capacity to support about 200,000 people. We should all be promoting that fund with our local authorities. I commend the fact that the welfare fund is being put on a statutory footing. However, our powers are limited. Only with a yes vote can Scotland’s Government set about creating a fair, caring and compassionate welfare system that does not punish those who are sick, poor or vulnerable. Our approach will, I believe, be positive, constructive and supportive, rather than one that implies blame or that labels people as benefit scroungers. Everyone will be working for and will be supported by the Scottish common weal. As colleagues in the Parliament are aware, I have a close and very personal interest in the lives of those who suffer from motor neurone disease. On average, victims of MND live for 14 months from diagnosis. Those sufferers, having been assaulted in 2008 by the work capability assessment, now have to be put through the mill of Department for Work and Pensions welfare benefits assessments, questionnaires and appeals as well as the worry that they might not be able to support themselves financially through such a traumatic time. It seems downright malevolent to force a terminally ill person to go through that, and that is to say nothing of the waste of taxpayers’ money. People with MND do not get better; they get worse and they die, but the Westminster Government believes that, unless someone is likely to die within six months, they are not terminally ill and they might well be considered fit for work—as many MND sufferers have been told—and have their benefits withdrawn. Then there is the bedroom tax. They lose their jobs because they are no longer physically capable of work. They need special adaptations to cope at home. They need kit like a wheelchair or breathing equipment to keep them safe overnight and it all takes up a lot of space in their bedrooms. Not surprisingly, their carers—who are probably their spouses—have to give up their work to look after them and need a second room to catch up on the much-needed sleep that they require to care for the person through the day. For that privilege, the family is expected to pay £12 a week. Lord Freud—members know him: he was employed by the Tories on the other side of the chamber and continued in employment by the Tories on this side of the chamber—said in a letter to me this week that the options that people have “in some cases could include taking in a lodger, finding work or increasing their hours of work.” How disgustingly out of touch he is. Not only that, he directly contradicted his Prime Minister. It does not take a rocket scientist to work out that child poverty and discrimination against the most vulnerable and poorest in our society increase the gap between rich and poor. The no parties need to ask themselves whether they really want to back policies that are designed to militate against the most needy and to reward the wealthiest. With independence comes the responsibility and freedom for Scotland to make its own choices and to introduce policies that do not condemn to social exclusion those who are already struggling. At the last count, we were talking about 80,000 of Scotland’s most vulnerable families. The UK is the fourth most unequal country in the developed world. An independent Scotland would be the fourth most equal, resting alongside other small independent nations such as Norway, Denmark, Sweden and Finland. What does the no campaign have to offer? It offers a continuation of the increasing divergences between the rich, who get richer, and the poor, who get poorer. We have a choice of two futures. I say choose independence and choose a fairer Scotland.

Members will be well aware that I play an active part, with other members, in seeking to improve the lives of young people who have undergone the trauma of trafficking or who have been seeking asylum, and in some cases both. Immigration is a reserved power, so we in Scotland have no real control. The UK Border Agency sees it as being fit and proper that it treats children who are as young as 10 or 11 the same as it handles adults who arrive at its borders. That means lengthy interviews, probably through an interpreter, and—as we have heard—the preparation of a testimonial that they probably do not understand but that is meant to explain why they are seeking asylum. I imagine that those young people have a feeling of complete and utter disorientation. That will not do. The UKBA has got it badly wrong in the past. I cite Dungavel and dawn raids as clear testimony to, and perfect examples of, where the UKBA has got it badly wrong. Westminster needs to re-examine the system and to find a better, fairer and more compassionate approach. The young people are scared and confused about why they are there. They lack the comfort of having a family member beside them, they have few belongings and they do not know what is going to happen next. They must be absolutely terrified. In my opinion, that is beyond Dickensian. It is incontrovertible that we are talking about extremely vulnerable and frightened young people who have been displaced. We need to give them more than an introduction to our fingerprinting service—they are children. They have rights that are enshrined in European and UK law, and we have a duty to uphold and implement those rights. That is why I was pleased to hear that Westminster’s Joint Committee on Human Rights suggested that the Scottish guardianship service be used as a model for England and Wales. The committee’s interesting report on the issue states on page 49: “We welcome the findings from the Scottish Guardianship Service, which demonstrate the value that a guardian can add for unaccompanied asylum seeking and trafficked children. We recommend that the Government commission pilots in England and Wales that builds upon and adapts the model of guardianship trialled in Scotland. The guardian should provide support in relation to the asylum and immigration process, support services and future planning, help children develop wider social networks, and ensure that children’s views are heard”. I could not have said it better myself. I hope that the Westminster Government will take heed of that recommendation. Without independence, we are helpless to change the official UK Border Agency system with its apparent lack of interest in compassion or understanding. The squeeze on time to produce the crucial testimonial barely gives the child time to build any kind of meaningful or trusting relationship with a solicitor, who probably does not even speak their language.

That is a good point, although Liam McArthur will not be surprised to hear that I do not agree with it. Like the Westminster Joint Committee on Human Rights, I believe that Scotland could be the beacon. We could make the difference and, I hope, change the system in the rest of the UK. That is what I strive for. My agenda is positive and is not just about criticising—although, as he will understand, I criticise the UKBA quite a lot. To assume that a child could instantly recover from cataclysmic circumstances that have brought him or her to the UK, and be ready to explain it all cogently and clearly in a couple of weeks, seems to be not just unrealistic but inhumane. I have taken part in interviews with adults who have had to explain their circumstances in extremely difficult terms. That a child should have to do that is unbelievable. What people go through when they relive and retell their stories is indescribable. UKBA is not interested in helping Scotland to be a little more caring and sensitive. The Scottish guardianship service, which is provided so effectively through Aberlour Child Care Trust and the Scottish Refugee Council, is clearly not going to be encouraged by the Border Agency. UKBA refuses even to record interviews with children that are carried out at the guardianship centre, and will accept only those that take place at UKBA, even though that means additional trauma for the interviewee. Recording transcripts are often crucial, later in the decision-making process, for the child’s future. The system is patently unfair and militates against any form of natural justice. The Scottish Government supports a Scotland-based programme that takes the guardianship service forward, which is something that I hope the rest of the UK will consider. It will allow the service to develop its mission to help vulnerable displaced young people, to enable them to have a more positive experience of arriving in a new and alien country than they get in England, for example, and to help them make sense of procedures that are daunting and confusing. All the evidence points to just how helpful the model is. The guardians are able to deal with the enormous complexity of their work because they have the qualifications and skills to do so. They are thoroughly trained, supervised and supported and are committed to the young people whom they work with and for. I commend the guardianship service not only for what it does so well, but for actively pursuing improvements, even though we are at present so restricted in our powers. I hope that the Scottish Government will be able to offer more support for those disadvantaged and often traumatised young people. Human trafficking is not just a developing-country problem; it is a problem for all of Europe. Sometimes it is an in-country problem, as well. The Scottish Government has already pledged to develop the guardian pilot so that young people entering Scotland in that way will have someone whom they can trust and rely on to help their case—not a civil servant, but an advocate who understands and who cares about that child’s future. UKBA does not have the professional skills to offer judgement on child cases. Such assessment needs to be made through child protection panels or similarly professional forums at local social work level. Those people are best placed to respond sensitively and with care. I recommended that action to the Equal Opportunities Committee’s predecessor committee during an inquiry in the previous parliamentary session. Furthermore, as I have told Theresa May, the impending breakup of UKBA looks set to make matters worse rather than better. Far from operating in a more dignified manner, treating all people fairly and humanely, UKBA’s UK-wide organisation will be even more unable to determine the trafficking status of children and young adults.

That is something that needs to be managed from within the local community. I invite everyone to join me when I host refugee week next week—

Thank you.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to people with motor neurone disease. (S4O-02246)

The minister will be aware that June is motor neurone disease awareness month and that families are attending an event in Parliament tonight. The minister mentioned safe and effective care. Will he give us his thoughts on the negative impact on the health and life chances of people with MND when they are forced to deal with the stress of the insidious welfare reforms?

I take this opportunity to thank all the members who signed the motion. It is on an important topic, and I am grateful to the members across the parties who enabled the debate to happen. I give my heartfelt thanks to MND Scotland, especially Susan Webster, Craig Stockton and Bryan Carroll, who I think are in the public gallery today. I thank them and the whole team for the advice, guidance and support that they have given not just to members of the Scottish Parliament but to the people for whom they care. I must also quickly thank Hanna McCulloch at Capability Scotland for the informative briefing that she sent members last night. Members tend to open members’ business debates by saying, “I am delighted to open this debate”, but I am heart sorry to open this debate. I am heart sorry that we have to have this debate; I am heart sorry for the people who have to live with motor neurone disease; and I am heart sorry for the families who must come to terms with such a shocking diagnosis. Members no doubt understand why I am standing here today. I was one of those family members: I had to come to terms with my dad being diagnosed with MND; I was that child who grew up with their dad progressively losing all his motor capability. My mum had three children at home and worked part-time at night so that we could look after him when we were home from school; she went out to work to make ends meet when my dad had to give up his job. I remember both my parents facing the indignity of four bus journeys to get assessed on whether he was bad enough to get sickness allowance. That was four bus journeys for a man who could barely walk and who, by that time, had no power in his arms at all. That was nearly 30 years ago. It is tragic that, 30 years on, people with MND and their families are facing such indignity again. A diagnosis of motor neurone disease is a devastating blow for a family. The last thing they expect is to be put through the mill of Department for Work and Pensions welfare benefits assessments, questionnaires, appeals and the worry that they will not be able to support their families financially through a traumatic time. Can you imagine the roller coaster of emotions that a family will go through at such a testing time? Unfortunately, as a result of insidious welfare reform, that is exactly what is happening to many people with MND and their families. MND Scotland is campaigning to highlight the dreadful impact of current and proposed welfare reform on people with the condition. MND Scotland’s energy should be spent supporting those families, but it has had no option but to join the increasingly loud calls for this horrible policy to be dropped. MND Scotland has published a report called “Time to benefit people with MND”. I emailed the link to all members yesterday and I know that MND Scotland has sent it out, too. MND Scotland wants a few things to happen that will make life easier for people with MND at a stage of their life when life cannot get any harder. First, people with MND should be exempt from the work capability assessment and allocated to the employment and support allowance support group. The charity points out that 100 per cent of people with MND who have been supported by the team at MND Scotland are allocated to that support group. It is a waste of taxpayers’ money to put those people through the highly stressful process of assessment. Secondly, people with MND who are unable to share a bedroom because they need an array of equipment to keep them safe at night, or whose home has been significantly adapted for their needs, should never be subjected to the bedroom tax nor forced to move from that adapted home. Thirdly, people with MND who are currently on higher rates for the mobility and care components of disability living allowance should not be forced to go through reassessment for the personal independence payment, which has only come in this week. It is medically impossible for their illness to improve; they should not be put through those assessments. MND Scotland has sent its report, “Time to benefit people with MND” to MPs and MSPs, including Iain Duncan Smith; Lord Freud, the Minister for Welfare Reform; the Westminster all-party parliamentary group for MND; and the Scottish Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee. I urge all of those people to take the time to read and act on the very small asks that I have just outlined and which that report details. Let us look at some of the real people who are affected. We talk about new policies and sometimes do not realise that they affect real people. For instance, under the old system of incapacity benefit, people with MND were exempt from going through a medical assessment and were awarded the full benefit from the outset. That exemption was removed when incapacity benefit was replaced by employment and support allowance in 2008. Jamie is one of the case studies on the MND website. He is 40 years old, he has MND, and he lives in the north of Scotland with his wife and three-year-old daughter. Jamie was employed as a mechanical technician but had to give up work when his motor function deteriorated and his arms became very weak. That is a picture that I can see very clearly in my mind; it is what happened to my dad. Jamie was assessed for employment and support allowance but he failed the work capability assessment. He was only awarded nine points and was deemed fit to work: how outrageous. He appealed the decision but had to wait one year for his appeal to be heard and was only provided with the basic rate of benefit during that time. From their diagnosis to their untimely death, people with MND live an average of 14 months. Jamie eventually won his appeal at tribunal and was awarded a further 22 points. However, he was put into the work-related activity group, which means that his entitlement to ESA ran out after one year. Yes, we can guess what happened: DWP backdated his money for a year and then took it off him. I turn to the bedroom tax. As people with MND lose their ability to walk, speak, feed themselves or breathe unaided, they come to rely on a wide variety of equipment to assist them in their daily living. Much of that equipment, such as an electric wheelchair, a special medical bed, hoists, breathing equipment and speaking aids, is needed in the bedroom to help the person with MND keep safe during the night. That equipment makes it very difficult for a spouse or a partner to sleep in the same room. Often, the carer will sleep in a second bedroom and catch some much-needed sleep. William, who has MND, and his wife Carol live in the west of Scotland and have two wheelchairs. They have been subjected to the bedroom tax. They will go on the local authority waiting list until a suitably adapted one-bedroom property is found or one is adapted for them. William and Carol should never have to go through that. I do not even have time to go into the personal independence payment but, again, families are being forced to go through the assessment. I could not say this any better than MND Scotland says in its report, so I will just quote it: “We appeal to the UK Government to alleviate some of the burden for people with MND and their families. We urge them to adopt a common sense approach by acknowledging that not only are people with MND unjustly suffering through welfare reform—assessing them for welfare benefits they are clearly entitled to is a waste of taxpayers’ money.” Let this Parliament—our Scottish Parliament—lend its voice to that appeal and urge the United Kingdom Government to have some compassion and think again about the real people involved.

Before I go into the detail of the debate, I pay special tribute to Citizens Advice Scotland and thank it very much for the valuable work that it does in informing us in our role, and the work that it does day in and day out in our communities. I make special mention of Hamilton Citizens Advice Bureau, which has been absolutely fantastic in supporting me in what I do and in supporting my constituents. I also thank the members who signed the motion and allowed it to be debated as members’ business. “This is not just politics. This is people’s lives.” That is what Tracey, a neighbour of Stephanie Bottrill in Solihull, the grandmother who threw herself in front of a lorry on the M6 on Saturday, said about her tragic death. She added that Stephanie would not be the last to die as a result of the bedroom tax. As some newspapers reported, Mrs Bottrill killed herself because she said that she could not afford to live. Her two adult children had left home to set up their own family lives, and she was assessed and told that she must pay £20 a week for her underoccupied home. She had lived in the £320-a-month house for 18 years, but there was no way that she could find the extra £80 a month out of her limited income. Stephanie suffered from a debilitating condition called myasthenia gravis and was far too weak to work. That painful reality is a testament to Westminster’s uncaring Government and to the conviction that is held by David Cameron and George Osborne that if we pull the carpet from under vulnerable people’s feet they will bounce up and join the workforce. It is simply discrimination; it victimises those who do not have the advantages that Messrs Cameron and Osborne have enjoyed. I have to tell Mr Cameron that life in Scotland—or, indeed, in most parts of England and Wales away from the cushy constituencies of the south-east—is not like that. Citizens Advice Scotland’s recent report “Voices from the frontline ... Digital by default” and its follow-up “Offline and left behind: Digital exclusion amongst Scotland's CAB clients”, which was published today, highlight a wide range of real-life suffering that is a direct result of the so-called welfare reform policy. Those real people have, like Mrs Bottrill, been pushed and shoved to the edge because they do not meet the Government’s neatly streamlined criteria. They are already at a disadvantage because of their health outlook, prosperity, career prospects and vulnerability to, for example, drug and alcohol abuse, so the outcome of this Westminster policy is to push them to the limit. Perhaps the hope is that, like the internet, the approach will change lives. Many of us sit on the train tapping into our BlackBerrys and smart phones, checking up on the breaking news, firing off emails or reading information about an event that evening. When we return to our offices, we can access a huge wealth of information and stay up to date with 24-hour news. Citizens Advice Scotland has found that its clients’ personal experiences reveal a technological disadvantage in addition to all the other disadvantages that benefits claimants already endure. Only 53 per cent of Citizens Advice Scotland clients use the internet, just 24 per cent said that they would be able to apply for a benefit on their own with no problem, and a total of 76 per cent said that they would struggle to apply for a benefit online, including 39 per cent who said that they could not apply online at all. Moreover, 72 per cent said that they would struggle to apply for a job online. Perhaps that is not surprising, given that just 55 per cent of Citizens Advice Scotland clients have a computer at home. The internet is by no means a universal service that is available to everyone. The report details evidence that shows how people are already being denied benefits to which they are entitled or are having benefits taken away from them because they cannot access or use the internet. It says: “The UK Government must ensure that citizens are fully supported to access the benefits to which they are entitled in a way which suits their needs, resources and capabilities. In addition, benefit claimants who do not have access to the internet or who are less able to use it to apply for benefits or jobs” online “must not be penalised for this. Rather, we believe that Jobcentres have a key role to play in supporting people to gain skills and find work and that Government more broadly has a duty to support the roll out of internet access.” In November 2012, the UK Government launched its Government digital strategy, which sets out how the Government will transform the way it delivers services to citizens, including moving services online—a change in ethos to what is known as “digital by default”. The strategy came along at the same time as the unprecedented changes to the welfare system which, coupled with at least £18 billion of cuts to the welfare budget, will cause significant upheaval for those who are in receipt of benefits. Citizens Advice Scotland says that it is concerned that a digital-by-default approach to welfare benefits could exclude some of the most vulnerable and marginalised members of society from accessing the very services on which they rely. A more cynical person might suggest that that is yet another useful Westminster mechanism to cut down on the volume and backlog of applications. However, it is a perfect example of the bizarre way in which the Westminster Government looks at its electorate. I am reminded of Nelson looking down his telescope with his blind eye and saying, “I see nothing.” The digital issue is a microcosm that reveals Westminster’s attitude. Only with independence can we give people back their dignity, help and encourage them to access the benefits to which they have a right, and support those who really need that intervention. The wider implications of the so-called benefits reforms are well known to the Parliament, but Citizens Advice Scotland’s report on the matter shows that about £2.5 billion will be taken out of the Scottish economy in the Westminster Government’s lifetime. Invariably, it is the most vulnerable people who will suffer most heavily; for example, disabled people in Scotland stand to lose more than £1 billion, which equates to a 29 per cent cut. Successive British Governments have pushed vulnerable people to the edge in Scotland. With independence, we can do something much better. As we are already doing within our limited powers, we can work to build more within communities instead of slapping on a depersonalised solution for all from above. If we are to make a more equal society a reality in Scotland, we need to do it independently. London solutions might or might not work in London; they do not work in Scotland and they certainly do not work in Solihull.

I commend Unite’s campaign and put on record my personal thanks to Stewart Hume and Greig McArthur, who have given me updates on a daily basis on the campaign and the challenges that they face. I am sure that all members agree that the practice of blacklisting workers, especially—but by no means only—in the construction sector, is reprehensible. The House of Commons report entitled “Blacklisting in Employment: Interim Report”, which was referred to, makes it abundantly clear that this is no occasional word-in-the-ear event, but “a real live conspiracy”, as Mr Findlay’s motion stresses. Our procurement procedures in Government need to take into account the danger of blacklisting companies somehow slipping through the net, and the upcoming procurement reform bill should include a specific provision to ensure that no company that is found guilty of blacklisting can be eligible to tender for any Government contract. I was reassured when the Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said on 27 March this year: “We are totally opposed to blacklisting or the compiling of a blacklist and are developing guidance for public bodies on addressing the issue in future procurement processes and public contracts. We are also considering what measures we can include in the forthcoming Procurement Reform Bill to deal with inappropriate conduct, such as blacklisting, by companies bidding for public contracts in Scotland.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 27 March 2013; S4O-1964.] In a debate on 17 April, she added: “Last but not least, we also need to expect companies that bid for public contracts to demonstrate high standards of ethical conduct or know that they risk being excluded from the market. The practice of blacklisting, failure to comply with tax obligations and other acts of professional misconduct may—and should—in future result in a company being judged as unsuitable to bid. The Government regards blacklisting as wholly unacceptable. My officials have invited trade union representatives, including the Scottish Trades Union Congress, to work with us to develop guidelines for purchasers on how to address that issue when awarding contracts.”—[Official Report, 17 April 2013; c 18646.] Those are very welcome words, and I urge my friends in the trade union movement to take up that offer.

I do not think that that is an unreasonable request, but now that we have the interim report from the House of Commons Scottish Affairs Committee we should await the final report and discuss it. However, I am certainly happy to keep my mind open on that. It is important to stress how good our record is on public procurement. As small and medium-sized enterprises form the backbone of business here, it is absolutely right that 82 per cent of contracts that are advertised on public contracts Scotland are won by small and medium-sized businesses. At Westminster, the equivalent figure is just 14 per cent. Most of the businesses that are involved in the despicable practice of blacklisting are big companies, as we have heard, either in the oil and gas sector or in the construction sector. The Scottish Government is totally opposed to blacklisting. Part of the problem is the systematic secrecy around blacklisting. Companies subscribing to the Consulting Association do not broadcast the information that they compile. The Scottish Affairs Committee’s report makes it clear: “The emphasis throughout was on secrecy, with telephone access to sensitive information restricted to only a few, with lists of names submitted destroyed at the end of each working day and no acknowledgement that such a system existed ... We note that many of the entries on blacklisting files are little more than gossip”— as Neil Findlay has explained. The report goes on to note that people “were blacklisted en masse.” The committee states: “We believe that most of the companies involved are genuine in their regret at having been caught”. I have no doubt—noting the choice of phrase—that they were sorry to be caught, but that is not so say that they are sorry for the lives, homes and families that were ruined as a direct result of their malpractices. The STUC recently passed a motion at its annual congress, welcoming the exposure of “the pernicious illegal practice of the blacklisting of workers.” I support that. Blacklisting companies should be looking over their shoulders all the time. The Government does not want to give contracts to offending companies. Transparency and openness are key. We may never discover the extent of this abhorrent practice or the number of people who have been damaged by it, but let us send a clear message today to those companies that engage in it: “We don’t want your tenders, you won’t get our contracts, and we will seek to prosecute if you are caught”.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent analysis it has carried out on the affordability of pension and social welfare costs in Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4O-02012)

The minister might be aware that the recent research that he referred to estimated that, in South Lanarkshire alone, welfare cuts will total £104 million a year by 2014-15. Given that social welfare is more affordable in Scotland than it is in the UK, does he think that this Parliament would take the same approach to welfare as Westminster?

The Scottish Government provides universal benefits and a decent living wage because we know that social justice, social cohesion and economic success depend on treating people fairly. My colleagues in the Welfare Reform Committee received some very interesting research this week. The study, which was undertaken by the centre for regional economic and social research at Sheffield Hallam University, warns that welfare reforms alone will take more than £1.6 billion a year out of the Scottish economy. That equates to about £480 a year for every adult of working age in Scotland. In Glasgow, the amount rises to £650 a year. Down south, in the Cameron counties such as Hampshire, Berkshire and Cambridgeshire, people will not feel the same pinch. The impact there will be less than £200 a year—hardly a testament to fairness. What happened to the idea of closing the gap between the rich and the poor?

As Alex Neil has just said, we didnae vote for that—absolutely. It is really interesting to listen to the Labour Party in the debate—it would rather come to this chamber and come out with such nonsense than fight austerity. Perhaps that is because its shadow minister, Liam Byrne, said recently that if Labour wins in 2015, it will not reverse austerity. He said: “I’m afraid that as part of Ed’s zero-based spending review”— what does “zero-based spending review” mean? Zero for pensioners, zero for students, zero for the vulnerable, zero for the sick and zero for the unemployed. That is what Labour has to offer Scotland—zero. What happened to the concept of lifting more and more children out of poverty? What happened to the belief in a fairer and more equal society? The concept of universality is the keystone of equality. To paraphrase George Orwell’s famous statement from “Animal Farm”, all men are created equal but some are more equal than others, while women are much more unequal. We live under an illusion that somehow the glass ceiling has been smashed and that women are treated equally, but that is not the reality for women in Scotland. They are significantly lower paid than their male peers. In spite of equality legislation, they are still paid about 11.9 per cent less than men who are doing the same job. The Government is working hard to close that gap, but many of the reasons for it are beyond our reach as yet. It is women who take most of the responsibility for children, and most single-parent families are led by women, so it is no surprise that women are more likely than men to be living in poverty. Poverty is about much more than a lack of income; it is about a lack of opportunity. Evidence shows that growing up in poverty can have a profound and lasting impact on children’s outcomes. We have worked hard in Scotland to lift more children out of poverty. Now the Cameron coalition, supported by its better together buddies, wants to reverse that success. By withdrawing universal benefits such as child benefit—the one payment that a mother could count on getting herself—Westminster is consciously undermining the future for a generation of children born into poorer families and those guys in Labour remain silent on it. We cannot continue to be powerless over decisions that concern the most disadvantaged people in our society. It is only independence that will allow us to make the best judgments, in Scotland, for the people of Scotland. Constituents are lining up at my door. Each one has a unique story to tell; each one is suffering because of decisions made by consecutive Governments at Westminster that have completely failed to understand the Scottish environment. Universality lies at the centre of equality. Introducing hierarchies of means testing and discretionary rules about a spare bedroom just reinforces that great divide. Who suffers most? The already disadvantaged—the lone parents, the children, the elderly, those who cannot find work, the chronically ill and the disabled. David Cameron says that he wants to make work pay, but he is even attacking those who work with the support of the disability living allowance. In the areas that we control, the Scottish Government has put equality right at the heart of its agenda. We provide healthcare that is free at the point of delivery and is not threatened by continuing privatisation—it is also delivering a consistently better service to everyone in Scotland in comparison with the service provided elsewhere in the UK—because we control that budget. We have universal free prescriptions, because we know that such services help to keep people out of hospital. The Scottish Government does not expect people to pay for being ill. We have free eye tests and free dental checks for children, because we see the value of early intervention and because we have control of that budget. We also have free education and no tuition fees at university, because we control that budget. We have frozen council tax and made up the 10 per cent reduction in council tax benefit that David Cameron introduced, because we control that budget. We believe that older people should be treated with dignity and respect and enabled to enjoy an independent old age. That is why we support universal free personal care for the elderly and free bus passes for them. Universal services should be not a benefit but a right, and equal treatment should be given to all by all. Only with a yes vote will we open up those choices. That will allow the people of Scotland to create a fairer society. I look forward to the day when we create that fairer society—that just Scotland—that we know is intrinsic to our values, which are Scottish values. I support the motion in the cabinet secretary’s name.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to organisations that use drama to raise awareness of social issues. (S4O-01974)

It was indeed. The cabinet secretary will be aware that, at 6 o’clock tonight in the garden lobby, I am hosting the first ever live performance outside Hamilton of the street project. The street uses hard-hitting and immersive theatre to teach young people about the potentially serious and dangerous consequences of actions that are all too common in their environments and backgrounds. It is designed to challenge those who dare to take part in a way that has never been done before using gritty, hard-hitting theatre and top-quality youth work. The street takes theatre in education to a new level. Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating everyone at the street, especially the young people involved, on the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities award that they recently won, and will she offer whatever support she can to that worthwhile project?

3. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government is using its international development fund to support Malawi. (S4F-01275)

This week, I have had the great privilege of spending time with the hon Albert Thindwa MP, my Malawian parliamentary pair. One of his priorities is education, especially for girls. Given that extreme poverty in countries such as Malawi impacts on women and girls more severely than men and given that the majority of the world’s poor are female, can the First Minister confirm that the Scottish Government’s action on international development will reflect that?

At present, there are more than 200 nuclear bombs in Scotland. Most of them are on Trident submarines operating from Faslane, 25 miles from the centre of Glasgow. That is almost enough bombs to wipe out humanity. In 2007, the UK Government said that building a replacement for Trident would cost £20 billion and that the running costs would be £1.5 billion a year for 30 years. That gives a minimum of £65 billion. What else could we spend that £65 billion on? Trident is economically inept, morally repugnant and spiritually bereft. The presence of these weapons in Scotland’s waters is an insult to the people of Scotland. It is an insult to all of us who believe that peace is preserved by diplomacy before war and by compassion before coercion. It is an insult to all of us who believe in spending public money more wisely. I am not a pacifist, but I recognise the impotence, vanity and sheer waste in a weapon such as Trident. It cannot be a defensive weapon, and we are promised that it will never be used in aggression, so what exactly is its purpose? I would rather be a citizen of a nation that looks to persuade and co-operate rather than bully and cajole, and I would rather be that citizen safe in the knowledge that my country and my world were free of weapons of mass destruction. I was saddened when Labour turned its back on disarmament and fell in love with the bomb. I was saddened when a Labour Government in London decided to renew Trident at a time when Paul Sinclair and Iain Gray were special advisers to that Blair Government. That was bad enough, but we discovered on Monday that Labour wants to do it on the cheap. Not only would it send these monstrous weapons on patrol around the world; Labour wants sailors to go to sea in substandard equipment carrying the world’s most dangerous cargo. We know enough about Labour’s record of sending people into harm’s way with substandard equipment from its days of waging war in Iraq. It could be even worse if the submarines are unsuitable. The Ministry of Defence told us in January that Trident is too dangerous to be stored in England—so that is why it is in Scotland. The final decision has been delayed by the Westminster Government until after the independence referendum. That means that Scotland might save the UK from itself, by voting yes and removing the option. However, there is no way of telling what people who want to keep these horrific packages of death would do—they might want to foist them on an English city, which is just as abhorrent for me.

I have heard enough from better together today. The sheer inhumanity of spending billions of pounds on buying and running these things while forcing people out of their houses by cutting their benefits is breathtaking. I cannot believe that a single member of the Parliament would sanction that, and I hope that I am proved right. I make a plea to members. If they are spared long enough to die in their old age, what do they want to tell their children and grandchildren their legacy is? What do they want their political legacy to be? Will they be content to say that they supported another generation of immoral monsters lurking on our west coast? Will they be happy to have spent yet more public money on unusable, unthinkable and outdated carriers of multiple death? Will they be able to look back with a clear conscience and say that, at a time of restricted public spending, they were content to spend that money on weapons rather than welfare, on death machines rather than health machines and on poison rather than people? Can they look their future selves in the eye and say, “Yes, those are my priorities.” I am proud to say that I will put people first, I will put health first and I will put welfare first. Labour seems to have developed an obsession with squirrels lately.

Look—there’s a squirrel! However, that obsession is better than its obsession with war and weapons of mass destruction. I would rather focus on removing these weapons from Scottish waters. Labour abstained on the vote on the debate on the Iraq war yesterday and supported the Tories in taking more money from benefit claimants in London. Need I mention workfare? I only hope that a tiny remnant of principle remains and that we will see an echo of the memory of the once-proud Labour principle of nuclear disarmament. Labour’s principles are threadbare now. Labour members are barely distinguishable from their Tory colleagues in the better together campaign. Defence may be a reserved issue under the strict legal terms of the Scotland Act 1998, but morality, decency and common sense are not. We have a moral duty to oppose that which we see as a waste of national resources. We also have a duty, which was engaged in our name in 1960, to seek complete nuclear disarmament. Whether like me people see nuclear weapons as immoral and illegal under international law, or not, we each have a duty to seek their removal. The case against nuclear weapons covers morality, public expenditure, legality and the imperative of treaties that were signed in our name, to say nothing of the waste of having our armed services holding weapons that cannot be used. We have the opportunity today to make it clear that we believe that nuclear weapons have no place in Scotland and no place in our world, and we should take that opportunity and vote for the Government’s motion at 5 o’clock.

Will the member give way on the human rights point?

I thank Johann Lamont for giving way on that point. I do not doubt for a second her commitment to human rights. However, she said that action was supported with the best of motives. If the motive for regime change concerned human rights, why is there harassment on the street, restriction of movement, sexual assault, domestic violence and the new Iraqi penal code, which allows husbands to discipline their wives by any means? The poorest women and girls are being exposed to trafficking. That is Iraq today and that is not what I expect you to support, Ms Lamont.

I congratulate my friend and colleague Bob Doris on securing this timely and important debate in the year in which we celebrate the bicentenary of the birth of Dr David Livingstone. Members will be aware that the subject is close to my heart. I think that David Livingstone gave much more to the world than he took out. When I was a child growing up in the east end of Glasgow, I was treated to a school visit to the David Livingstone centre in Blantyre. The visit triggered a lifelong interest in the life and work of that remarkable man. The search for the source of the Nile fascinated me and led to dreams of sailing the Nile all the way to the pyramids. A few years ago I made that journey with my sons. We sailed from Luxor to Aswan and we visited the pyramids. The wee lassie fae Easterhouse realised her dream. I have had the great pleasure of visiting Malawi, which is a fantastic and beautiful country. I wish Malawi’s people well with their celebrations, too. We had a great adventure, which I think that I will always remember. When Dr Livingstone decided to travel to Africa, I wonder whether he thought about the dangers that the adventure would present, the plants and animals that he would see and the different people that he would meet. I wonder whether he thought that, 200 years later, we would revere him and celebrate his remarkable life and work. One thing that I remember about Livingstone is the fact that he wrote about the horror of people trafficking and the slave trade in his many letters, diaries and journals, some of which I have had the great privilege of seeing at first hand at the visitor centre. I know from my involvement in the cross-party group on human trafficking that that is an issue that, sadly, we still face today. Livingstone had a great spirit, and it is that spirit—the spirit of equality, fairness and justice—that took him to Africa in 1840. In a letter to the editor of the New York Herald, he wrote: “And if my disclosures regarding the terrible Ujijian slavery should lead to the suppression of the East Coast slave trade, I shall regard that as a greater matter by far than the discovery of all the Nile sources together.” What a powerful reason for writing to newspapers and raising awareness of the inhumanity of the slave trade. Livingstone is remembered extremely fondly in Malawi. I did not go anywhere where there were schoolchildren who did not know who he was or adults who could not talk about what he brought their country. He is remembered in Malawi not just for his many endeavours to end the trade in human beings, but as someone who brought education and medicine. Anyone from Scotland who visits a school in Malawi will find the education system very familiar. I believe that the things that Livingstone fought for are worth fighting for, but things that are worth fighting for are never easy to attain. Livingstone said: “If you have men who will only come if they know there is a good road, I don’t want them. I want men who will come if there is no road at all.” I think that women would have joined him. Over the course of his first 12 years in Africa, he developed an anger about slavery and even refused to follow the same paths as the slave traders. He wrote: “it is so undesirable to travel in a path once trodden by slave-traders that I preferred to find out another line of march.” The David Livingstone Centre is a jewel in Lanarkshire’s crown. I am delighted to see that the local councillor, Bert Thomson, is in the gallery, and I am delighted that future generations of Scots and visitors from across the world will continue to be able to learn about and gain inspiration from Livingstone’s life and legacy at the centre, which I was treated to visiting as a child. For that reason, I put my heart and soul into securing the centre’s future when it was under threat a few years ago. We managed to do that through a lot of joint work and great work by the staff. I am delighted that the centre has been given museum status. That has been a long time coming—it should have happened a long time ago—but we are very grateful that it has now happened. I am also delighted that the Scottish Government has committed to celebrating Livingstone’s 200th anniversary. We should not forget the roles that people played in forging Scotland’s place in the world. Today’s debate and the events of the rest of the month will be a very fitting legacy.

It is my great pleasure to lead this debate on an effective and simple way to ensure that Scotland is recognised as one of the greatest places on this earth to visit. If you visit from abroad or live here, #Scotlandhour is the place to go to get positive and at times very local information about things to do, see and eat in Scotland. We all know that the Scotland brand is very powerful, and that and a love for Scotland brought together the group that came up with #Scotlandhour. Created by Douglas Baird in August 2011, #Scotlandhour was the first time that Twitter had been used to promote a destination in that way, and it is refreshing and inspiring. It gives up-to-date, factual information about Scotland and, at times, lovely, quirky pointers for travellers. Douglas Baird was joined by Mark Caplin, who I am delighted to say is a general manager at the Holiday Inn Express hotel in Hamilton, in my constituency; Fiona Drane, director of Bright Light Marketing, which is an agency that works to get business noticed; Susan McNaughton, who is owner of Sandcastle Holidays and now works with social media to promote festivals and events around the Borders and Fife; and Aileen Lamb, who is a tourism manager with Scottish Enterprise and has been helping the visit St Andrews—a place very close to my heart—destination group to develop its programme. I am delighted to invite the #Scotlandhour team to the public gallery. It has been tweeting all morning about coming along, so the Scottish Parliament has had some of the team’s input to its network on what is good to visit in Scotland. That group of people just decided that they could provide a great service to travellers to Scotland and boost our tourism trade—they did not do it for any other reason. Rather than wait for someone else to do it, they just got on and did it. That is the type of innovation and imagination that Scotland is pretty famous for. The last #Scotlandhour tweet chat had an audience of 596,000 people. That is a huge audience and, as #Scotlandhour says, it got all that advertising for free. It is worth looking at and participating in the tweets during the monthly hour of dedicated chat on the last Wednesday of each month. On top of those tweet chats, #Scotlandhour is building up its website—which, unsurprisingly, is http://www.scotlandhour.com/—to make an excellent resource for people who are considering visiting Scotland or to give those who are already coming the inside information on the very best things that our fine country offers. The #Scotlandhour team are doing that not with any backing or sponsorship, but just for the greater good of the tourism industry in our country, which is very commendable. One of the #Scotlandhour links tells us that there are 23 reasons to visit Scotland in 2013. I think that there are many, many good reasons to visit Scotland, but here are some of the 23 that the InsiderScotland website lists: our “coast with the most”; our golf, including Gleneagles and the Ryder Cup; our whisky—in small measures; our adventure sports; our prehistory; Scotland’s fantastic food, to which all of us in the chamber are testament; our Celtic culture, reflected for example in Celtic Connections and Highland games; and our football. I am not a huge football fan, but I know that many are and have those memories of the Scotland team managing to clutch disaster from the jaws of victory. We have the west Highland line—I have had the great pleasure of being on that steam train; fascinating wildlife, which is a great draw for photographers and others from around the world; and we have our seven cities, and it is worth mentioning them all—Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness, Stirling and our new city of Perth. Scotland’s festivals are mentioned, including Celtic Connections and the Edinburgh festival, which is the biggest arts festival on the planet. Our world-class engineering is on the list. Scottish engineering is famous around the world and highlights range from the Forth bridge to the jaw-dropping Falkirk wheel. We have our mountains, and I am a committed mountain climber myself although I do not get as much opportunity these days. However, our mountains inspire us and I do not think that anyone has driven through Glen Coe without the hairs on the back of their neck standing up. Our tartan—the fabric of Scotland—is on the list, as something that shows how colourful and intertwined we all are. Kilts are also mentioned—we like a man in a kilt, as well as ladies in tartan tights, which I have been known to wear in the chamber. Our monsters are on the list, and we have many of them, not just in the chamber but in our lochs and our forests. We have our music, from Big Country to Simple Minds to Franz Ferdinand and Belle and Sebastian, as well as Rod Stewart, who would like to be Scottish but, perhaps mercifully, is not. We welcome his interest anyway. Our literary talents make the list. Scotland overflows with talent, from the writer of “Auld Lang Syne”, Robert Burns—whom we have just celebrated—to Sir Walter Scott, Irvine Welsh and Alasdair Gray. Scotland’s world heritage is mentioned. We have five impressive United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization world heritage sites. Those include Edinburgh’s old and new towns, Orkney’s prehistoric sites, the Antonine wall, St Kilda and—local to me—New Lanark. We also have the fantastic movie “Brave”, which shows Scotland at its best. There is also hogmanay. We know how to party in Scotland and we should always remember that we like to do that partying with visitors from abroad. We love to have people here, and we have our Christmas lights celebrations across Edinburgh, Glasgow and other cities. At 23 on the list is the year of natural Scotland. The Scottish Government and VisitScotland have designated 2013 as the year of natural Scotland to celebrate this unique country of 283 mountains over 3,000ft, 800 islands and beautiful and bountiful wildlife, from sea eagles to killer whales. I have decided to increase the list from 23 to 25. At 24 are the fantastic areas you can visit in Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse. Those include Low Parks museum, walks under ancient oaks at Chatelherault, a visit to Morgan glen or a trip to the beautiful covenanters church in the stunning village of Dalserf, all rounded off with an ice cream from award winners Equi's in Hamilton. I extended the list to 25, because it would not be complete without a fantastic visit to our very own Scottish Parliament. I ask that we all congratulate Dougie, Mark, Fiona, Susan, Aileen and Lesley for having the initiative to use social media to promote our land. I believe that others across the United Kingdom and beyond are now copying this great initiative. Our land—our Scotland—is better for the imagination and drive of the #Scotlandhour team. We wish them well and look forward to 27 March, when we will all be tweeting about Scotland’s playgrounds, activities, outdoors and sports. Given that the Commonwealth Games and the Ryder Cup come next year, the topic is very relevant to encouraging people to come and visit Scotland. I ask members to remember #Scotland hour, and I move the motion in my name.

This is the second time that I have stood here as convener of the European and External Relations Committee to present to members the issues that are likely to dominate the work programme of the Parliament’s committees for 2013. Before I go into the substantive areas of the committee’s work, I offer an apology to my colleagues on the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, which because of an administrative error was not consulted in time for its EU priorities to be included in our report. I understand that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee is due to consider its priorities at its meeting tomorrow morning. Once they are agreed, the European and External Relations Committee will consider them separately. I have asked the clerks to review their procedures to ensure that the administrative error never happens again. Before I look at some of the priorities in more detail, I thought that it might be useful to cast our eyes back over the previous year. At almost all the meetings of the European and External Relations Committee, we have surveyed and discussed the unfolding crisis in the euro zone. We have watched as banks and, indeed, countries have been bailed out, Governments have fallen and the people of Europe have taken to the streets to protest. It is a chilling reminder of the situation that, in parts of Europe, particularly in countries such as Spain, youth unemployment has risen to 58 per cent. I bring that to members’ attention because it is a reminder of the stakes at play in Europe and the challenges facing us as the year goes on. My committee will continue to engage with the issues and to keep a close eye on what is happening and the impact on Scotland. My committee has also taken an active interest in the machinations surrounding the settlement of the European Union budget—the so-called multi-annual financial framework. As members will know, the European Council has already secured agreement among its members for a cut in overall funding for the years 2014 to 2020, the first such cut in the European Union’s history. The figure now on the table is €960 billion, which is 1 per cent of EU gross national income and a fall of 0.12 per cent from the previous budget. My committee has already raised concerns about the implications of several of the cuts, not least those to the budget for connecting Europe, which covers broadband and which has experienced an 86 per cent cut. That money matters to rural Scotland, which is obviously a huge issue for committee members who represent rural areas. As we know, the Deputy First Minister has already alerted us to what the overall reductions could mean for Scotland in our European structural funds budget. The only point that I note at this juncture is that although the figure may have been agreed by the Council of Ministers, it has not yet been considered by the European Parliament. As we in this chamber know, Parliaments can make a difference. The next point to highlight is that, since I last stood here, some issues have made progress under the current Commission mandate. For example, the negotiations around the common fisheries policy, of which I am sure we will hear more, are nearing their end and it looks like discards will soon become a thing of the past; and negotiations on the common agricultural policy are also in their endgame. When I spoke in this role in the chamber last year, I repeated the near truism that we have to get in early to have influence. This year, I remind members that the Barroso Commission has only one year left of its mandate. The declared ambition of President Barroso is to secure agreement on all outstanding dossiers by early 2014, which is a challenging ambition indeed. That will set a higher challenge for members here, since they will have less time in which to exert influence over the content of those dossiers. I urge all members to use their influence as well as they can. An additional challenge to members is to indulge in some blue-sky thinking on what the priorities should be for the Commission that will take up office in 2014. Scotland has already led the way in so many areas: fisheries management, renewable energy and research and development. How can we ensure that the lessons from those initiatives help to guide the incoming commissioners’ determination of their future priorities? We should all ask that question over the next year. My committee will take an active role in ensuring that the ideas and initiatives of this Parliament’s committees are heard and heeded in Brussels. I come to priorities for the year ahead. My committee is already midway into its inquiry into teaching foreign languages in primary schools. Members of the committee have been visiting schools the length and breadth of the country, speaking to teachers, parents and, most importantly, pupils. I speak for all my committee members when I say that it has been an extraordinary experience. I have no doubt that we have witnessed in action some of our country’s future leaders, captains of industry and maybe even members of the European Parliament. We will draw our inquiry to a close in early May with a major event in this Parliament to celebrate Europe day. I turn to the European and External Relations Committee’s engagement across the Parliament. Although the committee may be the Scottish Parliament’s lead committee on EU issues, in fact all Scottish Parliament committees are European committees. It is estimated that upwards of two thirds of legislation that passes through this Parliament began its life in Brussels. The deliberations that have led to this debate are not a one-off. EU issues—Parliament receives notification of up to 20 such issues per week—are on-going. I am just glad that the clerks have a very good system for filtering them, otherwise we would spend a lot more time in committee. The committee has worked with its sister committees in London—including the House of Lords committee—Belfast and Wales. We have deliberated on issues of subsidiarity and proportionality in relation to upcoming EU legislation, and we always try to ensure that legislation that emanates from Brussels is fit for purpose. In the past year alone, the Scottish Parliament’s committees have dealt with seven issues of subsidiarity that affect Scotland, ranging from alternative fuels infrastructure, which is currently before the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, to food for deprived people, which was addressed by the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. So what happens next? It will be important as we conclude the debate today to continue to prioritise our engagement with the European Union. It would be too easy at this late stage in the Barroso mandate to lay down our tools—I suggest that we do not—having seen so many of the dossiers all but complete their legislative journey. However, as our fishermen will often say, sometimes the greatest challenge is getting the boat into port. We must remain active and vigilant until each of the dossiers that affect the people of Scotland have been safely berthed. I move, That the Parliament notes the European and External Relations Committee’s 1st Report, 2013 (Session 4): The EU priorities of the Committees of the Scottish Parliament (SP Paper 271).

1. To ask the Scottish Government what implications the agreement on the European Union financial framework for 2014 to 2020 has for the allocation of structural funds in Scotland. (S4T-00250)

That is concerning indeed. Will the Deputy First Minister confirm when the allocation formula was calculated and whether her devolved counterparts share her concerns? What prospects are there for getting an improved deal?

Will the Deputy First Minister give an insight into the agreements that were reached by other member states and whether they have secured different deals?

I warmly welcome the Scottish Government’s positive and progressive work towards Scotland’s national action plan for human rights. The action plan is a key recommendation from the UN and is championed by the Scottish Human Rights Commission. Human rights are commonly understood as “inalienable fundamental rights to which a person is inherently entitled simply because she or he is a human being.” Human rights are thus conceived as universal, being applicable everywhere, and egalitarian, the same for everyone. Those rights may exist as natural rights or as legal rights in both national and international law. The doctrine of human rights—in international practice, within international law, in global and regional institutions, in the policies of states and in the activities of non-governmental organisations—has been a cornerstone of public policy around the world. “Promoting and respecting” human rights are important aspects to a rights-based nation and a rights-based constitution. I hope that my friend and colleague the minister will agree with me that the onus is on the Government also to fulfil, and on the Parliament to oversee and ensure the fulfilment of a human rights-based society. The requirement is for states to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights that are contained in the treaties that they have ratified. That raises the question of what needs to be fulfilled and how we could achieve it. The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is one aspect for consideration. Those rights include, in article 11.1, “an adequate standard of living ... and ... the continuous improvement of living conditions”. Article 12.1 includes the right of everyone to “the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health” and article 15.1 includes “the right of everyone ... to take part in cultural life”. Article 6.1 includes “the right to work” and free choice of employment and “the right ... to social security” is covered in article 9. It is possible that the Scottish Government and the Parliament could be called upon to inform people of all their human rights under international law, including their economic, social and cultural rights; formally and publicly recognise poverty as a violation of human rights; step up the campaign to eradicate the current stigma surrounding being poor, particularly around being on benefits, by setting it within a rights-based framework and the proper language; and commit to a human rights-based framework of policy development and impact monitoring that recognises the full range of human rights that the Scottish population is legally entitled to—including under international law—which includes the economic, social and cultural rights that I have just mentioned. I ask the Scottish Government to consider poverty as a violation of human rights, taking into account our health record and, in some cases, our increasing poverty. The battle with welfare reform and austerity, which is being paid for by the poor, the sick and the vulnerable, is a woeful insight into what the future could hold for us all. Universal and egalitarian free prescriptions, free education and free healthcare go some way towards tackling that poverty. I also ask the Scottish Government to highlight the deliberate refusal of UK Governments of all colours to incorporate the covenant into domestic law as they were and are committed to do. That comes on the back of William Hague’s fresh start in Europe paper, which rips us out of the EU social chapter even though that has at its heart rights that protect pensions and equal pay, the working time directive and gender and disability protection in the workplace. According to the Department for Work and Pensions’ own figures, households with the lowest incomes will be the most affected and will have the highest average change. Some 83 per cent of those households are in the bottom three deciles. They are the ones that are affected. I believe that the poorest will pay for austerity. That is not acceptable and it is a violation of human rights. I believe that Scotland can be a beacon in the family of nations. I believe that Scotland has a universal and egalitarian outlook, as explained in the description of human rights.

I believe that, with a rights-based constitution, starting with an action plan and working with our partners such as the Scottish Human Rights Commission and others across Scottish society and academia, we can and will build a progressive and a fairer nation.

Family allowances were one of Beveridge’s three assumptions about what was needed to make the social security system workable; the others were a national health service free at the point of need—how innovative—and an avoidance of mass unemployment. Five shillings per week were given for each child after the first, and the allowance was the legal entitlement of the mother rather than the father. The reason that child benefit was paid to the woman was to ensure that the money was spent directly on the child. According to the campaigning groups the Fawcett Society and the Women’s Budget Group, more than 70 per cent of the £18 billion in cuts to social security and welfare fall on women. One fifth of the female wage consists of benefits to compensate, for instance, for the low wages associated with female-dominated sectors such as care and retail, whereas benefits make up only one tenth of the male wage. Child benefit changes will actually increase dependency of women on men. Removing child benefit from families in which one earner pays higher-rate tax impacts almost 100 per cent on women and indirectly on their children. The UK Government’s proposals seem to reflect outdated prejudices, as they give the impression that its goal is a world of breadwinning men and homemaking wives. We now have a situation in which stay-at-home motherhood is viewed in distinctly pejorative terms by UK coalition politicians. How else can we explain the withdrawal of universal child benefit, with the promise instead of a childcare tax break whereby people will be forced to hand over the baby to the child minder, which they cannot afford, to make them more economically viable? Currently, parents in the UK contribute 33 per cent of their total net household income to childcare, whereas the figure is 11 per cent in France and 4 per cent in Belgium. Taking the cuts to childcare and the cap on in-work benefits together with the ludicrous plan to rip Scotland out of the European Union’s social chapter, we are seeing the biggest attacks on the rights of women since before the suffrage movement hailed victory with the right to vote in the 1928 act. Burns said: “While quacks of State must each produce his plan, And even children lisp the Rights of Man; Amid this mighty fuss just let me mention, The Rights of Woman merit some attention.” The EU’s social chapter gives a woman the right to maternity leave, the right to equal pay, the right to a pension and the right to protections in her workplace. Following the official figures released by the Office for National Statistics in December 2012, analysis shows that Britain is now the most unequal country in Europe. What an achievement. I hope that the UK Government is proud of such an accolade. It is a lesser-known fact that there has never been an equality impact assessment of the welfare reforms, in which child benefit reform is included. What a disgrace. No thought or attention has been given to how damaging the reforms are or to whom. No thought or attention has been given to the fact that the biggest losers are low-paid women and their families. Let us take the example of a woman who, for many reasons, might find herself on her own with her children. She listens to the Government, which tells her that she has to work, and builds herself a career, but around 40 per cent of her earnings go on childcare. If she earns £19,869 a year, she will lose £9.32 per week. That cash could be used to pay for at least two family meals, send a child on a school trip or, depending on how many hours are needed, pay for some after-school care. Parents have to make such choices every day of the week, but the UK Government could not be bothered to pay those women some attention. Let us say that the woman works hard, gets a better job, works her way up to a senior level and lands a job in which she earns around 60 grand a year. Just as she is feeling that she has made it in a world where it is difficult for women to reach the heady heights of such senior levels, the UK Government says to her, “We need your help to sort out the mess we made of the economy”. The child benefit on which she has depended to pay for school trips, after-school care or other childcare will be removed, but her next-door neighbours, who each earn £49,000 a year, will keep theirs. How can that be fair? How can anyone say that it is okay for her neighbours to earn a combined wage of £98,000 but it is not okay for her to earn £60,000 on her own? Let us not forget that it was Tony Blair as Prime Minister who introduced the welfare reforms agenda. According to the Child Poverty Action Group, under his plans, which are being realised by the Tories at Westminster, another 85,000 children in Scotland alone—1 million across the UK—will be plunged into poverty over the next few years. The Labour Party sits there with its synthetic outrage about how far its better together pals are going when, in fact, it would have done exactly the same thing. I wonder whether it is a requirement—or indeed a training need—for Labour members to take a course in revisionism. History seems to start only on the day that Labour comes to power and ends on the day that it leaves power. Labour are the great revisionists. The inequality that I have described is what many Scottish women will experience for several years to come. They will disproportionately forfeit prospects, employment, pay and pensions. That is an abrogation of the social contract between citizen and Government, it represents a loss to the economy and, ultimately, it will exact a high price from us all—a price that we should not have to pay. The unionists laughed at the misfortune of independent Iceland. They are not laughing now. Independent Iceland jailed its bankers, bailed out its people and increased child benefit at a most difficult time. Should Scotland be an independent nation? Yes, it should.

Last week, the Child Poverty Action Group said that the Westminster Government’s policies—and, let us not forget, a welfare reform policy that was started by Labour—would result in a staggering 1 million more children being dragged below the poverty line by 2020. On a simple population share, that means 85,000 Scottish children being pushed into poverty by a Government that we did not vote for. Does the First Minister agree that the only way to protect those children is independence, and that we really are not better together?

I add my congratulations to Malcolm Chisholm on securing the debate. I commend him for the long, unstinting and committed support that he has given to the issue. He referred to a speech that he delivered at Westminster, which shows how long he has been involved. I should declare an interest: I am the co-convener of the men’s violence against women and children cross-party group. I have the great honour of being the co-convener alongside Malcolm Chisholm. I have learned a lot from him in the past year. We all know and understand that violence against women is a significant problem, and we have heard many stories about that today. One thing that members should commend themselves on—we do not often do that—is the cross-party support on the issue. That is a credit to the Parliament and to everyone in Scottish politics who has supported and progressed the issue over the years. We know that work needs to be done. We must continue to tackle the problem in all its forms, a number of which we have heard about during the debate. I am interested in human trafficking; another cross-party group is pushing that issue. We should take that seriously, too. We should remember that violence against women is a worldwide issue. That has an impact on our focus in Scotland and how we can lead the way in the rest of the world. Although we should focus more on Scotland’s problems than on those worldwide, we should not forget that if we can change attitudes in Scotland, we can perhaps change attitudes worldwide. That might mean that we do not experience again the horrific scenes that we are seeing from India. As Malcolm Chisholm said, the original zero tolerance campaign was a six-month campaign with billboards. It then moved to a poster campaign for workplaces. At the time, I was a young Unison steward, who was tasked, as part of the women’s committee, with putting up the posters in my workplace. I was faced with those who wanted to tear down the posters because they were seen to be too hard hitting, nasty and scary. Let me refresh members’ memories about the posters. The first poster, which dealt with child sexual abuse, said: “By the time they reach 18, one of them will have been subjected to sexual abuse.” That was a hard image to look at and a hard message to understand, but it was a message that we needed to put across. I put that poster up, but it was torn down. I put it back up. The second poster dealt with rape and was very close to the bone. It was a black-and-white poster that said, “From three to ninety three—women are raped.” It was another extremely hard-hitting poster that some of my colleagues said should be taken down because it was too scary. When they went away, I put it back up. There is a theme to how I dealt with the situation as a young Unison steward. The strapline of that poster was, “Husband, father, stranger—male abuse of power is a crime.” It is and always has been a crime, and we should ensure that its absolute rejection by society as a whole continues to be a focus. The third poster dealt with domestic violence and challenged the widely accepted myth that domestic violence occurs only in working-class households. We definitely dealt with that myth. The strapline for that poster was: “She lives with a successful businessman, loving father and respected member of the community. Last week he hospitalised her.” It was extremely concerning. I am a bit worried about my time, Presiding Officer, because the clock did not change.

Okay. Those were powerful images that sent powerful messages. We were delighted to host an event in the Parliament on 6 December at which all parties spoke. We need to continue to change attitudes. We should commend the work of Jenny Kemp, Franki Raffles and Evelyn Gillan, and of the Scottish Government, because the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 provides for the automatic referral to a children’s panel of a child who is in a household in which they are likely to be the subject of sexual or domestic violence. We should impress on the Government the need to continue that work. I congratulate Zero Tolerance and everyone who has been involved in the debate.

When the Deputy First Minister meets Mr Barroso, will she raise concerns with the European Commission regarding the UK’s withdrawal from the EU? Does she agree that the biggest threat to Scotland’s EU membership comes from the Westminster Government and not from Scottish independence?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking in Lanarkshire to reduce crime. (S4O-01578)

The cabinet secretary is aware of the work of the street project in Hamilton, following his visit there earlier this year. Will he welcome and commend the project’s new venture, which it has undertaken with Crimestoppers UK? The project has produced a video about the dangers of carrying a knife called “Open your Eyes”. Will the cabinet secretary commend South Lanarkshire Council and its partners on the progress that they have made with the no knives, better lives initiative? Under that initiative, 7,384 young people have participated in diversionary activities and seven young people have been trained as no knives, better lives peer educators. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, along with the sentencing changes that he recently announced, that partnership approach is reaping rewards in the lowest crime rates in decades?

I commend my colleague Margaret Mitchell for bringing this debate to the chamber. As she said, it is a timely debate. I, too, welcome Nancy and Christine to the gallery. They gave us a warm welcome in their place, and we hope that they have had a warm welcome here today. A 40th birthday is a significant stage in a person’s life. They say life begins at 40—I am still waiting for 40, so I am not sure about that—but, for some people, getting to 40, or just living life, is a daily struggle. It is that struggle that the Samaritans help people with. Like Margaret Mitchell and a number of other colleagues, I was delighted to be able to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the Samaritans of Hamilton on 3 November. There was an open day to raise awareness of the services that are provided and the work that is done by the volunteers, and we got some lovely cake. At the party, which was attended by members of the public, politicians and partner organisations, we were able to gain an insight into the work of the Samaritans. We met volunteers, past and present, and it was interesting to hear their stories of how they got involved. We tend to forget that these are people who are giving up their own time, and are putting all their heart into the work. We were treated to a guided tour of the building, which some of us know quite well now, and saw the services that are delivered. It was interesting to see the different stations from which the various services are delivered, which enables the different aspects to be separated out. Like others, I was particularly struck by the Shotts prison service. In addition to groups of volunteers visiting Shotts, selected prisoners are trained as listeners in an effort to meet the emotional needs of fellow prisoners and so reduce tension and the suicide rate. I believe that there is also a process whereby prisoners who are released are given a contact to help them cope with the challenges of getting out of prison and settling back into life outside. I was informed of a service for people leaving hospital. They can sign up for a call-back service to ensure that they are coping with discharge and that they have the services they need to cope with being outside the protective hospital environment. That is a particularly helpful service for people who have mental health issues or who have attempted suicide. As we have heard, the Samaritans work in secondary schools throughout North and South Lanarkshire as part of the choose life project, and give talks on self-harming and emotional health. That is a new service that is being developed every day. I think that some young people are involved in the project in order to ensure that the message is absolutely right. That message is relevant today, as we can see from the ChildLine report “Saying the Unsayable”, which says that the number of children getting in touch because they may be suicidal has risen by almost 40 per cent. That is a huge number. Elaine Chalmers, the head of ChildLine in Scotland said today: “The pressures facing children and young people, particularly girls, are increasing at such a rate some see these drastic measures as the only answer. Boys are suffering but they are less likely to seek help and we urge them to do so. No matter how bad things seem, it can help to talk to someone.” Margaret McCulloch talked about boys committing suicide. The numbers in Lanarkshire are pretty high, but the work that is being done by the Samaritans is helping to bring them down. Young men do not talk to people the way that girls do and, hopefully, having an anonymous person to speak to on the phone or to send a text message to is enough to help them when they are struggling. To young people who are struggling, I say, “Please just pick up a phone and call Samaritans or ChildLine.” A report by the Samaritans, called “Taking the lead to reduce suicide”, works alongside the ChildLine report to consider how people get to the stage in their life where they are completely at the end of their tether, and gives them ideas about how to move on. The Samaritans volunteers provide a free, safe and confidential service for people to discuss their problems by phone, text or email. They reach out and work with schools, colleges and universities, workplaces, health and welfare services, homeless shelters, prisons and other charities. As we have heard, it could not be easier to contact the Samaritans. Over the past 40 years, as we have heard, Selkirk Place has been an excellent home for numerous volunteers who have ensured that the people of Lanarkshire have received a service to be proud of. However, there is now a need to move to a new home, which I hope will continue to be in Hamilton. I wish Hamilton Samaritans well in the hunt for a new home and offer my support to the volunteers in all the work that they do. More important, I want to thank all the people who have made and continue to make this service the vital service that it is today.

Notwithstanding Mr Macintosh’s assertion that the cabinet secretary can fight this one with one hand tied behind his back, can he provide further detail on how he will protect the lowest-paid workers earning under £15,000 a year from the increases proposed by the UK Government?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it takes to raise awareness of household dangers to young children. (S4O-01516)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the terrifying experience of little Eilidh Paterson of Larkhall, who was caught in blind cords at her home recently. Thankfully, quick-thinking paramedic Alex Kennedy managed to save Eilidh, and we pay tribute to him for that. Will the cabinet secretary offer his support to the make it safe campaign run by Debbie Paterson, Eilidh’s mum, and the Hamilton Advertiser in conjunction with ROSPA to raise awareness of that type of household danger in the hope of preventing any more families from facing such a terrifying ordeal?

Hear, hear.

I commend my colleague and friend Linda Fabiani for bringing the debate to the chamber. It is an issue on which, together, we have campaigned long and hard, and we have spent many a cold morning outside Dungavel detention centre. I believe that Parliament is at its best when it debates issues of humanity such as this. I will give a definition of destitution: “Extreme want of resources or the means of subsistence; complete poverty ... A deprivation or lack; a deficiency.” Those are the reasons why I support the open your eyes to refugee destitution in Scotland campaign. The campaign’s website can be found—I take the opportunity to give it a plug—at www.stopdestitution.org.uk. It seeks to build public and civic society opposition in Scotland to asylum destitution. The Scottish Refugee Council, of which I view myself as a friend, and the Refugee Survival Trust, which is another friend, are asking individuals and organisations to sign a petition that they will present to the UK Minister for Immigration. Members will remember the tapestry of deceit that was manufactured in 2003 to make legal an illegal war in Iraq. Let us look at the human costs of that war. I will tell members about a young man called Adar. Adar is an Iraqi Kurd who was forced to flee Kirkuk after his father, a high-ranking military man, was executed and his own life was threatened. He claimed asylum in 2008, but his case was refused, as were a subsequent appeal and a fresh claim. Adar is 27 and has been destitute for two years. He survives by relying on a network of friends who will put him up for weeks and, in some cases, months at a time. At various times he has slept in a night shelter that was set up by the Glasgow destitution network. He says that it is almost impossible to sleep there, but that it is far better than being on the streets. Survival is extremely difficult for Adar. He eats at drop-in centres for asylum seekers such as the cafe that is run by the Unity centre and others across the city. Occasionally, he has received small grants from organisations such as Positive Action in Housing and the Scottish Refugee Council, or has been given money by friends. I declare an interest in that I am a financial contributor to Positive Action in Housing, and have been for a number of years. Adar desperately wants to be allowed to work. In Iraq, he worked as a designer in a factory making windows and doors, but he will not risk working illegally here. He is a very moral man who wants to do things by the book and continues to report to the Home Office. In recent times, he has found the stress of his situation to be increasingly intolerable and finds it difficult to sleep at night. He feels as though he is no longer seen by others as a human being but, however difficult his situation, he cannot consider returning to Iraq, where he fears for his life. In Scotland, he says, at least he is alive. That testimony is heart breaking; imagine not being able to go home for fear of losing your life, and not being able to make the place of your sanctuary your home because of the disgraceful UK Home Office policy. It is an utter disgrace. Imagine being left outside in this weather. Imagine catching a weather report last night and realising that you need to seek shelter—any shelter—from the elements. Imagine not knowing where your next meal is coming from. Imagine that all that is a result of a terrible war in your land, which was not caused by you, and that the country that waged that war will not help you in your time of need. Imagine wanting to work to support yourself and not being able to do so because of draconian rules that have been imposed upon you. That is what destitution means for Adar. That is Adar’s life. That is why the campaign is so important. It is important not just for Adar and all the others like him, but because people—human beings—should expect nothing less than care, compassion and support in times of need. To turn our back on our brother or sister in times of need is not a Scottish value; helping, supporting and caring are Scottish values. We need to assert those values, we need to ensure that people seeking sanctuary are treated with dignity and humanity and we need to have control of the system to ensure that those good values are used to create the best of circumstances for people who are nationless. We need to stop destitution. As has already been said, humanity is not a reserved matter, so let us open our eyes and see—yes, really see—the impact of destitution. I urge everyone who can do so to support this extremely important and worthwhile campaign.

12. To ask the Scottish Government when it will next meet NHS Lanarkshire and what will be discussed. (S4O-01470)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that NHS Lanarkshire recently signed a contract with Atos Healthcare to deliver the personal independence payments assessment for sick and disabled people on benefits without seeing the contract first. Given the reported actions of Atos and how it carries out its work, I find that deeply disturbing. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that in the light of the Westminster inquiry into Atos and its questionable assessment practices—which my Larkhall constituent Brian McArdle was subjected to and which his family believe were linked to his death—he will monitor closely any public body contracted with Atos, especially when the terms of the contract are not known at the time of signing?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what the average timescale is in which a European arrest warrant issued in Scotland results in an arrest. (S4O-01439)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the European arrest warrant has been used successfully in my area to return alleged perpetrators to face justice for very serious crimes. However, is he as worried as I am that the United Kingdom Government is not only putting that at risk by withdrawing from European arrest warrants, but putting Scotland at risk by withdrawing completely from Europe?

Hear, hear!

Presiding Officer, if I say, “Zikomo,” do not be alarmed—I am simply saying “Thank you” in Bantu languages. I offer my congratulations and support to Humza Yousaf in his new ministerial role. As members have said, it is made to measure. Scotland is a nation of adventurers. We like to travel, we love to learn and we definitely like to make new friends. It is not a new concept; we have been pioneers and inventors since time began, and that thirst for knowledge and adventure has taken us around the world and has gathered us, as a nation, many friends. It brought us the enlightenment and, the jewel in our crown, our universal education system. I spoke earlier to Clare Adamson, who visited the David Livingstone centre in Blantyre with her primary school. I did so, too, and I was regaled with stories of the search for the source of the Nile, of wild beasts and of exotic animals and plants. I came back from that visit filled with wonder, which led me to take a keen interest in the natural world. I read about and sketched many exotic animals, and I became a big fan of big cats. However, that visit also confused and upset me—I must have been about nine or 10 at the time—when I learned that people had to face the traffickers of the time who sold human beings into slavery. I wonder whether that sadness as a child built in me the sense that slavery should not be tolerated—not then and not today—because I have maintained that belief and have campaigned on the issue all my life. When, in 2008, I had the great honour to visit Malawi as part of the Westminster Foundation for Democracy programme to encourage underrepresented groups such as women to get involved in the 2009 elections, I was very pleased to go there. I was glad to hear Claudia Beamish discuss the preparations for the 2014 elections in Malawi. My visit realised a lifelong dream to see the heart of Africa. I knew that the romantic view that I held as a child was far removed from the reality of life in Africa, but I felt that the work that the Westminster Foundation was doing chimed well with my belief that everyone in this world should have a chance to shape and build democracy in their land. I absolutely fell in love with the land and its people, and I was delighted when I heard that the new president of Malawi would be Joyce Banda. Many members have commended her today. Joyce has always campaigned for equal rights, health and education for all, but especially for women in Malawi. She wants young women to be able to stay on at school, she has highlighted the risks of early motherhood and she has championed the progress towards dealing with the root cause of bad maternal health. She has also, as we have heard, started the process of repealing some of the discriminatory laws that were introduced by Bingu. I am delighted to support Patricia Ferguson’s amendment, and I add my commendation of the Scotland Malawi Partnership. As Clare Adamson mentioned, last week in Lanarkshire I was honoured to open the NIDOS exhibition of charitable work that is being done in Malawi and across Africa. I travelled from Lilongwe to Nkhata Bay South, which took me almost the entire length of Lake Nyasa. The landscape was absolutely fantastic and the spirit of the people was breathtaking. That spirit carried me along, and it is in the same good spirit that the Malawian people hold us in high regard. The minute that we said we were Scottish, they mentioned David Livingstone. It was the spirit of equality, fairness and justice that took David Livingstone to Africa in 1840. In a letter to the editor of the New York Herald, Livingstone wrote: “And if my disclosures regarding the terrible Ujijan slavery should lead to the suppression of the East Coast slave trade, I shall regard that as a greater matter by far than the discovery of all the Nile sources together.” His great passion was to discover the source of the Nile, but he would gladly have given that up to end slavery. What a powerful reason to write to a newspaper, to raise awareness of the inhumanity of the slave trade. Livingstone is remembered fondly in Malawi for his endeavours to end the trade in human beings. Things that are worth fighting for are never easy. At the time, Livingstone wrote: “If you have men who will only come if they know there is a good road, I don’t want them. I want men who will come if there is no road at all.” That shows that, in the face of adversity, he took the courageous road. Over the course of his first 12 years in Africa, Livingstone developed a strong anger against slavery, refusing even to follow the same paths as the slave traders. He wrote: “it is so undesirable to travel in a path once trodden by slave-traders that I preferred to find out another line of march.” If a person visits David Livingstone’s tomb in Westminster Abbey, they will see the following inscription written on it: “Brought by faithful hands over land and sea here rests David Livingstone, missionary, traveller, philanthropist, born March 19. 1813 at Blantyre, Lanarkshire, died May 1, 1873 at Chitambo’s Village, Ulala. For 30 years his life was spent in an unwearied effort to evangelize the native races, to explore the undiscovered secrets, to abolish the desolating slave trade, of central Africa, where with his last words he wrote ‘All I can add in my solitude, is, may heaven’s rich blessing come down on every one, American, English, or Turk, who will help to heal this open sore of the world’”. That is a great testimony. The David Livingstone centre is a jewel in Lanarkshire’s crown. I am delighted that future generations of Scots and visitors from across the world will continue to learn and gain the same inspiration that I gained from Livingstone’s life and legacy. That is the reason why I put my heart and soul into securing the centre’s future when it was under threat in 2009. I am delighted that the Scottish Government has committed to celebrating David Livingstone’s 200th anniversary. I am equally delighted that the Government has continued, and will continue, the good work started by Jack McConnell and his many colleagues over the past 12 years. David Livingstone died in Ilala in the centre of Africa in May 1873. His heart was buried under an mpundu tree, but his faithful attendants enclosed his embalmed body in a cylinder of bark, which was wrapped in sailcloth, and carried it to the coast and then sailed it to London, where it arrived the following year. David Livingstone belonged to Scotland, but his heart belonged to Africa. Scotland’s heart belongs with the people of Malawi, too. Many members across the chamber have acknowledged that eloquently. Livingstone’s values of the 1840s were values of justice, equality and fairness—those are still the values of Scotland. If we stay true to those values, our future, and that of our partnership with Malawi, is sound.

I welcome the debate and hope that Labour colleagues will pass on to Kezia Dugdale my best wishes for a speedy recovery. There is nothing worse than a politician with no voice, because we all need to use our voices to represent our constituents. I thank John Park for eloquently opening the debate, which is timely during living wage week. It is right to highlight and promote a policy that mitigates the worst ravages of poverty, as Malcolm Chisholm has just explained. In this day and age, it is a travesty that some people who are in full-time work are below the poverty line. Not only is that completely unfair, it is also bad for the economy. John Park made a clear argument and explained very well the impact on the economy of better-paid, happier staff and people having a wee bit more money in their pockets. I was delighted to hear on Monday that the Scottish Government had raised the living wage to £7.45 an hour for people who work in the Government, its agencies and the national health service. That affects about 6,000 staff members, and it is the second time that the Government has raised the living wage since it introduced it to those agencies more than a year ago. When the Scottish National Party came to power in 2007, the minimum Scottish Government wage was about £5.63 an hour, which means that the wage has jumped by 32 per cent. I am sure that we all agree that that is a great achievement in what are very tough economic circumstances, and that we all support the policy. However, the United Kingdom minimum wage for over 21s is £6.19 an hour, and for 18 to 20-year-olds, it is £4.98 an hour. I am sure that that contrast is not missed by anyone. This week, Peter Kelly of the Scottish living wage campaign said: “With the problem of in-work poverty continuing to increase, the Scottish Government’s continued support for the Living Wage must be congratulated. Today’s announcement will ensure that some of the lowest-paid workers in the public sector will receive a wage increase that will provide real help in these difficult times. We look forward to working with the Scottish Government to ensure that more employees across Scotland can get the benefit of the living wage.” I am sure that everyone in the chamber could not agree more. Last year, South Lanarkshire Council stepped up to the plate and implemented the living wage, for which I roundly congratulated it. That policy was supported by all councillors, which just goes to show the breadth of support for it. The policy impacted on 8,000 of the lowest-paid council employees. Of the 1,800 employees who were paid less than £7.20 an hour, 87 per cent were women; of the 8,400 employees who were paid less than £21,000 a year, 76 per cent were women. South Lanarkshire Council’s brave decision to follow the Government in implementing the living wage is very welcome—not least to families in which women are out there as the breadwinners. A number of those women are still fighting equal pay cases. Not all councils have implemented the living wage, so I urge the rest to follow South Lanarkshire Council’s lead. We have a commitment that all SNP councils will introduce a living wage. If we reach consensus that everyone should do sthat, I am sure that the whole nation will benefit. There is nothing more honourable than earning your own crust and supporting your family with dignity. In supporting living wage week, I hope that we have gone a little way towards maintaining that dignity. I congratulate the living wage campaign and everyone across the chamber who has been involved in the campaign.

4. To ask the First Minister what the economic benefits for Scotland are of replacing Trident. (S4F-00945)

I thank the First Minister for that interesting response. [Laughter.]

Does the First Minister agree that it is incumbent on all political leaders in Scotland to make their positions known? Yesterday, the Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament criticised the Labour leader, Johann Lamont, for consistently failing to publicise her views on Trident. That was after one of her own front-bench members, Neil Findlay, claimed that renewal would be “economically incompetent”. The Scottish Government’s position on Trident, unlike the Labour Party’s, is clear. Will the First Minister reiterate it in the hope that the majority of members will speak out and resist the development and dumping of nuclear arms in Scotland?

4. To ask the First Minister what the economic benefits for Scotland are of replacing Trident. (S4F-00945)

I thank the First Minister for that interesting response. [Laughter.]

Does the First Minister agree that it is incumbent on all political leaders in Scotland to make their positions known? Yesterday, the Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament criticised the Labour leader, Johann Lamont, for consistently failing to publicise her views on Trident. That was after one of her own front-bench members, Neil Findlay, claimed that renewal would be “economically incompetent”. The Scottish Government’s position on Trident, unlike the Labour Party’s, is clear. Will the First Minister reiterate it in the hope that the majority of members will speak out and resist the development and dumping of nuclear arms in Scotland?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how many businesses in the Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse constituency have received support from its direct interventions, such as the small business bonus scheme. (S4O-01403)

I thank the minister for that very welcome news. Perhaps he will want to congratulate Hamilton on voting in favour of its BID status recently, following the minister’s visit. The businesses in the area need that boost for their economic future. In light of Labour’s cuts commission, does the minister share my concern that cutting the small business bonus scheme would severely damage the future of those businesses in Hamilton?

Like many of my colleagues, I was delighted to see the title of the motion. I thought that, at last, Labour had got the point and had realised that the future of Scotland matters. For the past few days, I have been thinking about the many things that Labour could bring up in the debate. Our economic future? Absolutely. Our humanitarian future? Possibly. Our welfare future? Most definitely. Instead, what do we get? We get the no future for Scotland under Labour debate. We get snipe, snarl and lashing out, because Labour members cannot make an argument for the discredited and failing union. Let us look at the only arguments for the union, which were articulated recently by a friend of mine. Our main Parliament will be hundreds of miles away, and our MPs will be in a small minority. We will have a Government that we did not vote for, and we will hand over all our oil and gas revenues to the London Treasury. The biggest nuclear arsenal in western Europe will be based on the River Clyde only 30 miles from our largest city. An austerity budget will be imposed by London, cutting jobs and threatening public services, instead of Scotland being responsible for raising and spending its own taxes. We will join a country whose health and education services are rapidly being privatised. Is that a manifesto to be proud of? No, I think not. In their lashing out over the past few weeks, Labour members have talked about dishonesty. Well, let us have an honest debate about Scotland’s place in Europe. I will see their Spanish foreign minister and raise them Mr Almunia, the European Commissioner for Competition and the Vice-President of the European Commission, who is a fierce opponent of Catalan independence. He said this week that it would “not be honest” to say that a breakaway region would be stuck outside the EU if it was independent. Mr Almunia also insisted that citizens of the EU could not be stripped of their rights just because their territory separated from a member state. That nails it. The fact that it would not be honest to make that argument says it all. Let us consider the issue of honesty. Is it honest to cry foul just because something does not suit Labour’s negative agenda, even though it suited the party very well in government? Drew Smith rose— Was it honest to suppress a top secret document—the McCrone report—to deny the people of Scotland the full facts of the benefits of Scotland’s oil? I will quote the main conclusion of the McCrone report, just in case Opposition members have forgotten what it said, because it was so secret for 30 years: “This paper has shown that the advent of North Sea oil has completely overturned the traditional economic arguments used against Scottish nationalism. An independent Scotland could now expect to have massive surpluses both on its budget and on its balance of payments and with the proper husbanding of resources this situation could last for a very long time into the future.” Was that the honest action of Labour and Tory Governments, which for 30 years have been hell-bent on stripping out of Scotland every penny that they have been able to? Is it honest to convene a cuts commission that will punish the sick, the old and the young? Is it honest to accuse the people of Scotland of having a “something-for-nothing culture”? I think that Johann Lamont got mixed up when she used that phrase and that she actually meant that Labour is the nothing-for-something party, because when the people of Scotland face the most savage of welfare cuts, they get nothing from Labour. When the people of Scotland face the prospect of continuing to be a nuclear dump for Westminster, what do they get from Labour? Nothing—utter silence. When the people of Scotland face attacks on their universal benefits from Labour’s cuts commission, what do they get? Nothing. When their pals, the Tories, devastated public sector pensions at Westminster yesterday, again we got nothing from Westminster Labour members, who sat on their hands and allowed their Tory pals to lay waste to pension provision in Scotland. Drew Smith rose— Yes, Labour is the nothing-for-something party. That something is the dignity and independence of our elderly, which Labour is attacking by seeking to take away their free personal care and their bus passes. That something is the denial of free education to our young folk and the creation of a situation in which people can learn as long as they are rich. That something is the return to the sick man of Europe tag, which would result from Labour’s ending of free prescriptions. That something is the pillage of our oil and gas resources to shore up illegal wars and pay for weapons of mass destruction. No questions were asked yesterday and none have been asked today about the squandering of £350 million on such weapons when people are at food banks and are losing their jobs. Drew Smith rose— That something is the subjugation of our nation to a Tory-Labour alliance at Westminster that is not interested in the people of Scotland. The future of Scotland under Labour is the nothing-for-something party. How dare Labour come to this chamber to talk about the future of Scotland and to present no vision, no hope and no ideas about what that future should be. Scotland deserves better.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Patricia Ferguson very much for taking that intervention. Opposition members have nothing to say—that is why I did not take an intervention from any of them. [Interruption.]

Let us talk about the European and External Relations Committee inquiry. The inquiry on the white paper—when it comes out—is on the agenda. The agenda is already published, so perhaps Patricia Ferguson should have looked at the facts. Also, I had to read Patricia Ferguson’s letter in the Daily Mail before I had seen the original.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what powers the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has to ensure full compliance with laws on emissions by waste incineration plants and what enforcement actions are available to it. (S4O-01388)

I impress on the minister one of the issues that has arisen in the process of granting a Pollution Prevention and Control (Scotland) Regulations 2000 licence for the proposed Dovesdale plant near Stonehouse. Objectors have had difficulty in adding their objections when further questions have been asked and answered by the company, which in this case is Scotgen (South Lanarkshire) Ltd. Given that the Scotgen (Dumfries) Ltd plant at Dargavel has not produced one iota of energy and has committed hundreds of breaches of environmental legislation, and that it plans to use the same technology at Dovesdale as it is using at Dargavel, can the minister reassure my constituents that he will do everything that he can do to ensure that SEPA has all the powers that it requires to fulfil the statutory requirements in protecting our environment?

I welcome the debate, which is timely and, I hope, will continue the momentum that was generated by the women’s employment summit that the Scottish Government held last month. I join other members in paying tribute to all who were involved in supporting the Government to realise the summit. In particular, I pay tribute to the STUC for its valuable support and guidance. The STUC briefing tells us that women are disproportionately affected by unemployment. I will concentrate on that disproportionate effect. Equality in the workplace has been a long-standing sore for many Governments over decades. With the Equal Pay Act 1970 in her 40s, should we really be living in a nation that turns a blind eye to the pay gap? Let us look at the history of women’s employment. People talk about there having been full employment in Britain after the second world war, but there was never full employment for everyone; it was full employment for males only. Women were taken out of the workplace and removed from the employment that they had undertaken during the war. Women’s work has always been an afterthought. It is not taken as seriously as, or thought as important as, employment for men. By leading the debate, the Scottish Government is showing how seriously it takes employment for everyone, regardless of gender, but also that it recognises that women have particular needs and concerns when it comes to work. The Government is putting women’s work front and centre of the debate about how we create jobs, grow our workforce and grow our economy. Writing in The Guardian in April this year, Tanya Gold said: “A strategy for women’s employment is necessary, encompassing women’s security in the workplace, decent provision of childcare and the scandal of occupational and gender segregation, which, together, bring forth the pay gap.” That is a sad indictment. It is a fact that we now have women in the army, women engineers and women who have rebuilt damaged satellites in space. We do not need to look much further than one of our own accomplished Scottish women: Professor Anne Glover, who is now the European Commission’s chief scientific adviser and works closely with José Manuel Barroso. Women are no longer excluded from doing jobs previously carried out by males. At the recent Scotland Europa event held in the Parliament, Anne Glover told us that Scotland is number 1 for research and development impact. It would be a shame to roll that achievement back by reintroducing tuition fees, which would create another barrier to learning for women. Another point of fact is that having control of benefits and taxation in Scotland would allow this progressive Scottish Government to continue its work in supporting women into the workplace. Having control in Scotland over universal benefits such as child benefit would end the attacks on women with the Tories at Westminster, aided and abetted by Labour in Scotland following its lurch to the right, attempting to take away the little financial control some women have. Child benefit enables women to pay for childcare, it gives them some financial freedom and it enables them to contribute not only economically but intellectually to the recovery of our nation. If, as Arthur “Bleak” Midwinter suggests, nothing is off the table when it comes to abolishing universal provision, I fear that the progress that we have made over the years will be eroded as women are pushed back into the kitchen and out of the job market. There are fundamental questions to be asked of all Governments on equality in the workplace. If the answer is further to attack and erode the universal provision that enables people to get into and stay in work, that is not an answer that I am willing to sit back and accept—I suspect that many women feel the same. It is certainly not an answer that this Scottish Government is willing to accept. The Scottish Government has shown that by taking the action it has taken to protect families’ incomes through universally free higher and further education; addressing health waiting times; providing free prescriptions, personal care and support; and, of course, freezing the regressive council tax. This Scottish Government has proved beyond a doubt that the Tory/Lib/Lab way is certainly not, to borrow an STUC phrase, “a better way”. Johann Lamont says that the cap does not fit when her proposals are described as something that the Tories would be—and are, according to the Welsh Tories today—proud of. I say that the cap fits Labour far too snuggly. The Minister for Youth Employment, Angela Constance, said that the summit would help public sector bodies, employers, trade unions and other partners identify steps that they could take to make a difference. She has also pointed to the Scottish Government’s pledge to increase childcare provision for three-year-olds, four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds from 475 to 600 hours per year. Those plans will deliver the best package of flexible childcare in the UK. That is the action that the women whom I speak to need and want; it is the action of a Scottish Government that is not bound by London masters; and it is the action of a Scottish Government to be proud of.

The presumption of innocence is the cornerstone of a just society and a fair justice system. I thank all the organisations, such as Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland to name just a few, that have been and continue to be constructive in informing us as we progress towards the fair justice system that we strive for. As we know, Lord Carloway published his report on criminal law and practice last November. He was asked to carry out the review after the Supreme Court ruled in October 2010 that evidence in the case of Pater Cadder was inadmissible as he was questioned by police without a lawyer present. The review is extensive: the report has more than 400 pages and includes 76 recommendations, 76 meetings were held, and a public consultation was carried out that received 50 responses. There was also an investigation into jurisdictions elsewhere, along with conferences and the commissioning of a research project for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. It was a robust investigation and analysis, and I tried to read all the report last night in preparation for the debate. Lord Carloway argued that, in incorporating the European convention on human rights and ensuring the correct rights-based approach, there needed to be changes in the law and alterations in the thinking of all those working in the criminal justice system—we have heard about that from previous speakers. It is essential that an effective justice system continues to evolve, which ties into what the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said earlier about the need for a longer-term review of our laws. They are evolving and not just an event. The report mentions the need for training and guidance for the police, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, solicitors and everyone else involved, to bring consistency, as John Finnie mentioned earlier. As someone who was previously a training officer in a professional capacity, I cannot state that enough, and members will not be surprised to hear me say that training is a key to ensuring that our important people make sound judgments—judgments that affect the lives of the accused, but especially the victims. Effective training and continuous professional development build a competent and confident workforce that underpins a professional service. The proposals to give police increased powers to liberate a suspect from custody temporarily give me and others cause for concern. Those powers will be subject to certain conditions, such as restrictions on the suspect’s whereabouts and conduct and a consideration of the possible negative consequences on women, children and young people experiencing domestic violence. Groups supporting people in the area of domestic violence have raised grave concerns about that matter. I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that, in order to protect victims, an effective risk assessment is undertaken of all accused persons in such circumstances. Scottish Women's Aid has expressed concern that the issue of accused persons released on bail will be further exacerbated by the numbers likely to be afforded temporary release. That matter has particular relevance in domestic violence incidents: the safety of women and other victims, especially children, should always be considered if that situation arises and, in most cases, the suspect should be detained if there is any risk at all of them perpetrating further crimes. Scottish Women's Aid further asserts that such a blanket release policy could also interfere with police investigations, and we have heard from Margaret Mitchell and others on that point. Sometimes key evidence is picked up when police investigations are at an early stage, and there could be an opportunity for someone who is released early to tamper with and destroy evidence, to establish an alibi after the fact, and to intimidate and interfere with victims and witnesses. As members of the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children know, there are cases in which that has happened and people have received phone calls, letters or Twitter or Facebook messages. We should be looking at that issue, too.

I certainly do, and I thank the member for his intervention. That is an issue that I will refer to later on in my speech. A further issue is how to administer the process of advising victims of a suspect’s liberation, which is a matter of significant importance in domestic violence cases and, indeed, any case in which violence is perpetrated on someone. I hope that the cabinet secretary will give us some assurances on how that process will work in practice. There can be nothing scarier for a victim than to see the accused on the street or back at their front door when they had not even known of their release. As we have heard, if the need for corroboration is removed, it is vital that careful consideration is given to the introduction of new safeguards to minimise miscarriages of justice. I must put on record my support for the removal of the requirement for corroboration, for largely the same reasons as those given by my colleague Malcolm Chisholm. Women’s Aid agrees. It has said that there is a need to explore further “the implications of removing the requirement for corroboration ... However, in doing that, we should look not at what will happen if that is done but at how we can make such a move work.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 20 December 2011; c 780.] It is extremely important to remember that. As I said at the outset, and as John Finnie also said, the presumption of innocence is the cornerstone of a just society and a fair justice system. John Finnie also referred to the fact that, of the 51,926 incidents of domestic violence that the police recorded in 2009-10, 10,259 ended up being dealt with in court. In other words, the proportion of such incidents that reach court is relatively small. Only half of the 21,660 cases that were reported to the procurator fiscal made it to court. As is well documented, the situation with rape and sexual assault cases is even more worrying. I know that the Scottish Government is working on that issue, and I hope that the cabinet secretary can give us an update and reassure us that it is a priority for the Government. As part of its remit, the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children has had concerns about the role of corroboration for many years. In light of the comments that have been made, I hope that we will be able to work together to fix that. John Finnie will be happy to hear me say that, in the past few years, there have been welcome developments in how the police respond to domestic violence. Their approach to evidence gathering has broadened, and they now take a more forensic and robust approach to the investigation and presentation of evidence. I think that such professionalism is in the best interests of victims and the accused. As a number of members have said, we need better conviction rates for rape. That can be achieved by using the rule of quality evidence, which may bring a sense of justice to the victims of such crimes. The cabinet secretary informed us: “The review has unearthed striking research. In 268 of the 458 cases that were dropped in 2010 on the basis of insufficient evidence, there would have been a reasonable prospect of conviction if there had not been a requirement for corroboration.”—[Official Report, 1 December 2011; c 4246.] That is an extremely important point. I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that first responders and others who are engaged in supporting victims of crime are adequately trained to identify victims of trafficking. I see that I am well over my time, so I will make two quick final points. The introduction of greater support for vulnerable suspects is very important to me, and the letter of rights is welcome. I see that one recommendation of Lord Carloway that the Law Society of Scotland agreed with was that on child suspects. The society suggests that safeguards should be put in place for people under the age of 18 and that children under 16 should not be allowed to waive their right to a lawyer. I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that the children’s hearings system matches that proposal, so that a welfare-based approach is adopted when we deal with children in the criminal justice system. The same should be true of vulnerable adults, and we should perhaps look at the appropriate adult scheme. I believe that a robust, fair and effective justice system is evolving and that, with the changes that have been outlined and a commitment to certain safeguards, we will progress further down the path to a fairer and more just society.

I thank the cabinet secretary for some of the reassurances that he has given members this afternoon. In his final comments, will the cabinet secretary refer to the question that I asked him about ensuring that the children’s hearings system matches up with the proposed changes, especially when dealing with children under the age of 18?

The term, “independent living” is defined by the Government as: “disabled people of all ages having the same freedom, choice, dignity and control as other citizens at home, at work, and in the community. It does not mean living by yourself or fending for yourself. It means rights to practical assistance and support to participate in society and to live an ordinary life.” What does independence mean to members? I believe that its meaning is enshrined in that statement. Imagine having the same choices as a non-disabled person and the freedom to make that choice. Imagine taking part in the same activities as your friends without having to sit on the sidelines. Imagine taking part in civic society, in a work place, in a recreational activity, without the stigma or barriers that can so often stop people, literally, in their tracks. Imagine being empowered not just to take control but to actually be in control, when much of your life is in other people’s hands. Imagine the dignity of not only being consulted, but of being respected in the choices that you make for yourself, without fear or favour, safe in the knowledge that the choices that you make for yourself are yours to own, to decide, to control. Those are all things that non-disabled people take for granted. We cannot imagine how difficult life can be in some respects, and as non-disabled people we cannot understand the sense of liberation a person has when they take control and ownership of their life. Imagine how you would feel as a young person trying to make your way in the world and attempting to keep up with your siblings and friends. The story I am about to tell illustrates the need for underpinning legislation. I have the permission of the people concerned, but I will maintain confidentiality. This is the story as told to me by a father; these are his words and his experiences. “We first heard about self-directed support via parents at the Scottish Spina Bifida Association and we thought it would be great for my child with the outcome being that Mum gets some respite and my child’s care needs are being addressed, including personalisation, socialising and learning social skills for her to learn independently without her mum; the perfect all-in-one package. What we did not realise is that we were entering a minefield of events that would have us unnecessarily stressed, resulting in submitting complaints to the local authority to fight for our rights and receive what we are entitled to. Our first appointment with our local social worker was within 6 weeks of expressing our interest in self-directed support, the meeting went well, we explained that we were interested in self-directed support and the outcome for my child would be care needs being addressed along with independence, personalisation, socialisation and learning social skills independently while her mum gets respite—the social worker went away with our request to report back to her team leader. A few weeks passed and we received a call to arrange a follow up appointment—on arrival the social worker asked similar questions to the first meeting, we were confused and said that it was self-directed support that we were looking for for my child. The social worker in surprise looked at us and asked for more information, and so once again we explained why we wanted the self-directed support and the social worker went off to report to her team leader. A few weeks passed and we received a call to arrange a follow up appointment—on arrival the social worker asked similar questions to the first and second meeting, we were very confused and I asked if she was having a laugh as we had spent the last two appointments discussing this—at this point the social worker admitted that the team leader is unaware of the details of self-directed support—I asked that if I did not quiz her then would we be having a coffee in another few weeks to talk discussing self-directed support? Talk about déja vu. We gave the social worker in-house contact details within the local authority to request the process of self-directed support. A few weeks passed again and we received a call to arrange a follow up appointment—on arrival the social worker smiled and the assessment began all over again. A few weeks further passed and we were informed that there was no money in the budget to pay for the self-directed support which would be revised at the next financial year. And now the complaints start as we arrange meetings with the social workers, team leaders, people at Scottish personal assistants employers network, Christina McKelvie MSP, the Head of Adult and Older People Services, the executive director of social work in South Lanarkshire Council—resulting in my child being awarded 2 hours per day which was awarded from another budget as there was no money in the children's budget, even though Scottish Government had awarded SLC with £600,000 every year for the next 3 years, £1.8 million swallowed into other budgets. The social worker verbally gave us permission to arrange a personal assistant for my child as the first payment would be processed at month end. Lesson number one, take nothing verbal from a social worker as my child's first payment took 3 months and was not back dated—so who would have paid the wages if I had managed to find an appropriate personal assistant for my child? A few weeks later we received an email from the social worker and team leader requesting for more information, (remember that I have taken everything to every meeting) which may now result in monies being paid back, 6 months later my child's 1st review is still waiting to be heard. This will leave the matter of respite for Mum not dealt with, with her having caring duties for my child's twin sister who is now recognised as a young carer. We have requested a review to receiving extra hours for respite on a weekly basis to support Mum—6 months later we are still waiting.” There is nothing more powerful than a person’s experience of trying to navigate a system that does not have legislative backing. For that reason alone, I welcome the plans to legislate and hope that families will not have to experience what I have detailed this afternoon. I ask the minister to pay particular attention to children’s needs during the bill’s process.

The minister is obviously aware of how the BID process and setting up a BID can benefit a community. Jamie McGrigor expressed very eloquently how a BID can support Oban. Hamilton, too, is going through the BID process and its ballot deadline is 11 October. I extend an invitation to the minister from the Hamilton Chamber of Commerce to visit Hamilton just before the ballot deadline in order to lend his support.

I am delighted to be moving today’s motion for members’ business and I would like Parliament to warmly welcome the Citizens Advice Scotland report “Civvy Street: The New Frontline. Meeting the advice needs of the Armed Forces community in Scotland”. The armed services support project, or ASAP, has been piloted in a number of areas, including Fife, Dundee, Inverness, Nairn, Moray, Renfrewshire and East Renfrewshire, Inverclyde and Stirling, and in conjunction with the citizens advice bureau in Hamilton in Lanarkshire. It is a partnership involving Poppyscotland, Citizens Advice Scotland and a number of other forces and non-forces charities. The armed forces advice project was established in 2010 to provide advice and support for all members of the armed forces community, whether serving personnel, veterans or their families. It is a holistic service that supports veterans who have served their time and those who, for whatever reason, have had to leave the forces early. People who leave the forces early do not generally get the same transitional support, so the project is very important for them in particular. ASAP is delivered by the Scottish citizens advice bureau service, which is a highly trusted network, which is very important. CAB has decades of experience of delivering a free, independent, confidential and impartial advice and information service to the general public. I am going to give members some of the statistics that are in the report. In the period from July 2010 to March 2012—the first 21 months of the project—ASAP advisers assisted 1,769 clients with more than 6,000 issues. Approximately 84 per cent of the clients were either veterans or their dependants, while the majority of the remaining 16 per cent were serving members of the forces or their dependants. Some of the veterans had issues such as homelessness, debt, alcohol and drug dependency and post-traumatic stress disorder, and some of them were just unable to adjust to civilian life. They deserve our full support. I am talking about homeless veterans, such as the client reported by west of Scotland citizens advice. He became homeless after serving in the Army for 20 years. He did not have family to rely on and he said that he was not prepared for society, having lived with a routine for so long. The client admitted that he had been stealing so that he could get into jail, so that he would be back in a routine. That is a very sad story indeed. He wanted a roof over his head. The client’s lawyer took him to citizens advice to get advice and stated that he had had no help in adjusting to life outside the Army. I ask the minister to look urgently at the fact that service personnel cannot fill in housing application forms while they are still in service, even if they know their leaving date. That can lead to homelessness, or a situation called sofa surfing. A client in another case study in the report had financial problems. He had been in the Army for 20 years and was in financial trouble. He was in full-time employment as a contract worker but borrowed to repay his debts, which he was unable to service. He had secured a loan to pay off debts, but he did not understand that the loan was secured on his home. His borrowings included payment protection insurances, unsecured loans, which stood at approximately £36,000, and secured loans of £48,000. On investigation, citizens advice realised that he might not really understand what his borrowings involved and that that might be due to his length of service in the Army. That is another very sad story. There are a number of case studies, which I ask members to look at. I welcome the amendment to the motion that was lodged—it is unusual to have an amendment to a members’ business motion. Recently, I was asked why I supported armed forces day and veterans week, given my obvious anti-war stance. The Presiding Officer and I have both participated in anti-war rallies and demonstrations. War is the last resort. Every possibility of a diplomatic solution should be exhausted before we engage in any act that results inevitably in loss of life or limb. Given that pacifist principle, I had a long hard think about why I support veterans and their families. I came to the conclusion that although I may not support Governments in their decision to go to war, I whole-heartedly believe that our armed forces deserve care and support when they have to undertake the risk of the front line. I recently met an amazing woman called Ann Hardman, who is a constituent of mine. She may not describe herself as an amazing woman but, inevitably in this job, we come across amazing people who are very humble and do not describe themselves in those terms. Ann Hardman lost her brother, David—a member of 2 para—in the battle at Goose Green, near Darwin, on 28 May 1982. I will put the story into context. I had the great privilege of being invited to join a delegation from throughout the United Kingdom to celebrate liberation day in the Falklands and to remember those who lost life and limb securing that liberation. Ann Hardman asked me to honour her brother David and the other fallen when I attended the many memorial services over the three days that we were there. There can be nothing more compelling than the stories of our service people who, in the face of great danger, show such determination and courage. I also spoke to a veteran who was severely injured in the battle in which David Hardman lost his life. He had suffered years of survivor guilt. He believed that the support that he received from a number of agencies, including some of the ones involved in ASAP, had helped him to lead a good life. I went to see Ann Hardman when I got home last week and shared with her my experiences with the people, the veterans and of course the wildlife—the penguins were very endearing. I gave Ann a number of keepsakes, which I hope will give her a different, more positive view of the Falkland islands, other than it being a place of war and, for her, the death of her brother. ASAP is an inspired and inspiring service. It brings hope and light at the end of what can be a dark and lonely tunnel. I was privileged to be at the launch of the Lanarkshire service in Low Parks museum, where we have an exhibit on the Cameronian regiment. There is a long military history in Hamilton, and I am delighted that the project there is going from strength to strength. I hope that members agree that ASAP is a very worthwhile project. I felt that it was my duty to raise it in Parliament. This week, when I think of liberation and freedom, I will be thinking of Ann Hardman, David Hardman and the many, many service personnel and families who have put their lives on the line for that freedom.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to educate children and young people about the dangers of sectarianism. (S4O-01156)

Will the minister join me in congratulating the Larkhall community on being awarded the first Nil by Mouth communities award, which was granted for the positive work that has been undertaken by the community, the churches and the Machan Trust to tackle sectarianism? I convey an invitation to the minister to see the great work that the Machan Trust in Larkhall does in tackling the scourge of sectarianism in its community.

This week, Philips Lighting in Hamilton in my constituency announced the potential loss of 40 jobs. As the company has had a 65-year presence in Hamilton, the announcement will be a blow to the local economy as well as a shock for the workers concerned. What support can the Scottish Government offer both to the workers directly affected by redundancies and to Philips itself to ensure that the workforce in Hamilton is protected?

This is a very important and topical debate, which has been raging across the Parliaments in Europe, Westminster and here. Indeed, the European and External Relations Committee of the Scottish Parliament has just published its report on the situation in Europe and the impact on Scotland of Prime Minister David Cameron’s use of the veto at the December European Council meeting. I commend to members the report’s findings. The committee awaits responses from the Governments in Scotland and at Westminster. I speak today not as convener of the European and External Relations Committee but as a humble back bencher who is worried about the impact on our nation of the decisions that are being taken on our behalf. I believe that the measure of a good budget is the focus that it places on growth, and it seems that the International Monetary Fund agrees. Christine Lagarde has issued a stark warning to the UK chancellor, and I echo that warning. UK austerity measures in isolation are not working and, in fact, are putting the economic recovery of Scotland and the UK at risk. The IMF has called for—believe it or not—a plan B for growth and economic recovery. Last week’s warning from the IMF to the UK Government about the lack of growth in the UK economy did not come as a surprise to me or to any of us in Scotland who have been saying the same for a long time.

I am spoiled for choice, but let me carry on a bit. I recognise the challenges in the euro zone and I understand the importance of finding a resolution to them to prevent the crisis spreading and to protect the Scottish economy. It seems that there is a growing consensus in Europe, the G8 and now the IMF that we need to invest in growth. I call on the UK Government to act on the warnings and recognise that additional capital spending is the route to support economic recovery.

As Mr Rennie knows, Christine Lagarde has a lot to say about lots of things, and I do not agree with her on all of them. I am very interested in the Lib Dem position on cutting wages and benefits and putting poor people further into poverty. I think that that is a stark reminder of what Mr Rennie stands for. Members will not be surprised to hear that our SNP Scottish Government has a few ideas on how exactly to build economic growth. One way to boost the Scottish economy is for the Parliament to unite in calling on the UK Government to give the green light to the Scottish Government’s proposals for shovel-ready projects. The Government recently published a list of shovel-ready infrastructure projects that would support employment; it is estimated that every additional £100 million of capital spending would grow around 1,400 jobs across the Scottish economy. We cannot cut our way out of recession; we must build our way out of it. More jobs, more tax and more confidence makes for better and sustained recovery—it is not rocket science. It seems that Scottish Labour is just as clueless as the coalition is on the economy. The Labour Party, north Britain division, derided plan MacB when the SNP Scottish Government first put it forward at the end of last year. However, now that the IMF has called on the UK Government to increase infrastructure investment, Scottish Labour is in favour of more investment. Perhaps it should use its presence and its voice down at Westminster to reverse the 33 per cent cut in Scotland’s capital budget. Since the summer of 2011, the SNP has called for the UK Government to adopt a plan MacB approach to economic growth. As we have heard, that involves increased capital investment, improved access to finance for small and medium-sized enterprises and the introduction of measures to boost economic confidence and income security.

I certainly can. I would not spend £100 billion on Trident missiles—I would spend it on economic growth. The SNP Government has been doing all that it can to invest in recovery by securing new jobs and investment. It has been doing all that it can to protect Scotland from the effects of Westminster's misguided economic policy. We in this Parliament are also delivering a record 25,000 modern apprenticeships a year—I see somebody huffing and puffing, but he would not be if it was his son who was in an apprenticeship. Our opportunities for all programme ensures that all young people have access to the opportunities that they deserve after leaving school—building the way out of recession. Osborne’s austerity measures are putting all of that at risk. In a good relationship we need good communication. It is on that topic of communication that I turn, briefly, to the report that was published today by the European and External Relations Committee. The UK Government shows a distinct lack of respect for all the devolved nations. David Cameron’s use of the veto at the December Council meeting was at best misguided and at worst a clear indication that the opinions and concerns of the other nations of the UK really did not matter. When David Lidington and David Mundell gave evidence to the committee, they made a number of commitments and recognised that communication was not good. They put some commitments on the table about future working practice. The minister for Europe stated: “in addition to the normal structured process, in which I make myself available to talk to the devolved ministers ahead of each JMCE meeting, I will similarly make myself available at the time or immediately after the general affairs council preceding a European Council.” The minister confirmed that that would apply to informal councils too. He continued: “I thought that that might be one way of ensuring that we can build into the system a fairly last-minute formal point of consultation, so that the devolved Administrations, including Scotland, can feel that they really are being listened to seriously”.—[Official Report, European and External Relations Committee, 20 February 2012; c 386.] I could not agree with him more. I wait to see whether that is delivered. I welcome that commitment from the UK Government. I hope that it continues to listen to the Scottish Government, because I believe that this Scottish Government is best placed to make decisions that are best for Scotland. With control over all of our economic levers—yes, through independence—the Scottish Government will be able to do more to tackle the lack of growth in the economy and to make Scotland better.

I offer a quote of my own: “The way to get the right answers is by being there, vigorous, confident, leading in Europe, not limping along several paces behind ... That’s why the euro is not just about our economy, but our destiny.” That was said by Tony Blair in October 2002.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the United Kingdom Government’s proposed changes to child tax credit will have on the ability of families in Scotland to access childcare. (S4O-00923)

The minister is aware that 118,700 children will be affected by the changes, which will make it more difficult for families on low incomes to access appropriate childcare. Can the minister reassure us that the Scottish Government will do everything within its power to prevent those families from falling further into poverty as a result of this abhorrent attack, by the Westminster Government, on hard-working families?

I commend the cabinet secretary—he will not be surprised to hear—for initiating this important inquiry. Sometimes, we as parliamentarians and those in government have to face difficult situations. An example is how we deal with people in our society who offend and reoffend and, in the case of the report that we are discussing, women who have entered the criminal justice system. The cabinet secretary was brave to accept that, compared to men, women are getting longer sentences for lesser crimes, and he was brave to set up the commission to tackle that inequality—an inequality that seems to be unrecognised by David McLetchie. I also take this opportunity to commend the team who made up the commission. It was ably chaired by the former Lord Advocate Elish Angiolini, who has a long and distinguished career in our Scottish justice system. It is worth while restating the commission’s remit. It was: “to consider the evidence on how to improve outcomes for women in the criminal justice system; to make recommendations for practical measures in this Parliament to reduce their reoffending and reverse the recent increase in the female prisoner population.” I was astonished to learn that the female prison population has doubled in the past 10 years. I believe that a solution needs to be found that not only breaks the cycle of reoffending but prevents people from entering the criminal justice system in the first place. Notwithstanding the percentages that David McLetchie gave us, it seems that only 2 per cent of female offenders are involved in serious violent crime. That means that 98 per cent do not represent a serious risk of harm to the public. I reaffirm my position that, if someone is a danger to the public, a custodial sentence is the only option. Some women will still require a prison sentence. I welcome the recommendations in the report, especially the call for more community-based disposals. I believe, as does the Association of Directors of Social Work, that the key to better outcomes for these women, and in many cases for their children, is better joint working and preventative work with an emphasis on greater collaboration and the involvement of universal and mainstream services alongside the criminal justice services. The involvement of joint services is essential if we are to ensure that vulnerable and hard-to-reach women are enabled to access appropriate services in their communities. That is usually where their support network is, and that is where we can get the best outcomes. The need for preventative and early intervention services is overwhelming. Services that focus on the families and children of offenders are critical if we are to reduce the negative impact of parental offending and imprisonment on children. The Government has already provided £8.5 million in funding to the 218 centre in Glasgow, which is highlighted as an example of good practice in the commission’s report. It was also highlighted as an excellent example in the report on female offenders in the criminal justice system by the session 3 Equal Opportunities Committee, which was chaired by Margaret Mitchell. We felt that it was a fantastic community-based project. I was delighted to hear that that funding will be maintained in 2012-13. The 218 centre provides a specialist community-based facility to help women offenders to address their offending behaviour and tackle the underlying causes. The results speak for themselves. The police have recorded that offending by the 320 women who were referred to the centre between June 2007 and May 2008 reduced by 21 per cent following their contact with the service. The 218 centre has also been the subject of an independent evaluation by London South Bank University, which estimates that the cost benefit of every £1 that is invested in the service is a potential saving of £2.50 per year across healthcare, criminal justice and social care. The funding is one of the best examples of preventative spend that I have seen. We know that, in some cases, it costs up to £70,000 a year to keep a person in prison, but it costs only £3,000 a year to support them in the community. Better health plays a vital role in rehabilitation. As the Parliament knows, the responsibility for prisoner healthcare, including mental health and addiction services, moved from the SPS to the national health service at the end of last year. I hope that that will ensure a smoother transition from prison to the community in terms of treatment, support and access to mainstream services. As the previous Equal Opportunities Committee heard, better healthcare gives the best outcomes in dealing with the serious underlying causes of reoffending. That committee reported that the majority of women in prison suffer from mental health issues and/or addiction to alcohol or drugs, and a large proportion have been in a generational cycle of criminality. The saddest fact is that a number of those women are very vulnerable and are victims of crime. Some are victims of domestic or historical abuse. I have said before that I firmly believe that they need a hospital bed, not a prison cell. I ask the cabinet secretary to remember in his deliberations on the report’s recommendations that he already knows about and has visited excellent projects, such as the Wise Group’s routes out of prison project and Barnardo’s women in focus project, which provides mentors and guidance for women offenders and reduces reoffending. The women in focus service works with community-based orders and with women and their criminal justice supervising officers. It helps young women in particular to comply with their orders, gives them constant support and practical help via a mentor, and looks at their budgeting and improving their social skills and education. The commission makes many good recommendations for women in the system, but I ask the cabinet secretary to consider some of them for men, too. I believe to my feminist core that, if they work for women, they should surely work for men. We can then truly break the cycle of reoffending.

I commend the Cabinet Secretary for Justice for taking the issue seriously by initiating the commission in the first place. The First Minister will no doubt be aware that a high proportion of women offenders suffer from mental illness. Can the First Minister give me some indication of the action that has already been taken to address that issue? Can he further reassure me that the women will be given the highest standard of medical care?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made with its child poverty strategy. (S4O-00861)

I welcome the range of work that the Scottish Government is undertaking, within the powers that are available to it, to lift children and families out of poverty and to reduce the pressure on household budgets through the social wage. The social wage is, once again, under attack from the opponents of universal benefits, who argue that measures such as the council tax freeze and free prescriptions benefit only the well-off. Does the minister agree that it is struggling households and the working poor for whom such benefits are of particular importance and that, without the relief on household incomes that the social wage provides, many more children and families would be left vulnerable?

This debate ends the European and External Relations Committee’s consultation on EU priorities for 2012. I put on record my thanks to the clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre for their support in bringing the report to members. Although it is the end of the consultation, it is only the beginning of the serious work that must be undertaken to ensure that Scotland’s voice is heard in Brussels. The European and External Relations Committee is the Scottish Parliament’s lead committee on EU issues but, in fact, all the committees of the Parliament are European committees. It has been estimated that upwards of two thirds of the legislation that passes through the chamber begins life in Brussels. The common fisheries policy, the common agricultural policy—I am sure that both will feature prominently in the debate—proposals for a North Sea energy grid and targets for renewable energy are issues whose importance cannot be overstated in the Parliament. It would be too easy to believe that we can leave the business of Brussels to others. We may be well served by our Scottish MEPs, who have contributed to the report, and the Scottish Government has never been more active, but we MSPs cannot leave it to them alone to articulate Scotland’s views. The committees of the Parliament have a vital role to play in ensuring that the voice of Scotland’s stakeholders is heard. As the old saying goes, the early bird catches the worm. It is certainly true that we have to get in early to have influence in Europe. As the report documents, the Scottish Parliament’s committees are committed to early engagement, getting in early, and seeking to influence when that influence can be most keenly felt. The deputy convener of the European and External Relations Committee, Hanzala Malik, has pointed out on many occasions that EU issues have a significant impact on the lives of our constituents. We have a duty to them to ensure that we do not simply allow the EU to happen to Scotland but work actively to secure the greatest possible benefit for the people whom we represent in our constituencies. When the European and External Relations Committee began its investigations into EU issues that will come forward in 2012—those issues appear in the report—the task was daunting. Some 70 issues were presented to us in December 2011 as likely to have an impact on the affairs of Scotland. As we debate those issues, the committees have already begun their focused engagement. Over the course of this year, they will discuss with, consult, take evidence from and scrutinise the key players at home and abroad to ensure that nothing is missed or overlooked, and that due priority is given to important issues. The European and External Relations Committee will shortly publish a report on developments in the euro zone and their impact on Scotland. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee will publish reports on the reforms of the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy, and the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has already begun its dialogue with the House of Lords on issues that affect public procurement. We will hear more from the other committees about such developments over the next few months. The adoption of the Lisbon treaty in December 2009 was significant for the Scottish Parliament. For the first time in a treaty, regional Parliaments were recognised as part of the EU legislative process. I use the word “regional” because that is the word that is used in the treaty. It would not be my first choice of adjective, but perhaps a debate on that is for another time. National Parliaments—or, in the case of the United Kingdom, the supra-national Westminster Parliament—are now expected to take into account our views in Holyrood as well as those of our colleagues in Cardiff and Belfast. Whether that has always happened as effectively as it should have is no doubt a matter for debate, but the principle is true. The Scottish Parliament should take every opportunity to remind ourselves and others of what we do and how it has an impact on us. In the previous session, the European and External Relations Committee initiated debate and discussion about the introduction of an EU strategy for the Scottish Parliament to ensure that advantage is taken of that treaty change. The resulting strategy was agreed in the chamber in 2010. As well as initiating early engagement with the development of EU issues, the strategy meant the creation of the new committee role of EU reporter. I know that several of those reporters will speak in the debate. The reporter is essential and is responsible for ensuring that their respective committee is up to date with EU developments. The system has worked well so far, and I thank all the reporters for their committed work and for the time and effort that they have put into drafting the report that is before us. The deliberations that have led to this debate are not a one-off. EU issues are continuous, and Parliament receives notification of up to 20 European issues a week. Towards the end of this year, we will audit how well we, as a Parliament, have engaged on those issues. The economic situation dominates the debate in Brussels at the moment and, as I said, my committee will shortly publish a short report on that issue. Finance will be at the heart of another debate kicking off in Europe, namely the determination of the next budget—the multi-annual financial framework. Those negotiations will determine how much money is available for EU projects—in other words, how much money Scotland and the rest of the UK will get. Closely related to those negotiations is the development of two policy areas that are vital to Scotland’s interests: the future of structural funds, and the newly named horizon 2020 for research and development. The European and External Relations Committee will publish reports on both those issues by the summer. In addition, we intend to stage a high-level conference on the horizon 2020 initiative in the chamber in May. A wide range of stakeholders has been invited to discuss that important issue. I ask members to keep an eye on the committee’s website, where we will shortly publish details of that event. European funding represents a big opportunity for Scottish institutions. Scotland has been successful in securing significant funds from the current research and development funding stream programme, framework programme 7. By holding an event on the horizon 2020 programme, the committee hopes to bring together interested parties in a team Scotland approach. Other broad themes are emerging from the policies that are being developed in Brussels, including the greening of policies such as the CFP and CAP; a welcome focus on outcomes, notably in relation to economic growth and jobs; and greater connectivity between parts of the EU, whether through energy infrastructure, greater harmonisation of legal codes or the removal of barriers as the single market continues to be strengthened. Europe has never shown a greater interest in events unfolding in Scotland, although perhaps that touches on a debate for another day. Suffice to say, interest in Europe in, for example, developments in renewables, innovations in sea fishing and the Parliament’s Public Petitions Committee, continues to grow. Last year, my committee spent two days on a whirlwind induction of the EU institutions sponsored by the European Commission. I put on record my thanks to the Commission for that. As many members know, Brussels and the EU institutions are not, as they are often painted in the popular imagination, full of Eurocrats who spend their days measuring bananas. That was interesting for the committee, because of the perceptions we encountered before our visit. In fact, the institutions are open, and the officials whom we met were welcoming and interested in what we had to say. We spent almost an hour with Maja Kirchner, the chef de cabinet of Commissioner Damanaki, the fisheries commissioner, who outlined the reforms proposed for the common fisheries policy. A spirited discussion ensued about all things fish, from the Icelandic situation and mackerel to the nature of the nets that are used to catch cod in the North Sea. We learned a great deal during our trip, but what is important is that I believe the officials of the EU also learned something. It was clear to them that we, as representatives of the Parliament, had something serious to say; we had done our homework and consulted the stakeholders, and we were presenting a reasoned opinion. When that happens, officials in Brussels sit up and listen. The Scottish Government’s officials in Brussels were a vital resource—I commend them to the cabinet secretary. They may be small in number but their commitment to Scotland’s interests was plain to see. After we conclude today, it is important that we do not lose the momentum that we have created by having this debate in the first place. Scotland needs us to be vigilant, attentive and alive to the challenges and opportunities that are inherent in our relationship with the EU. I look forward to hearing members’ contributions and, on behalf of the committee, to garnering positive ideas from throughout the chamber for continuing and building on that active, constructive engagement and ensuring that officials in Brussels carry on sitting up and listening to what Scotland’s Parliament has to say. I move, That the Parliament notes the European and External Relations Committee’s 1st Report, 2012 (Session 4): The Scottish Parliament’s EU priorities for 2012 (SP Paper 93).

I welcome the decision to devote debating time in the Parliament to a serious subject on which I have spoken on many occasions. I declare an interest, because I am a campaigner for Stop the Traffik. I also welcome the publication of the two reports that are referred to in the cabinet secretary’s motion. We have had several debates about human trafficking in the Parliament over the years and I have raised the issue in letters and questions to ministers and the First Minister. I have been left in no doubt about how seriously the Scottish Government takes the issue. Baroness Kennedy herself said that her discussions with the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice during her inquiry impressed on her how personally committed they both are to eradicating trafficking from Scotland. Baroness Kennedy’s report is a substantial and serious piece of work, which provides much food for thought and a useful road map for building on and enhancing the work that the Scottish Government and the relevant agencies in Scotland have done and the systems that have been put in place. I fully endorse Baroness Kennedy’s recommendation that “Scotland should be taking steps to make it clear that it has established an environment which is totally hostile to trafficking and that the police, border agency and all other parts of the state apparatus are geared up to stamp it out”, although I add that the activities of the UK Border Agency are—somewhat notoriously—not exactly open to the influence of the Scottish Parliament or the Scottish Government. I will come back to that. I am glad that the Scottish Government has agreed in principle to accept the vast majority of the recommendations in Baroness Kennedy’s report. That does not detract from the actions that the Scottish Government has already taken or the significant investment that has been directed towards preventing trafficking and dealing with its consequences in Scotland. However, we all recognise that the area is one in which, in many respects, our work is never done. The nature of trafficking will change and evolve at different times and in different places. The traffickers themselves are by their very nature cunning and manipulative, and they will change their methods in an attempt to get round the systems that are put in place to stop them. Therefore, there will always be room for improvement and we must always be vigilant, to ensure that our response to trafficking keeps pace with the nature of the crime. I welcome and look forward to the summit on trafficking that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has pledged to convene. It will help to bring together everyone with an interest in this issue, in order to identify and implement the continuous improvements that I am talking about. I endorse Baroness Kennedy’s recommendations. To them, I would add a particular concern that has been brought to my attention—that the emphasis on organised crime in discussions about trafficking could, in some cases, detract from situations in which children who are trafficked are victims not of organised crime but of more random criminal behaviour by families who sell on their children. We must keep that form of trafficking in our minds at all times. I said that I would come back to the UK Border Agency. Anyone who knows me will know that I do not get on with the UK Border Agency. Some of its methods and attitudes act as a hindrance to identifying and tackling trafficking in Scotland. I would go so far as to say that the UKBA lacks humanity. In my opinion, that puts lives at risk. The UKBA’s refusal to communicate with MSPs at any level has been an issue in this chamber before, but this bears repeating: immigration and asylum may be reserved matters, but their impact is felt in devolved areas and is just as likely to be dealt with by a member of this Parliament as by an MP. By continuing to refuse to deal with MSPs, the UKBA is placing barriers in the way of the properly co-ordinated response that we all recognise is required to deal with trafficking. The UKBA is putting people who have been trafficked at risk of not receiving the recognition and support that they need. That brings me on to the national referral mechanism, which has serious weaknesses. In the mechanism, the UKBA and the UK human trafficking centre are identified as competent authorities with the right to make decisions on trafficked status. We do not have that ability in Scotland because the UKBA does not even speak to us. In evidence to an Equal Opportunities Committee inquiry, in which I took part, Michael Emberson of Migrant Helpline said: “it is the only system in the world that requires the victim to consent to being a victim. They have to sign the form; otherwise, it cannot be put into the NRM and they cannot get a decision.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 4 May 2010; c 1670.] During the committee’s inquiry, a report, “Wrong kind of victim?”, was mentioned that was highly critical of the NRM. It was produced by the anti-trafficking monitoring group—a coalition including Anti-Slavery International, Amnesty International UK and TARA, the trafficking awareness-raising alliance. The report found that new anti-trafficking measures were “not fit for purpose” and that the UK Government was breaching its obligations under the European convention against trafficking. It also found that the NRM was “flawed”, possibly discriminatory and operated by “minimally trained” UKBA staff who put the emphasis on the immigration status of the presumed trafficked people. Trafficked people are victims of crime, not criminals. I raise the problems with the UKBA not to absolve the Scottish Government of responsibility—far from it. I am sure that the justice secretary will confirm that I have sent letters to him on these issues. However, it would be remiss of me to ignore the fact that if the Scottish Government does not have control over the policing of borders or the identification of victims of trafficking, it does not have control over some of the most crucial tools that are available in tackling trafficking. It is not only the current UK Government that has had such issues brought to its attention; the previous UK Government did too. Neither of them has dealt with them, and that should be to their eternal shame.

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will consider changing the law so that sentences for crimes committed by an offender released on licence are served consecutively rather than concurrently. (S4O-00673)

I am encouraged by the significant reductions that we have seen in knife crime this week, and fully support the Scottish Government’s approach to tackling it. I am delighted that the cabinet secretary joined me and others last night at the launch of the no knives, better lives campaign at the street project in Hamilton. It is crucial that the public has confidence in our courts and justice system. People in my constituency have made it absolutely clear to me that, when sentences for separate offences are served concurrently, their confidence in justice is undermined. Can the cabinet secretary assure me that he will give serious consideration to taking action to ensure that individual sentences for separate offences are served consecutively?

The appointment of Angela Constance as the UK’s first dedicated youth employment minister and the announcement of the strategy should leave no one in any doubt about how seriously the Scottish Government takes the agenda. I hoped that we would not hear suggestions from the Opposition that the Scottish Government or, indeed, the Scottish National Party does not care about the future of our young people or has not given them sufficient priority, but some members have already been guilty of suggesting that. The issue is too serious for that. It is not an issue for party-political point scoring. Just as the strategy is an all-Government and all-Scotland strategy, our approach should be an all-Parliament approach. We can all see the impact of very difficult job market conditions on young people in our constituencies, and I do not believe that there is a single member who does not share the Scottish Government’s desire to do whatever it can to ensure that those young Scots do not become a lost generation. Last night, I had the pleasure of attending the launch of the no knives, better lives campaign in my constituency, and of witnessing again the street project, which is a remarkable immersive drama project that challenges young people who are at risk of becoming involved in criminal or antisocial behaviour with the consequences of their actions. It is a great project that has a great success rate and I wish the street 2 well. The best way of preventing young people from behaving in ways that damage themselves or others is to ensure that they are able to make their contribution to society and to know that they are spending their time positively and productively, whether in education, training or work. Youth unemployment is a problem not just for the individuals who are affected by it but for society as a whole. I am therefore glad to welcome the youth employment strategy and the substantial set of actions that it contains. It recognises that the problem is complex and requires a complex and wide-ranging response. No Government can magic jobs out of thin air—we just wish that it could. The actions that are set out in the strategy will go a long way to ensuring that no young person goes without a job, an apprenticeship or a training place, and that our young people are fully prepared for the world of employment with the work and life skills that employers are looking for. At this stage, I declare an interest. As the mother of an apprentice joiner, I have particular reason to be grateful for the Scottish Government’s superb record on delivering apprenticeships. I was pleased to hear the First Minister confirm last week in the chamber that Skills Development Scotland is confident that 25,000 apprenticeships will be achieved during the current financial year, and even more pleased to hear that 45 per cent of modern apprentices are now young women; I am sure that you approve of that, Presiding Officer. I have been concerned about girls not getting equal access to apprenticeships, so the news that almost half of current apprentices are girls is welcome indeed. I look forward to that figure rising in future to reflect the gender balance of the nation. The most crucial point about modern apprenticeships is that each one is attached to a real job. The apprenticeships are not a repeat of some of the youth employment schemes of the past, such as the youth opportunities programme and the youth training scheme, which are the most well-known examples. Too often, they were just a mechanism for massaging unemployment figures rather than a real attempt to provide a young person with the skills and knowledge that they needed to graduate to permanent employment. That is not the case with our modern apprenticeships. I know from my son’s experience that he is clear that the joinery skills that he is acquiring now will be put to use in a future career in that profession. He understands that his training is not taking place in a vacuum; it will lead to a job when it has been completed. That knowledge allows him to make plans for his future and to look forward with optimism. All Scotland’s modern apprentices can share that confidence. It is also fantastic to have someone in the house who can fix the wonky cupboard and the broken drawer. We are offering more and more choice in apprenticeships. A young person can now be apprenticed not just in the traditional trades such as joinery, crucial though such trades are to our economy, but in a wide range of sectors from renewable energy to accounting, from the creative industries to youth work. Modern apprenticeships are not about trying to force square pegs into round holes for the sake of getting a young person off the dole. Instead, they provide our apprentices with the opportunity to learn professional skills that will equip them for a future career in an area that genuinely interests them and matches their personal life aspirations. With 25,000 apprenticeships in each year of the parliamentary session, we will be able to create a generation of highly skilled young people who will contribute to our future economy in all its diversity. Vital and welcome as the youth employment strategy and its actions are, it would be remiss of me to talk about any kind of employment without making the point that the Scottish Government would be able to do so much more for our young people if Parliament had real job-creating powers and control over the levers of our economy. Kezia Dugdale mentioned poverty and, unless we have control over the tax and benefits system in Scotland, we will never be able to deal properly with poverty. Until that happens, the Government is inevitably constrained in how effectively it can tackle youth unemployment. I am confident, however, that the strategy is as comprehensive as it can be in our current circumstances. It will make a difference for our young people—it has certainly made a difference to the young man in my life—and I look forward to working with the youth employment minister to implement the strategy in my constituency.

4. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to address unemployment among young people. (S4F-00437)

I welcome those actions, of course. However, the Labour Party voted against the Scottish Government’s commitment to provide 25,000 modern apprenticeships in every year of the parliamentary session. Will the First Minister give us an update on the progress of the apprenticeships, which offer a vital way of ensuring that young people get the skills and experience that they need to gain future employment?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the Scottish Retail Consortium. (S4O-00642)

I thank the minister for that answer and draw his attention to an area in Hamilton that has suffered the loss of a number of independent retailers who had been there for decades. Those retailers were too big for support from the small business bonus scheme but not big enough to have the protection that a big corporation has through economies of scale. What work can the minister and the Government do with local authorities to reverse the loss of long-standing independent businesses on our high streets?

The Scottish Government has a carer strategy for Scotland that has a particular focus on young carers. Can the First Minister assure me that the detrimental impact of the Welfare Reform Bill will be monitored to ensure that that most vulnerable group of young people in Scotland is properly supported?

A yes vote in the referendum that the First Minister has just set out would see Scotland take her place in the world as an independent nation. Can he confirm that one advantage of that independence is that Scotland could be a nation without the obscenity of nuclear weapons in her waters?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made regarding the devolution of reserved tribunals to Scotland. (S4O-00571)

Does the minister share my concern about the UK Government’s proposals to introduce a charge of up to £1,750 that must be paid before an individual can take a case to an employment tribunal? Does she agree that that amounts to an attack on fundamental employment rights, particularly of lower-paid workers, and that it demonstrates the need for not just the management but the control of charging of employment tribunals to be fully devolved to the Scottish Parliament sooner rather than later?

The primary 5 and primary 6 pupils at St Elizabeth’s primary school in Eddlewood in Hamilton in my constituency know something about ambition in learning. They are taught by Christine Emmett, who last year received both the Scottish and the United Kingdom teacher of the year awards. I have seen Christine’s teaching methods and the response that she draws from her pupils at first hand, because the Minister for Learning, Science and Scotland’s Languages, Alasdair Allan, and I were lucky enough to visit St Elizabeth’s late last year after Christine won her award. We joined in with a Scots language version of heads, shoulders, knees and toes, singing it as heids, shooders, knaps and taes. It was a very good day. More than that, we saw how Christine’s emphasis on pastoral care in her teaching—knowing and valuing each child as a whole person with individual strengths and weaknesses—results in a class of happy, confident children who come to school every day to learn and who are eager to achieve. Christine believes that, ultimately, knowing that you are respected and cared for is far more important for a child than being able to do the times tables. However, the fact is that a child who feels secure and cared for is also a child who is getting the kind of start in life that will help them to learn and to get the most out of their education in a way that works best for them so that they can go on to realise their full potential. Believe me, Christine Emmett is an inspirational teacher who in many ways embodies the hopes and ambitions that we have for Scotland’s education system. We want every school in Scotland to be a place where children are secure in the knowledge that they are respected and cared for and can as a consequence take pleasure in learning and have the confidence and the self-belief to expect and have an educational experience that maximises their individual life chances. That is our ambition for every child, but it is particularly crucial for children who do not feel adequately respected or cared for at home, whether that is because there is parental neglectful—sorry, parental neglect; I think that I put somebody else’s false teeth in this morning, Presiding Officer—or because their home lives are chaotic and disrupted, or simply because their parents lack the knowledge and ability to impart self-confidence to their child, perhaps because they themselves were never taught that. For all vulnerable children like those, schools and nurseries are, as the motion says, the “single greatest tool” that we have in the fight to break that cycle and to ensure that no child is condemned to live out some kind of pre-ordained narrative of failure. That is why early intervention and preventative services are such crucial policy themes for the Scottish National Party Government. They are threads that run through every aspect of the Government’s programme, for which education, high-performing schools and improving learning outcomes are absolutely central. Early intervention is undoubtedly the key to improving outcomes for the children who start off with the fewest chances in life. However, it is also crucial for the children who have problems that are fewer and perhaps less overwhelming on the surface, but which, if they are left unaddressed, can still blight potential in the longer term. Those problems might include mild learning problems, a condition such as Asperger’s syndrome, dyslexia or dyspraxia, a physical impairment or simply shyness and lack of confidence. Teachers who know the child well and as an individual can identify such issues early and work to address them in a way that compensates for areas of weakness while drawing out and building on the strengths that those children have. Indeed, that sounds like a template for successful learning for any child—after all, every human being has unique strengths and weaknesses. Last week, I had a discussion with some teachers, who told me that having some awareness of the challenges that young people face—not only in learning—is vital. One teacher told me about a young boy in primary 7 who got detention over and over again for lateness. It turned out that he was caring for a mother who had an addiction, and the fact that he got himself and his two younger siblings up in the morning, fed and dressed and to school was a major achievement on its own. That young man needed support, not detention. Intervening early to identify actual or potential problems and prevent them from holding children back means teaching the whole child. Curriculum for excellence allows teachers to do just that in a way that perhaps was not available to them before. Christine Emmett says: “Curriculum for Excellence is hard work; to make it work, you have to be on the pulse and you have to be aware of any new initiatives. You have to put a lot of energy into the activities to make them purposeful. You have to take an experience and make it into a learning outcome”, and goodness me, has Christine Emmett got energy. She admits the challenges of curriculum for excellence but, like teachers throughout Scotland, she is meeting them head-on and grasping the opportunities that the new curriculum gives a teacher such as her. Members should listen to the positive words that she uses—such as energy, purpose and determination—and compare them with Labour’s continued negativity about curriculum for excellence, harping on the same old tune for virtually the whole of the previous session of Parliament. Labour has learned nothing from the rejection of its negative politics at the ballot box last year, and it is apparently determined to be forever the glass-half-empty party when it comes to Scottish education. One would have hoped that, after sitting through so many education debates in the previous session, Labour might finally have grasped the concept of constructive opposition, but it is not to be. I will finish on a positive note. Christine Emmett says: “Now it’s about actually starting with the child, making use of their community and trying to get them ready for life tomorrow”. I could not agree more. I commend Christine Emmett and all Scotland’s teachers—and of course the Scottish Government—for taking exactly that direction.

I join other members in thanking Margaret Burgess for securing this important members’ business debate on a matter that is of increasing concern to many of us inside and outside the chamber. That is evidenced by the number of members who have contributed to the debate. More important, the issue is seriously affecting the lives of more and more of our constituents. For a long time, there was a deep-seated taboo against usury—the practice of charging excessive, unreasonably high interest rates on loans. That taboo was common to societies around the world. The Christian Bible, the Qur’an and the Torah all contain strong words against usury, and the Romans would punish usurers by putting them in a sack with two ferrets—hence the phrase “ferrets fighting in a sack”. Although most of us would accept that international financial practices have by necessity changed a lot since those ancient days, I believe that there is still a widespread sense of disgust at those who entrap and exploit the poor, the weak and the vulnerable through the mechanism of debt. However, as is so often the case when it comes to the financial industry, ethical and moral concerns do not hold a candle to the demands of the money markets, which seem to regard it as their God-given right to take what they can from people, regardless of the cost to individuals and society. If pay day loans are not a prime example of usury, then I do not know what is, but the taboo has now faded to the extent that, in any given ad break on TV, we are almost guaranteed to see at least one shameless attempt by a pay day loan company to present its products as a quick and easy solution to a short-term financial shortfall. I would also highlight those furniture and appliance stores that advertise the chance to buy a new sofa or dishwasher for small weekly payments over a period of years—the catch being that a person can end up paying thousands of pounds for a washer-dryer that should have cost only a few hundred pounds. What those adverts full of cheery, satisfied punters do not tell us, of course, is that—far from being a quick fix—the exorbitant interest rates on the loans are just as likely to lead to a spiral of debt that can snowball out of control and leave many people in a much worse situation than they were in to begin with. It is easy to understand why increasing numbers of people still fall into the pay day loans trap. Times are hard for many, and with the high street banks—including those owned by the taxpayer—having all but withdrawn lending and other financial assistance for ordinary families and businesses, the quick fix can seem like the only available option. Although these companies might like to present themselves as a friend when people are in a financial bind, no one should be fooled into thinking that they have any friendly intentions at heart. Their only aim is to extort as much as possible out of their customers. I saw a particularly distressing example of these companies’ methods recently when I helped a vulnerable person—a gentleman with learning disabilities who had bought a washer from one of the well-known appliance stores. He fell behind in his payments and was being not just pursued but relentlessly harassed by the lending company. He ended up paying thousands of pounds for a £300 washer. I do not think that anyone will be surprised that the UK’s regulatory framework for pay day loans is one of the most relaxed—perhaps we should say “irresponsible”—in the world. Other countries have caps on interest rates. In Canada, it is 60 per cent, and many regional Governments in Canada are now passing legislation that limits rates even further. We need regulation of that kind to be adopted in the UK, and soon. Let us restore that old taboo against usury and put a stop to exploitation and extortion by lenders.

I support Jim Eadie’s motion and congratulate him on securing the debate. One of the great things about the Parliament is that we debate serious humanitarian issues. What is trafficking? Stop the Traffik, of which I am a supporter, says that it is “to be deceived or taken against your will, bought, sold and transported into slavery for sexual exploitation, sweat shops, child brides, circuses, sacrificial worship, forced begging, sale of human organs, farm labour, domestic servitude.” In trafficking, “victims usually suffer repeated physical abuse, fear, torture and threats to families to break their spirits and turn them into saleable commodities. A person can be sold and trafficked many times”— sometimes for as little as $20. Over the past few years, Stop the Traffik campaigners have put pressure on the big chocolate manufacturers around the world to eradicate the worst forms of child labour in the cocoa farms of Ivory Coast in west Africa, where thousands of young children are trafficked, enslaved and abused to harvest the cocoa that makes more than a third of the world’s chocolate. Stop the Traffik tells us that, from January last year, four-finger Kit Kats have been fair trade, but Nestlé refuses to budge on its two-finger biscuits. Steve Chalke, the founder of Stop the Traffik and the United Nations special adviser on community action against human trafficking, recently said: “We welcome the Nestlé announcement. We are relieved for the cocoa farmers and children in Ivory Coast. The surrender of Nestlé demonstrates that by making a simple consumer choice ordinary people can hold multi-nationals to account. Though we understand that it is hard to make all products ethical overnight, we want to see that this is more than a token gesture. So, we intend to keep the pressure on Nestlé until their commitment is global and product wide, like their competitor Mars. No chocolate should have the bitter aftertaste of slavery. Therefore our campaign continues.” I remain committed to that campaign. Maybe we should give two-finger Kit Kats a miss until Nestlé makes them fair trade. The Ivory Coast is the top supplier of the world’s cocoa and, as we have heard, the centre of chocolate slavery. Slave traders traffick boys between the ages of nine and 16 from their homes, which are mostly in Mali, but also in Burkina Faso, Ghana and Togo. Some countries are transport points, while others receive and supply children. The main destination is the cocoa farms in Ivory Coast, where boys are lured by the promise of a salary for their hard work. Once they arrive, they are forced to work from 6 am to 6 pm or later without pay. They have to carry back-breaking sacks of cocoa and are often starved, beaten and locked up at night without toilet facilities. Sometimes human stories are the best way to illustrate a situation. I will tell the story of Aly Diabate: “When I was 11 years old, I was taken by a slave trader and sold to a farmer in the Ivory Coast. For 4 years, I worked 80-100 hours per week. I was beaten. At night we were locked into a windowless shed—18 boys in a 20’ x 25’ room. We had a bucket to use instead of a toilet. We were let out only to work.” Aly Diabate was promised a bicycle and $150 for his family in exchange for his work on a farm in Ivory Coast. Once he arrived at the cocoa farm of Le Gros—the big man—life was not as he had expected. He and the other children were forced to work in the fields for 12 and a half hours every day. He was forced to carry bags of cocoa that were taller than his 4ft frame. The others would help to hoist the heavy bag on to his head and when he fell down, the boss would beat him with a bicycle chain until he stood back up and lifted the bag again. I ask members to think very carefully before munching into their chocolate Santa or their selection box this Christmas. I ask them to think about where it came from and whether children such as Aly were involved in its production. Were they abused to provide that chocolate Santa?

I have worked in the NHS and in social care, so the question of how to achieve closer working between health and local authority social work is familiar to me, as it must be to everyone who has worked in the sectors in the past 20-odd years. I share Malcolm Chisholm’s and Mary Scanlon’s frustration. We have been discussing the issue for at least 20 years, right back to the introduction of care in the community. From joint futures through to local healthcare co-operatives and community health partnerships, there have been many names for the approach and a variety of structural arrangements, but the common hope has always been that in one way or another the differences and separations between agencies could be overcome sufficiently to enable service users to access the much-wished-for seamless service. The fact that we are still talking about the issue is enough to tell us that that ambition has never quite been achieved. That is not to say that there has not been progress. There are superb examples of integration that has delivered significant improvements for service users. We have heard several examples of that already, and I add one from my area—the integrated learning disability service that is delivered jointly by NHS Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire Council. However, the reality is that the examples of excellence are often driven by enthusiastic and committed individuals and teams, rather than emerging from an organisational culture that prioritises consistent integration across the full range of services. Without a clear statutory underpinning, genuinely integrated services have remained an option rather than an essential. That means that the good examples are too often isolated rather than mainstreamed and that service users still end up on the receiving end of failures in communication, knowledge and understanding between agencies that fall far below the exemplar standards of integration that we all want. We have heard several examples of that. That is why, although I am happy to praise the council and the NHS board in my constituency when they work together as they should, my constituency case load contains plenty of examples of people who have been let down by services on which they rely because staff in one agency have not spoken to or shared information with staff in another or—worse—because staff in different departments of the same organisation have not communicated properly. I am sure that members will be familiar with that scenario. I can see lots of heads nodding. Do not get me wrong—I do not blame staff. When there is a lack of a clear and shared understanding within and between organisations about what integration means and what it is intended to achieve, it is all the harder for individual staff to fully meet service users’ needs. I therefore believe that the Scottish Government’s plans, as set out by the cabinet secretary, will be welcomed by not only service users and their representatives across Scotland, but people working in health and social care, notwithstanding the ADSW briefing. I pay tribute to my constituent Robert Anderson, who runs the Lanarkshire Carers Network and whom most members from Lanarkshire will know. He has been a formidable campaigner for carers and, in turn, has changed policy and informed me in my quest to support my constituents, as he has done for other members. Campaigners such as Robert Anderson deserve our thanks and, importantly, our support. The proposals achieve a good balance between setting down the specifics of principles, structure, resources and accountability and enabling local health and social care partnerships to respond flexibly to local circumstances and needs. From my experience of having been a member of staff in the NHS and in local authority social care, I believe that staff will welcome that firmness and clarity of purpose, which will empower them to do what it takes to achieve the best outcomes for their patients and clients. Setting out clear requirements and duties, far from constraining individual staff, frees them to use their professional skills creatively in the context of that clear vision for integrated care. The proposals on structural change also achieve a good balance. We are neither throwing the baby out with the bath water nor inventing brand new organisations; we are keeping what works in the existing structures and making the changes that need to happen now to make the vision a reality and to deliver genuinely integrated care once and for all. We have already heard that the growing number of older people in the Scottish population means that we can delay changes no longer. We need to ensure that genuinely integrated care happens properly and happens now. Older people will not be the only ones who benefit from the improvements that the agenda will bring about. Everyone who, for whatever reason, relies on NHS or social care services, or a combination of the two, to help them in their daily lives needs us to make the changes and will be better off as a result. That is why I support the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government in their aspirations for a quality service.

The debate is timely not just because we are in the 16 days of action, but because the issues surrounding violence against women are always relevant—they have been debated in the Parliament many times before. Evidence suggests that there is a correlation between economic stress in households and society, and increased incidence of abuse of women. That is why, at times such as those in which we are living now, we must be particularly vigilant in ensuring that women do not end up becoming victims of the recession twice over—not only being disproportionately disadvantaged by cuts to pensions and services, but finding themselves on the receiving end of violence. I strongly welcome the Scottish Government’s emphasis on prevention and early intervention, on working to identify and address circumstances that exacerbate violent behaviour against women and on empowering women to take early action to protect themselves and their children if they think that they are at risk.

I could not agree more—I thank Johann Lamont for that intervention. As I continue with my speech, she will see that I do not think that. My point is that families face additional stress during a recession, and that is not a class issue either. I add my voice to the congratulations for Scottish Women’s Aid on its reaching its 35th anniversary and on the incalculable contribution that it has made to increasing massively awareness and understanding of violence against women in our society, and to greatly improving the response to it. As Jackie Baillie did, I welcome the letter to Santa campaign by the violence reduction unit and Children 1st, and I urge all members to sign the motion that I lodged today on that subject. There is still a long way to go to eradicate gender-based violence, but we can be certain that the difference between how public agencies responded to women who experienced abuse in 1976 and how they respond in 2011 is like night and day. I am glad that Lily Greenan, the director of Scottish Women’s Aid, who has braved the wind to be in the public gallery today, will provide the secretariat to the reformed cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children, which was approved by the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee on Tuesday. I am proud to co-convene the group with Malcolm Chisholm, and I am sure that I will learn a lot from him in the process. One particular stain on our country’s record of responding to violence against women has been the pitifully and stubbornly low rates of convictions for rape and sexual assault. For many years, it was all too easy to get away with rape in Scotland. I am quietly encouraged, therefore, by the early indications that the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009, which came into force a year ago, is starting to have an effect in increasing conviction rates. It is early days, but I believe that we can be hopeful that the act will finally improve the deal that women who have been raped get from our justice system. I want to add an international dimension to the debate, which may be where the continuum of violence against women is witnessed to its fullest extent. Hundreds of women arrive in Scotland every year seeking asylum from countries where war and conflict are used as justification for systematic acts of physical and sexual violence against them, and where the chaos and lawlessness of war create fertile conditions for crimes such as so-called honour killings and human trafficking. I call on the UK Government to consider signing the Council of Europe convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence. A recent amendment to a European qualifications directive requires European Union member states to fully consider gender, including gender identity, when assessing asylum claims. That means that women who seek refuge from gender-related persecution such as female genital mutilation, forced abortion or rape in war should receive greater protection. That is an important step forward in embedding protection for women in the asylum system. I regret, however, that the UK Government has opted out of the directive, thus effectively blocking the right to equal treatment for vulnerable women who come to this country to escape gender-based persecution. Yet again we see a Westminster Government taking a blinkered, tabloid approach to asylum and putting it ahead of its international duty and basic humanity. What is the Scottish Government doing to eradicate violence against women? I also ask it to challenge the UK Government in all its forms. I hope that the minister will today take the opportunity to raise the matter with the UK Government. I support the motion and amendment.

In a recent report on migration and trafficking by this Parliament’s Equal Opportunities Committee, UKBA was harshly criticised for the way in which it determines the status of a trafficked person. The report called for the status of individuals who are suspected of having been trafficked to be determined by local government social work services. Does the First Minister agree that there is a need now to have these issues devolved to the Scottish Parliament? Members: Shame.

What response has the Scottish Government received from the UK Government over amendments to the Scotland Bill that were suggested in August to give Scotland greater control over its representations in Europe?

Union members might ask why I am speaking in today’s debate. I want to make my voice heard for the many women who are on strike today. Many of my constituents have contacted me to ask me to represent their view in this, our national Parliament. I am not an employee in the usual sense of the word. I am a democratically elected representative of the constituency of Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse. I am bound by a duty to speak up for all the people in my constituency. I am expected to do that job and I am here today to fulfil that role. At this point, I should declare an interest in that I am a member of Unison. I support the strikers’ aims of equality, sustainability and fairness. I know that my colleagues in the SNP will speak up for many workers who are affected by the Westminster cash grab, but I will speak for the women who have contacted me to talk about the damaging effects of the Con-Dem proposals. The Fawcett Society has pursued female equality for many years and has come up with some stark analyses of the impact on women. Let us not forget that the cleaners, dinner ladies, school assistants, admin assistants and care givers did not create this financial crisis. Low-paid and part-time women workers did not create the situation that we are in today. It was created by a Labour chancellor and Prime Minister who did not take on the big banks and speculators and it is being continued by a millionaire Tory chancellor who, rather than taking on the people who caused the crisis, has pandered to them and tinkered around the edges with levies on the banks. The Fawcett Society asserts—and I agree—that women in the UK face entrenched economic inequality whereby they are on average poorer than men and face particular barriers to achieving economic independence. For example, women experience a full-time pay gap of 15.5 per cent, 64 per cent of low-paid workers are women and women’s average personal pensions are only 62 per cent of the average for men. After 40-odd years of the Equal Pay Act 1970, women still face an uphill struggle every day to get the same recognition as men. It seems that women are also disproportionately affected by the cuts that are being imposed on an already underpaid sector of our society. The Fawcett Society says that there is clear evidence that the approach that the coalition Government is taking to reduce the deficit is increasing women’s economic inequality and is resulting in a rollback of hard-won gains for women’s equality. The Equal Pay Act 1970 was supposed to end employment injustice for women but, 40-odd years on, there are still women fighting every day for the fundamental right to equal pay for equal work. Equality—whether it be in pay or in pensions—should be a right, not a privilege.

Willie Rennie should listen to some facts. I am going to deal with some of the nonsense that he came up with in his speech. Let us look at the proposals for average-salary pensions as opposed to final-salary pensions. A woman is more likely to be in low-paid, part-time work and is more likely to have taken a career break to have her children. If she is old enough, she may not have been allowed to enter some pension schemes, merely because she is a woman. In some institutions, women are still underrepresented. It recently emerged that only 12.8 per cent of the current senior judiciary are women. As far as I know, only one woman sits in the Supreme Court. The Equality and Human Rights Commission estimates that, at the current pace of change, it will take 45 years to achieve equal numbers of women and men in our senior judiciary. Journalist Hélène Mulholland writes: “Unions say that it wasn’t until after Alexander laid out the plans that they realised that the contribution increase is calculated on the full time equivalent earnings. In other words, if a woman earns under £21,000 because she works part time, she would not benefit from the 1.5 percentage point cap since her contribution rate would be based on the equivalent full time earnings.” So Gavin Brown’s and other people’s assertion that low-paid workers will not be affected by the proposals is completely and utterly untrue. She continues: “The other bug bear is that currently the contribution rates of public servants vary according to the field they work in. The GMB points to the fact that an NHS nurse currently chips in 6.5% contributions, whereas the rate for a high earning judge is zero. With the government saying the average increase over three years will see contributions rise by 3.2 percentage points, and a cap of six percentage points for the top earners, this could see a nurse contribute at least 9.7 percentage points by 2014-15, whereas the judge”— like the ones I mentioned earlier, who sit in the Supreme Court— “would be chipping in 6.” This tax on public sector workers will generate £2.8 billion a year. That is paid for by an average 3.2 percentage point rise in contributions, which is a separate initiative from the pension reform that was announced in the spending review by the UK chancellor, although the Conservatives are deliberately conflating the two issues. Whereas the larger-scale reforms that were suggested by Lord Hutton are at least in principle intended to strengthen the schemes and make savings, the short-term savings are just about getting money directly to Danny Alexander in the Treasury. It is important to remember that we are talking about a rise of 3.2 percentage points, not a rise of 3.2 per cent. New teachers who currently pay 6.4 per cent of their monthly income into their pensions face an increase of at least 50 per cent, to 9.6 per cent. The Government accepts that that means that people will pay more, and the Treasury acknowledges that that element of the deal is designed only to help with deficit reduction in the shorter term rather than to tackle the sustainability of public pensions over the longer term. The unions are right: all public sector workers will have to pay more and work longer and will get pensions that are worth less or are maybe just worthless. Scotland’s women and Scotland’s people should not have this tax imposed on them by a Government that they did not vote for. I believe that the answer is a clear yes vote in an independence referendum. We will end Tory rule over Scotland once and for all.

Will the member take an intervention?

Usually when we open debates, we say that we are delighted to be speaking in the debate, but I open this one with a heavy heart. I thank and pay tribute to the British Nuclear Test Veterans Association for attending the debate and bringing this issue not just to my attention but to the attention of a number of my colleagues across parties and Parliaments. [Applause.] I want to share some very wise words: “The first duty of Government is the defence of the realm. Our Armed Forces fulfil that responsibility on behalf of the Government, sacrificing some civilian freedoms, facing danger and, sometimes, suffering serious injury or death as a result of their duty. Families also play a vital role in supporting the operational effectiveness of our Armed Forces. In return, the whole nation has a moral obligation to the members of the Naval Service, the Army and the Royal Air Force, together with their families. They deserve our respect and support, and fair treatment.” I could not agree more, but those are not my wise words; they are contained in “The Armed Forces Covenant: Today and Tomorrow”, which is a heavy document, although it is light on commitment to thousands of servicemen who did their duty and, in fact, went above and beyond the call of duty when they either volunteered or were conscripted to take part in the atomic tests in the south Pacific and Australia. They undertook that duty with honour and dedication. The men were primarily young conscripts simply carrying out their national service who were exposed to radiation during nuclear weapons testing near Christmas Island between 1952 and 1958. At the time, the veterans had no idea what was going to happen; the only protection they were provided with was the instruction to hide their eyes or turn away when the A-bombs went off. Many of the surviving veterans are now terminally ill—there is a death rate of approximately three veterans a month. Those servicemen may not have been on the front line of any conflict or theatre of war, but they were indeed on the front line of the cold war—at the beginning of that race for ultimate power through nuclear dominance, in which the United Kingdom was at the forefront. My heart is heavy as a consequence of the realisation that those servicepeople who did their duty have not had that respected. Many Governments of many colours have neglected their duty of care to the people who served them with honour in the south Pacific and Australia. The stories of those servicepeople are well documented and each is a heartbreaking account of ill health and misery—from the men who became infertile, developed terrible skin cancers and other conditions or suffered with bone problems, bowel cancer, leukaemia, eye conditions and many more horrible cancers and illnesses; to the wives who suffered multiple miscarriages at three times the normal rate; the children who suffered 10 times the expected rates of birth defects; and the grandchildren suffering horrible defects at eight times the normal rate for deformity. That all comes on top of new medical research that suggests that DNA could have been damaged by radiation exposure. There is now robust scientific evidence that those previously thought to be safe from exposure were in fact exposed. The Rowland report on New Zealand naval servicemen upwind of tests at Christmas Island suggests that veterans’ DNA was damaged by radiation. Leading scientists agree that the exposure could have caused a catalogue of health problems. It is alleged that the Ministry of Defence did not monitor for alpha or beta radiation at the tests. Residual plutonium and uranium—both alpha emitters—weapons material will remain a hazard for thousands of years. Alpha particles have a higher radiation weighting by a factor of 20 compared with beta and gamma rays in International Commission on Radiological Protection guidelines. The orthodox view is that they are 20 times more damaging. If alpha particles lodge in the body, they continue to be hazardous for life. The United States, our wartime ally, passed an act in the House of Representatives in 1988, which was signed by President Ronald Reagan, recognising the sacrifice that had been made in the name of global security and peace. The US paid more than $100 million to its servicemen. Canada and France have already agreed to pay compensation to their nuclear veterans without the need for litigation. The UK now stands alone as the only western nuclear power not to offer such recognition and not to honour its duty to take care of its servicemen. A previous Government at Westminster committed £412,000 to fund a study of the health of the nuclear test veterans. However, when the current coalition came to power, it cut that amount to just £75,000. I am ashamed to say that no members of the parties represented in that coalition are here to answer for that today. A total of 633 men came forward to take part in the study, and the results make for stark reading. They show that only 18 per cent of those polled were in good health. Of those with a serious condition, only 16 per cent thought that it was caused by something other than radiation. That means that 84 per cent of those respondents believe that their health issues are directly related to exposure during the tests on Christmas Island. It is important that we represent our constituents as best we can, and I hope that people will listen and remember as I tell their stories in this debate. My constituents are blighted by ill health. They are a father and a son, and they have an uncertain future. They need genetic testing to prepare for that future, but the Ministry of Defence has informed both of them that their medical records have now been lost. I urge the MOD to find those records, and to allow my constituents to investigate their health issues, which would enable them at least to have a fighting chance. I hope that, in summing up, the minister will join all the members in the chamber and across the Parliaments in standing shoulder to shoulder with our veterans, to give them the dignity and respect that they deserve. In “The Armed Forces Covenant: Today and Tomorrow”, Liam Fox stated: “The Armed Forces Covenant is the expression of the moral obligation the Government and the Nation owe to those who serve or have served in our Armed Forces and to their families.” In return, those people deserve not only our respect and gratitude but constant attention to how they are treated and to the impact that service life has on them and their families. I ask that the duty that those men did for their nation be respected. Some of them are left today, but none of them has too many tomorrows.

I would have liked to give the Labour Party the benefit of the doubt about whether it is motivated by genuine concern for community safety, but its real intentions are given away by the motion and the speeches from Labour members. The motion takes two entirely unrelated figures—on support staff numbers and on violent crime—and tries to imply that one is a direct consequence of the other. Talk about adding two and two and coming up with 43. The whole motion is based on similar unlikely leaps of logic, which are all intended to scaremonger. One would think that, after the comprehensive rejection by Scottish voters of the right-wing, lowest-common-denominator criminal justice policies pursued by Labour in the previous session of the Parliament, Johann Lamont would take the opportunity to steer her politics and party away from fear and back towards a more constructive approach to the subject, but apparently not. That is a real shame, because I am sure that there are Labour members who would far prefer not to have to spout stuff that would make Ann Widdecombe cheer. The fact is that we are seeing real progress on reducing crime. In the process, we are gaining insight into, and evidence on, what works and what does not work in the drive to build safer communities throughout Scotland. Policing in Scotland—boosted by the 1,000 extra police officers that the SNP has delivered—is getting more informed and more effective all the time. We are giving the police and the courts the powers that they need to respond where spikes in rates of one or another kind of crime occur, against the prevailing trend of falling crime in Scotland.

I will not give way because, if the Labour Party was really serious about the debate, it would have dedicated its entire time to it this morning. I speak as the member for a constituency that, earlier this year, was given the unenviable label of the murder capital of Scotland, after there were an unprecedented 14 murders within the local division during 2010-11—up from three in the previous year. My constituents were shocked, and rightly so. However, in my discussions with local senior officers, I was reassured not only by how seriously they took the highly unusual figures, but by how swiftly and smartly they responded, using analytical police work to identify the flashpoints and locations for violence. In every one of those 14 murder cases, arrests were made. I hope that justice will be delivered for all the victims and their families. That does not bring the victims back, but it shows that, where particular problem areas for crime are identified, effective policing is having an impact. I pay tribute to the police in Hamilton and the surrounding area for the work they have done on that. In parts of Scotland, the prevalence of violent crime is complex and deep-seated, and we need far-sighted policy programmes to deliver profound social change for the long term. That is where initiatives such as no knives, better lives, which I am pleased to say will soon operate in South Lanarkshire, and cashback for communities come in. They provide in-depth engagement with young people and particularly with young people who are at risk of becoming involved in criminal behaviour. I commend the street project in Hamilton, which is an incredibly impressive example of a project that confronts young people directly with the consequences of criminality, challenges them to address their behaviour and its effect on other people and offers them choices. The street project has been supported by cashback for communities and South Lanarkshire Council. It is exactly the kind of essential work that will divert future generations of Scots from a culture of violence and crime and into more productive lives. I welcome the street 2, which was launched this week, and I wish those involved every success. More policing and more effective policing, evidence-based sentencing reform, in-depth engagement with young people and a refusal to resort to the easy, headline-grabbing option—the criminal justice programme will deliver the profound and permanent social change that we need to create a Scotland that is safe for all, now and in the future. That is the programme that the SNP Government, of which I am proud, is determined to pursue.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it will take to promote environmental sustainability in the construction of new social rented housing. (S4O-00334)

Given that the Scottish Government is investing record amounts in building new social rented housing, the opportunity should be taken to ensure that the investment also helps to reduce carbon emissions and tackle fuel poverty in the long term. Will the minister provide an assurance that fuel efficiency is being prioritised in the Scottish Government’s house-building programme?

The local roll-out of the no knives, better lives campaign in South Lanarkshire has been welcomed by people in my constituency and throughout the region, where communities have been shocked by high-profile knife murders in recent months. Does the Deputy First Minister agree that it is preventative action such as that campaign, and not mandatory sentences, that will tackle the problem of knife crime at its roots by changing the culture on our streets?

17. To ask the Scottish Government how it will build on the work of the activity agreements pilots. (S4O-00324)

I have been in discussions about the South Lanarkshire activity agreements pilot, which has secured some very successful outcomes as well as highlighting certain lessons learned, including making best use of third sector expertise, that should be addressed. Is the minister willing to meet me and those involved in the South Lanarkshire activity agreements to ensure that the experience of and learning from the local pilot are understood and applied to other parts of the country?

Will the member give way?

Sometimes more is not better, Presiding Officer. I will try my best. As the cabinet secretary has pointed out, the SNP is certainly not opposed to welfare reform in principle—far from it. The UK benefits system is needlessly complex and has for years failed the key tests: does it lift individuals out of poverty, and does it ensure that people are better off in work than out of it? Now that the Tory-led coalition is embarking on its version of welfare reform, it is right to say that the system needs to be overhauled. This is something that I do not say often, but it was hard to disagree with Iain Duncan Smith when he told the Tory conference earlier this week that the system as it is now stands “treats symptoms, not causes” and leaves too many people “entrenched” within it. As Mary Scanlon would not take my intervention, I will ask a question of David McLetchie, who will—I hope—answer it in his summing up. If work is really at the heart of these reforms, why has the Wise Group—a Scottish social enterprise with a proven record of getting vulnerable people into employment—been shut out of the employability programme in Scotland in favour of a profit-making private company whose director came straight from the Department for Work and Pensions? How is that prioritising work for jobless Scots? As usual, the Tories are reverting to type. Any impressive rhetoric is immediately cancelled out by a reality of harsh cuts, which will punish individuals and families on the lowest incomes and hit the most vulnerable the hardest. Instead of lifting people out of poverty, the Tories will—as they have before—plunge many into it, so deeply and immovably that it could have a generations-long impact. That the Liberal Democrats are their cheerleaders for that agenda—in the Scottish Parliament as well as in Westminster—should be a source of shame. There is, of course, an alternative approach to welfare, and it is the one that the Scottish Government is taking: protecting the incomes not only of the poorest households, but of those who, as a result of the economic crisis, are at risk of dropping into the poorer income brackets. Even if the drops in income are not huge, they can prove to be catastrophic for some families. The difference between struggling and getting by on one hand and tipping into real poverty on the other is very narrow. That is why measures such as the council tax freeze, the living wage, free personal care, free prescription charges and the maintenance of the concessionary travel scheme are so important. Those measures make the crucial difference to the incomes of many households that might otherwise find themselves in real trouble. With the proper devolution of powers, Scotland’s Government could and would do even more to protect the vulnerable in this country than it is able to do at present. Instead of cutting and scrapping benefits, we could be genuine reformers by aligning the welfare system to match our policies to protect household incomes, create jobs, tackle inequalities and grow Scotland’s economy and to fit with the values of the social contract that the Scottish Government has pledged to the Scottish people. I welcome Jackie Baillie’s comment that Labour stands “ready to help” the Scottish Government to find solutions. I make a plea to all members on the Labour benches to join the SNP in arguing for real powers over the welfare system to be included in the Scotland Bill. Martin Sime of SCVO was right when he told the Scotland Bill Committee yesterday that the Welfare Reform Bill renders much of the Scotland Bill virtually meaningless. Let us not waste that opportunity. Let us give it some meaning. I urge all members to join us and fight for Scotland. Even if they stand opposed to the principle of greater sovereign powers for the Parliament, surely, faced with the Westminster Welfare Reform Bill, we can agree with the SCVO and Citizens Advice Scotland that vulnerable people who live in Scotland will be better protected and social justice will be better served if our benefits system is our own and is held in the nation of Scotland.

As we conduct this debate, it is obvious that waste incineration is an immediate concern for many members. It is also an immediate concern for many of my constituents. As the Presiding Officer said, there is an on-going judicial review process that concerns the planning decision in question, so I cannot discuss the specifics of the case. As a constituency member who works every day to respond to those concerns, that is obviously frustrating. From a selfish point of view, I would prefer the debate to take place at a time when I could speak more freely, but it would be churlish of me to complain, as I fully support the judicial review, which was fought for and won by an action group in my constituency. I certainly do not want to compromise it. This is an important debate that we need to have, regardless of the timing. It is a shame that, in Labour’s typical negative fashion, it is being used as a party-political stick to try to beat the Government with and, indeed, to attack individual members with. That is a shame, particularly as there is much on which we agree and on which we could work together across the parties. There is enormous disquiet in many communities about the potential effects of waste incineration on their environments. In the part of my constituency that is affected, there is also considerable worry about the economic impact. It is hard to overstate the importance of agriculture and horticulture to the local community in the Clyde valley. The view of local farmers and market gardeners is that the area’s outstanding reputation for producing top-quality fresh produce could be seriously adversely affected by the presence of an incinerator in its midst. Images of the garden of Scotland and fumes from burning waste do not exactly go well together. My constituents are entirely justified in questioning the impact that emissions would have on their ability to sell their eggs, milk and fruit and vegetable produce to supermarkets and other retailers. Modern consumers demand quality and retailers respond. Producers are all too aware of how even a perception of impaired or tainted quality could be a hammer blow to their livelihoods. Those producers have a right to expect that the councillors and officials in their local authority would give at least as much priority to the environmental and economic health of the local area as to the desires of commercial companies to profit from incineration. I agree with other members on that, but perhaps I am straying into areas that could become sub judice. I emphasise that I fully support the Scottish Government’s zero waste ambitions and agree that we need to move away from the use of landfill. I recognise that the Government has to strike a fine balance between competing environmental issues. I know, too, from my extensive correspondence with the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment that he is fully aware of the strong feelings of communities in my area. The Scottish Government has undertaken to publish further planning guidance on waste management this autumn. In my extensive correspondence with the cabinet secretary, I have already asked for that guidance to pay particular attention to the issues surrounding incineration. I repeat that request today. I can confirm that, in my experience, some local authorities are not handling the planning processes at all well and communities feel that their sincere concerns are being treated as an irrelevance. Strong, clear national guidance is badly needed to ensure that local authorities carry out their duties properly, especially given that we are likely to see more planning applications of this type throughout Scotland. Given the concerns about incineration, the subject is an obvious candidate for an inquiry by a committee of this Parliament, which could listen to the concerns of action groups from throughout Scotland, such as the one in my constituency. Too often, such groups are not being listened to locally and this Parliament could ensure that their voices are heard. I say to Mr McMahon that my constituents, my party, this Government and I are taking action—instead of having mealy-mouthed debates for the purpose of party-political point scoring.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Has the First Minister received from the United Kingdom Government any response to his request that an automatic right to representation in EU negotiations be included in the Scotland Bill?

I welcome the emphasis that the Scottish Government has put on ensuring that apprenticeships and training opportunities are linked directly to real jobs. I believe that that will address the particular issues facing young people in my constituency. Can the cabinet secretary describe the benchmarking, monitoring and reporting frameworks that the Scottish Government intends to put in place to ensure that learners, trainees and apprentices have high-quality experiences that lead to quality outcomes in employment or advanced education?

Yesterday and today we have heard a comprehensive debate on a wide-ranging programme of legislation and Government action, the impact of which will be felt in many areas of Scottish society. First, however, I commend my colleague Fiona McLeod for a thoughtful and insightful look into how self-directed support could and should work. I especially welcome the proposed bill that will enshrine that right in law. Colleagues will not be surprised that I am going to focus my remarks on the proposed rights of children and young people bill. I have been banging on about this subject for many years—I confess that before someone else does it for me. For a long time, I have pursued the enshrining of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child in Scots law. That measure was adopted as official SNP policy in 2008 in a motion that was proposed by me and supported by our conference, and I am delighted that the Scottish Government has now made it part of its legislative programme for the coming years. Enshrining in law a duty for ministers to consider children’s rights when they make decisions will be a historic step. It will place children and young people at the heart of everything that the Government does and it will solemnise our commitment to securing and protecting the wellbeing of every child in Scotland. As Angela Constance, the Minister for Children and Young People, has recently been quoted as saying, happy and well-adjusted bairns are a good thing for Scotland. My initial motivation for wishing the UNCRC into Scots law was the detention of asylum-seeking families and children at Dungavel. That practice seemed to me to be a clear breach of several articles of the UNCRC, not least article 22, which states that a refugee has the right to special protection and help. I cannot let it go unmentioned that that issue is still entirely relevant. Although children are no longer being detained at Dungavel, families and children are still being detained and moved to detention centres in England, and we hear that a new family detention centre is planned. That is a flagrant abandonment of the UK coalition parties’ promise when they took power. Maybe Liam McArthur will join me in seeking that his friends in Westminster keep that promise. Of course, the UNCRC applies not only to refugee children but to every child and young person, regardless of their circumstances. The vast majority of the world’s nations have ratified the UNCRC, but by enshrining it in our domestic law the Scottish Government will go a step further and is demonstrating international leadership in protecting the rights of children in all areas of their lives. The rights of children and young people bill will legislate for our moral obligation to take every action that we can to ensure that every Scottish child is happy and healthy and that they are able to fulfil their full potential and make their voices heard. All of us in the chamber know well that there are far too many children in Scotland for whom those rights are all but absent from their day-to-day life experience. The bill, along with the great work that our Commissioner for Children and Young People does, will give us and them a legal basis for pursuing and protecting those rights. That is not just an airy-fairy aspiration, but the concrete foundation for the better Scotland that we want to achieve. If failures in care, understanding or respect with regard to a child are left unaddressed, they can lead to the problems in adulthood that are the source of so many of the social ills that we are trying to tackle in Scotland today. A rights-based approach is an excellent basis for understanding how to shape Government actions and public services to support children in having the best start in life. The rights of children and young people bill will not stand on its own, so I look forward to finding out more about the children’s services bill that will follow later. Those two pieces of legislation together could help to bring about a revolution in the way in which Scotland’s public services are shaped around, and respond to, the needs of children and families. Jenny Marra stated yesterday that we need action on early years. I could not agree with her more. The early years change fund, the national parenting strategy and the opportunities for all initiative—to name just a few—are real actions by the Scottish Government. They form a child and young person centred philosophy that will not only help to insulate young Scots from the impact of Westminster’s ill-conceived public cuts agenda—and, in some cases, Westminster’s ill-conceived language when they describe children—but build a better Scotland, a proud Scotland and a visionary nation for them to inherit.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what advice and guidance it provides to local authorities regarding self-directed support for users of social care services. (S4O-00113)

I welcome the new self-directed support legislation that was announced yesterday. Given the challenges for some of my constituents in securing a truly self-directed care package, will the minister reassure them and me that the new SDS bill will address those challenges and ensure that the independence of the individual is paramount?

Scotland’s role and the involvement of the Scottish ministers in European policy making and legislative processes is one of those issues that we are often told are about the SNP picking fights—that has become an increasingly tedious cliché—or demanding additional rights that Scotland does not need or deserve. From my brief experience so far as convener of the Parliament’s European and External Relations Committee, I have to say that I am bemused as to why the issue is considered to be so controversial or party political. As far as I can see, there is a great deal of cross-party consensus—at least in the Scottish Parliament— not only about the undoubted importance and significant impact of decisions in Europe on aspects of Scottish life, but on the fact that Scotland’s interests in the European context are not necessarily identical to those of the UK as a whole, which creates a need for Scotland’s distinctive voice to be heard when decisions are being made. Of course, we differ on the ultimate nature and extent of that voice. For me and for my party, the ideal would be for Scotland to be a full member of the European Union, as an independent state. The other parties obviously do not support that position, but in the context in which we find ourselves now, it should not be difficult for this Parliament to agree that the arrangements are inadequate and do not allow for Scotland’s best possible case to be made at European negotiating tables. We might debate how, and in what manner, the distinctive voice should be heard, but we can surely agree that it must be heard. The Scottish Government has not sought to pick a fight with anyone; it has simply asked the Westminster Government—the present one and its predecessor—to listen and respond to the entirely reasonable case that Scotland has distinctive interests and concerns in Europe that would be best argued and articulated by the people who have the greatest knowledge and understanding of the issues: our Scottish ministers. We should not be overly surprised that successive UK Governments have been less receptive to that reasonable case than we might expect. After all, few institutions, particularly ones that are as venerable and—dare I say it?—as self-important as Westminster, give up power without some resistance. However, in this chamber, where we all represent the interests of devolved Scotland, one does not have to be a nationalist to accept that the current arrangements could and should be greatly improved. When it comes to matters as important to Scotland’s economy and to the livelihoods of significant numbers of Scots as the common agricultural policy—to give just one example of where a member of the Scottish Government is responsible for implementing decisions that are made in Europe—an ad hoc system simply is not adequate. Where it is clear that the Scottish dimension is distinct from or different to that of other parts of the UK, it is only common sense that the Scottish experts should be in the rooms where the negotiations are going on and the decisions are being made. With the best will in the world, for a UK minister who represents the whole of the UK, the Scottish dimension will be at best an addendum and more often an afterthought—frequently, it will not be considered at all. That is not meant as an attack or even a criticism, necessarily—it is a UK minister's job to represent the UK, after all. What we should be critical of is a refusal by a Westminster Government of any political stripe to compensate for that by agreeing in partnership with the Scottish Government a proper and fit-for-purpose system that ensures that Scottish ministers are present on the European stage whenever Scotland’s interests require them to be. Nor is it too much to ask that Westminster recognise that it is those same Scottish ministers who are the best judges of when and on what issues the distinctive Scottish dimension needs to be represented. Of course, there might be some Westminster politicians who would prefer to deny that Scotland’s interests are ever different from, or discrete from, those of the UK. However, I would gently suggest to them that they lost that argument the day that Scotland’s devolved Parliament came into being. Of course, no one elected to this chamber would ever subscribe to such a view in this day and age. If we move forward on the shared assumption, therefore, that Scotland does have her own corner to fight in Europe, we should also be able to agree that any system in which Scottish ministers have to ask to be in attendance at discussions on crucial issues, as though begging for a great favour, the granting of which seems to be dependent on the mood of Westminster on any given day, does not represent a good arrangement for anyone. It does not look like respect to me, in either direction. It is not good for intergovernmental relations, and it is certainly not good for Scotland. I believe that the Scottish Government is doing the right thing by seeking to find a way to resolve the situation by agreement and consensus and I believe that a broad consensus already exists in this chamber. We should build on that to secure proper arrangements for Scotland’s interests to be represented in Europe on an on-going basis by the people who are best qualified to do so: the cabinet secretaries and ministers of our Scottish Government.

I congratulate Hanzala Malik on a well thought-out, inspired and inspiring maiden speech. In it, he reminded us that we need to reach out to the world and that it is important to involve all the voluntary organisations that do that and, in particular, to involve our children in doing it. On the subject of reaching out, last night I hosted the Refugee Council reception in the Parliament. A group of young children from all nations who are now at a primary school in Glasgow came along and read some stories from their book, which was about their dreams of Scotland and how they see their place in the world. It chimed perfectly with what Hanzala Malik said today. I also welcome him to his role as deputy convener on the European and External Relations Committee. I am sure that we will have some inspiring experiences together as we take that committee forward. I will do something that I do not often do: praise the last Labour First Minister. During Jack McConnell’s time in office, Scotland’s links with Malawi were strengthened and enhanced. It was his idea that the then Scottish Executive should play a part in international development. Recognising that the devolution settlement did not allow for any great programmes, he decided to focus on Malawi and its obvious links with David Livingstone and Scotland. I am proud that the first SNP Scottish Government built on Mr McConnell’s fine initiative and developed the relationship with Malawi. I am delighted that we have continued to strengthen those links and work in partnership with people all over Scotland to bring some aid, some help and some improvement to the lives of people in Malawi. I pay particular tribute to the work of the Scotland Malawi Partnership—I declare an interest as a member of that organisation—and the way in which it keeps the Parliament, the cross-party group, MSPs, members of Parliament, members of the European Parliament and the Government informed about what is happening out there. I am sure that other members of the Parliament share the sense of achievement that Scotland has made a positive difference in the world. I believe that the sense of being part of a global community and striving for a better understanding of each other and for a fairer world chimes with the vast majority of Scots.

Scotland has always been a nation of pioneers, often in a very good sense, although sometimes not. I have represented Central Scotland, and my links with the David Livingstone centre when it was under threat reinforced my belief that we need to reach out to the world. We need to demonstrate Scotland’s place in the world, and a big part of that is about how we deal with people who we care about. Our very special relationship with Malawi demonstrates that well, so I would find that question quite easy to answer. Having visited Malawi in 2008, I witnessed the positive impact on communities of our commitment to support the people there, and I am delighted that that support is continuing. My colleague Jim Eadie has spoken about Scotland’s role in international development, our connections with other African nations and how we as a nation are reconnecting with the world. It is clear from the contributions from members on all sides of the chamber that it is a real cross-party effort; that this Parliament has become Scotland’s voice in many respects; and that this crucible of debate helps Scotland to develop her own opinion. I note as an aside that it has not always been so. Some time ago, when members in a previous parliamentary session were debating the war in Iraq, some members suggested that such a thing should not be a point for discussion in this forum. It is exceptionally good to see that we have grown up from that strange position, and that no one here now would think to try to limit the topics that are open for debate in the chamber. Scots now rightly look to the Scottish Parliament to hear what is being said about the great issues affecting the world, and they are entitled to expect their MSPs to have something to say about global events. For example, they expect us to express our solidarity with people who—even now, today—are taking to the streets to demand freedom and democracy for their nations, and our outrage that some of them are being killed by their Governments simply for making their voices heard. We talk about Scotland being a strong voice: in other nations when people try to be a strong voice they are put down, and in some cases lose their lives for it. It is an indication of a sense of maturity in Scotland’s Parliament that we talk about those things. It indicates that we view Scotland as part of the world, not as some strange, isolated land that is hedged around with devolution issues and reserved matters and issues that members dare not speak about in the Parliament. Long may that development continue.

Sometimes in the heat of debate people say things that perhaps they do not mean to say. We should give Mr Davidson a taste of our compassion and offer him the opportunity to apologise. My colleague Aileen McLeod touched on the continuing development that I mentioned in her contribution. I am delighted that she will be a member of the European and External Relations Committee; she brings skill, experience and understanding that we will all lean on in learning about the committee’s work. She is an expert on Europe and I back her call for Scottish ministers to sit in sessions with other EU countries: speaking for Scotland, putting Scotland’s case, fighting Scotland’s corner and making new friends for Scotland throughout Europe. She talked about Scotland being a stronger voice, and that voice got stronger the day that she was elected. Scotland has a place in the world, and it is a developing place. We used to be a shy nation, and a bit self-conscious about expressing ourselves, but that is fading now and our national self-confidence is growing. You would never have imagined that I was that shy, self-conscious person, but I am growing in confidence every day. As Hanzala Malik said, we are teaching our school pupils how to look at the world through a Scottish prism and to identify Scotland’s place in the world through self-reference as much as through hearing what others tell us about their place. It would be fantastic if we had the power to see ourselves as others see us, but we should also have enough pride and self-confidence to have a self-view—to see ourselves as we believe ourselves to be. We are doing exactly that; Clare Adamson gave us some eloquent and wonderful examples of it in her contribution. The cabinet secretary talked about Scotland being a vibrant nation. She talked about music, theatres, dance, arts, science, architecture and everything else that makes us up. Each of those things is a thread of a Scottish tartan, a colourful mix of arts, culture and attitude—that is what makes us bright. Fiona Hyslop talked about being a citizen of the world. One of the things that the Scottish Government is committed to doing is working with Scottish Water and WaterAid. Clean water is something that we expect, but in other parts of the world, that is not the case. We should be proud that we are committed to that work. We are moving forward and developing ourselves. We are improving the Parliament, helping Scotland grow and making ourselves a nation rich in international friendships. Scotland is no longer the shy cousin hiding in the corner but it is a blossoming, developing flower. We have much more to do. A nation is never finished and complete; it is always a work in progress. We have not and will not reach our finishing post, but we will touch milestones along the way. I like the milestones that we have been touching recently and I look forward to the next stages of the journey with a great deal of hope.

Would the cabinet secretary care to comment on the deeply unfair and unequal situation pertaining to the women—as many as 40,000—who were born in 1953 and 1954? They have twice had the goalposts moved on their state pension age, just at the point when they are planning for retirement. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that he highlights the plight of those women in any representations that he makes to the UK Government on pensions reform?

I note with some irony that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has more control over the state broadcaster than the Scottish Government does. As members will know, the corporate body can exercise some control over the broadcast output from this fine building, but no Scottish Government minister has any say over what should be broadcast in Scotland. There is no proper Scottish public control over broadcasting, no proper public scrutiny of whether what is broadcast in Scotland properly serves Scotland and no control to ensure that Scotland’s diverse cultures and communities get what they need from our airwaves and digital networks. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on her work to help to address those issues and I congratulate the Scottish Broadcasting Commission on its work. It was a sterling piece of work by a distinguished group of individuals that encompassed a great deal of knowledge of, and experience in, broadcasting and digital media as well as a broad range of personal experience and political views. They produced what should be a route map for the future of broadcasting and digital media in Scotland. As Helen Eadie has just said, the pace of change is fairly rapid, and the commission’s report may need to be updated sooner than we might have expected. However, it is a solid platform on which to build a basis for debate, and it should be a catalyst that allows and empowers progress. In and of itself, it is not the final picture, and no one would argue that it should be, but it is a good start. The report notes: “Television is the dominant platform for public access to news and information in Scotland, being regularly used for that purpose by more than 80% of the population”, and that there is a “lack of opportunity for serious and in-depth examination of important public policy issues.” That is part of an important greater whole. There is a recurrent, confusing and, perhaps, dangerous habit in news organisations of seeing the UK news as the news and any Scottish news as little more than a local opt-out. We can continue to retread the “Scottish Six” arguments and to see the metropolitan sneer of broadcasters such as wee Jeremy Paxman, looking down on “Newsnight Scotland” as being the kailyard rather than the grand stage of current affairs. We can continue to be a bit chipper about whether “Good Morning Scotland” can bear up to the “Today” show, but that misses one important point. Clare Adamson touched on it, and I want to go into it in more detail. In what could most charitably be described as a series of cases of accidental misinformation, UK news channels refer merely by their titles to English ministers whose writ does not run in Scotland; the BBC and ITN do it, and so does Sky. Broadcast audiences in Scotland hear that the health minister has decided to cut services, the justice secretary has decided to increase sentences or the local government minister has decided to cut the number of councils. The impression that is created is that that is happening here, when in reality it is not—it is happening in England, not in Scotland. That may sound like a petty point, but it is not. I have with me a press release that the Scottish Cot Death Trust issued on Tuesday, after BBC’s “Breakfast” television programme broadcast about Government withdrawing the literature about cot death. That change applies only in England; the Scottish Government is continuing to provide the advice and support literature to parents here, but that was not made clear. As a result, the Scottish Cot Death Trust spent the whole day fielding calls from distressed parents of cot death children who want the literature to continue to be available. Unnecessary distress for those parents and unnecessary work for a busy charity was caused by a failure to make clear the geographical extent of the area to which the news item applied. It may be thought that that is not the worst thing that can happen to bereaved parents and to the charity; I agree. The confusion and distress of Scots may not be much of a concern for broadcasters, but other possible complications from a similar action could be much worse. The episode also calls into question whether the actions of the broadcasters contribute to or damage the public knowledge of current affairs in Scotland. Joan McAlpine has already raised that issue.

I admit to the member that I do not have such evidence on me, but it is probably a great topic for the Education and Culture Committee to consider. If confusion is sown about the various Government departments, people across this nation are being misinformed about what their ministers are doing and broadcasters are not clearly enunciating the public debate, there is a danger that public debate will not keep up with political events. If that happens, there is a danger that we will find that there is a disconnect between politics and the people. Are we in danger of seeing a democracy deficit open up before our eyes? We need greater confidence in our people, our nation and our sense of self. We need to engage all our media in the debate, and they need to engage Scotland with accurate and intelligent work. We need fresh respect for Scotland from our broadcasters and other media, and fresh respect for public debate. We need control of broadcasting to be brought back home. We need to reinvigorate and reinvent our nation. We need to do that starting here, in this chamber.

The minister will be aware that I have already communicated with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth regarding Dovesdale, which is in the Stonehouse area of my constituency. Does the minister agree that the creation of national guidance on dealing with planning applications for waste incinerators and waste-to-energy plants would help local planning authorities that are facing decisions about proposed developments and the communities that would be affected by them—there are 25,000 objectors in my constituency alone—to be apprised of the full range of issues involved? Will the Scottish Government actively consider my request that the development of such guidance be sought?

First, Presiding Officer, I welcome you to your place and wish you the best in it. It would, in my first speech in the Parliament following the election, be remiss of me not to mark Tom McCabe’s contribution to public life. He was the first member to be elected to the Scottish Parliament in 1999 and for 12 years served Hamilton South in that capacity; he also served as a minister under three First Ministers. His speech at the count three weeks ago was gracious and dignified and showed the kind of character and good manners that are all too often missing in politics. I am sure that the chamber will join me in wishing him well for his future. [Applause.] The future, of course, is what this debate is all about. It is about how we build a future for Scotland that will provide an enhanced living to all the people who live here and, importantly, how we build a nation that takes a full role in the world. As far as I am concerned, that is what is meant by taking Scotland forward. I do not imagine that I will agree with everyone in the chamber over the next five years, but I hope that this Parliament will take that time to debate and share positive ideas and imaginative solutions to Scotland’s problems. In other words, we need Scottish solutions for Scottish problems. Now there is a phrase that has already been coined. We face big challenges. The recession has cost this nation dear, not least in my constituency of Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse, all of which have, like other towns in the county of Lanarkshire, been among the hardest hit. Redundancy and unemployment have become a daily reality for too many of my constituents and the plans and ambitions of too many young people are faltering in the face of employment uncertainty. Across the country, public sector budgets are starting to shrink as the Whitehall Government administers the harsh medicine that it claims is needed to address the UK’s economic problems—problems, it should be pointed out, that are not of our making. Those challenges are not insurmountable. The Scottish Government has over the past four years already shown that even with the limited powers that we have it is possible to move Scotland forward. The SNP emerges from this election with a mandate to implement the vision for Scotland’s future that we set out in the campaign and which contains clear and concrete plans to drive economic recovery and growth, create jobs and expand employment opportunities in a way that will deliver tangible benefits for communities and households across our nation. That vision quite rightly rejects the received economic wisdom that the answer to deficit and recession is to cut and cut again and instead sets out a path of investment, growth and building—indeed, literally so, in the case of the many major infrastructure projects that the new Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment will ensure deliver maximum benefits with regard to jobs and opportunities. This morning, the First Minister made it absolutely clear how central that job and wealth-creating agenda will be to the SNP Government’s work in the coming years and I welcome his strength of commitment. We promised 25,000 apprenticeship places, offering youngsters the length and breadth of the country the opportunity to train in a trade. Crucially, those apprenticeships are directly linked to high-quality jobs. The SNP is not in the business of recreating the notorious youth opportunities programme of the Thatcher years, which wasted the time and lives of young people in an attempt to fiddle the unemployment figures. Our modern apprenticeship programme will provide real training and employment outcomes; it will invest in our young people and equip them with the skills that they need for a modern jobs market. After all, Scotland will need to build sustainable economic growth. The 7,000 flexible training opportunities that will be created for small to medium-sized enterprises will, along with the continuation and growth of the highly successful small business bonus policy, create new jobs and protect existing ones. That will help local high streets, services and amenities to survive and thrive and it will provide a crucial focus on the SME sector, which will be a key driver of Scotland’s future prosperity. Our ministers have the opportunity to deploy new ideas and imagination in the way that they direct the £202 million of investment in skills and training and more than 30,000 new training opportunities that we have already pledged to deliver. Like many others, I am energised and excited by the First Minister’s vision for the reindustrialisation of Scotland through our green energy sector, which offers up much potential for the future. This programme is about Scotland’s future, making it a better country and delivering for the people of Scotland. We will continue to put the case for independence, as many of my colleagues have done very well today, in the hope of completing the Parliament’s powers for Scotland’s future. In the meantime, we will do all that we can to improve Scotland with the powers that we have. My priority will be to ensure that my constituents receive the full benefit of the Scottish Government’s plans. Our ministers and cabinet secretaries can expect to hear me fighting the corner of Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse for their share of capital projects, infrastructure investment, training places and funding for local public services. That is my job, and I know that they will expect nothing less from me. I also know that our Government has the task of implementing the SNP’s vision and plans in a way that benefits the whole of Scotland, for communities of all shapes and sizes and every section of our society. The Scottish people entrusted the SNP to do that, and I trust our Government team to deliver on the promises that we made. We face difficult times, but with the right positive attitude and a belief in ourselves and our country, we can face those difficult times with some hope, optimism and faith in the future. Today’s debate is about taking Scotland forward. That job starts now for me and for us.

I am pleased to speak in the debate on the second-last bill that we will pass in this session of the Scottish Parliament—the first session in which I have had the privilege of being elected to serve. It seems to me that the bill is an appropriate one to pass today with the support of MSPs from all sides, with support from all parties—I am sorry, Presiding Officer, I thought that I had put my teeth in—

Perhaps they are. When the Parliament was established, human rights and equality were written into its proceedings from the outset. The Parliament was established to represent and serve all the people of Scotland. The Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill is emblematic of the Parliament’s principles. It was introduced to counteract one of the worst violations of human rights that can be perpetrated on a person. At its heart is an insistence on freedom of choice, which is essential to any meaningful concept of equality. The bill was designed to tackle a crime that happens to only a small number of people in Scotland, which in itself makes the bill even more important. There have been occasions when critics of the Parliament accused us of using legislation as a sledgehammer to crack a variety of nuts, but just because a problem affects a small number of people, that does not make it insignificant. On the contrary, the smaller the number of victims, the more vulnerable the victims are and the more vital it is that their elected representatives step up on their behalf. When we decide today to legislate against forced marriage, we will give strength to people who were powerless and give protection under the law to people who previously lacked such protection. During the Equal Opportunities Committee’s consideration of the bill, we discussed the imperative of avoiding the perception that the bill is directed at a particular ethnic group or culture. I will say a couple of things about that. First, forced marriage is not about religion, culture or race; it is a crime. It is a complex crime, to be sure, which stems from old and deep-seated attitudes about the role of women and girls—and sometimes, as we heard from Marlyn Glen, boys—but, as Burns said many years ago, “The Rights of Woman merit some attention.” Forced marriage happens in society and within families, but it is a crime nonetheless. What is more, it seldom happens in isolation. Almost by its nature, it is a precursor to other crimes: child abuse, rape, domestic violence and sometimes even murder. Those crimes and their victims must be pre-eminent in our minds, and I applaud the Scottish Government for sticking to those facts in introducing the bill. Nonetheless, there are complexities of which we must be aware, such as the need to make clear the distinction between arranged and forced marriage. Other speakers have addressed that point, so I will not go into it. I thank all the witnesses who came forward. I especially thank the clerks, who tried hard to ensure that we had a cross-cultural group of witnesses. We could not find some of the evidence that we needed even though we knew that it existed, which shows how deep-seated some of the issues are. The clerks tried hard to ensure that we had witnesses to provide that evidence. I also thank the committee members for their diligence in scrutinising the evidence, which was helpful for me. At stage 2, we linked the bill with the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011, which is a particular interest of mine. When we passed the 2011 act, I was concerned that, although forced marriage was a ground for referral, the term was not defined. I thank the minister for lodging amendments at stage 2 that fixed that anomaly and will bring the two pieces of legislation together to ensure that young people are supported in a welfare-based system. That further strengthens the approach of the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament to protecting children and young people. I am very proud that the Parliament can come together to ensure that we continue to enshrine human rights in our laws. That shows our Parliament working at its best. I said earlier that choice is essential to a meaningful definition of equality. If I had to pick one word to sum up what the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill is about, it would be choice. The bill will write clearly into Scots law that it is an individual’s—a woman’s—choice to enter freely into a marriage or to reject it. That choice, as the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women puts it, “is central to her life and to her dignity and equality as a human being.” That is the core of the bill, and I commend it to the Parliament.

I thank the cabinet secretary for taking time last week to meet my constituents John Tierney, Michelle McInally and Dominic Flynn, from Blantyre, who were among the organisers of the solidarity march that followed the death of Reamonn Gormley. They were left in no doubt about the cabinet secretary’s personal commitment, and that of the Government, to tackling knife crime and making our streets safer. The cabinet secretary recently announced a doubling of funding for the no knives, better lives education campaign, and work on the roll-out of the campaign in South Lanarkshire—

Does the cabinet secretary agree that training and equipping a range of organisations in communities, such as the Blantyre walk ’n’ rollers group, to take the no knives, better lives message to young people will help to empower communities to tackle knife crime directly, as it affects them?

One phrase that particularly struck me in Professor Donaldson’s description of the qualities and skills of a 21st century teacher is that they should have the ability to seek out and “work in a range of partnerships to support the learning and development of each young person”. That strikes me as being an approach that is vital in particular for children and young people who have additional learning needs. Will the minister expand on how she believes the Donaldson recommendations can join up with and support the Scottish Government’s wider additional support for learning strategies?

I know that the Scottish Refugee Council is an organisation that is close to both our hearts. Does the member share my concern that the SRC’s information and advice service and its advice service grant are to be cut? One will be halved and the other will be cut by 62 per cent on 1 April. Does the member share my concern that the SRC will not be able to deliver the quality service that it has delivered and that that will lead some people into destitution?

The inquiry by the Equal Opportunities Committee was very important and it will make an important contribution to public discourse about migration in Scotland. I do not need to tell anyone in the chamber that migration is a contentious political topic that all too often generates more heat than light. That contentiousness did not form part of the committee’s approach and, from the outset, the inquiry was grounded on committee members’ shared understanding that migrants have made and do make significant contributions to Scottish social, cultural and economic life. All my colleagues approached the inquiry in that spirit and, as a consequence, it was a positive experience that, if our recommendations are heeded and acted upon, has the potential to lead to positive outcomes. Our recommendations are wide ranging and cover issues in public services, employment and skills, relations between the Scottish and UK Governments, data collection, and the information and support that are available to migrants. I do not have time to go into all the details about those issues, and I echo the points that other members have made about more time for the debate. The inquiry report has uncovered and collated some genuinely new and useful information on each of those areas and it has made practical and achievable recommendations about how we can move forward. I think that I am right in saying that the public perception of migrants, the role that the media and politicians play in shaping that perception and the feeling among committee members that there are many myths out there that feed negative attitudes were the starting point for a wider inquiry. For me, it was a bit about myth busting. The evidence that we received made it clear that the general attitude to migrants in Scotland remains, sadly, negative, if not overwhelmingly so—we got some good examples in the inquiry. Prejudice exists and it will, as the report acknowledges, continue to exist in some folk even when they are in full possession of all the facts. There is no doubt that prejudice grows as a result of ignorance and misinformation and that, by busting the myths about migration, we have a better chance of building understanding across our communities. One of our central recommendations is that a concerted programme of education and awareness raising that is led by Government and extends right across all public services should be undertaken. I am pleased that the Scottish Government’s response to the report is unequivocal in its recognition that political leadership is at the heart of achieving the tolerant and cohesive society that we wish for. That leadership must come not just from Government, but from all of us who have been elected to political office. We have a responsibility to the communities and the nation that we serve to challenge myths and ignorance and to refuse to pander to media that, as we heard in evidence, too often seek to blame migrants for society’s ills. We do not have to be strident, but we have to be steadfast. The committee’s report gives us some of the tools that we need to perform that task. I want to touch on trafficking, as it is close to my heart—I am a campaigner for Stop the Traffik. I am extremely disappointed by Damian Green’s response to our report and that he will not pursue a right of appeal on the status of a trafficked person. The right of people to appeal should be built into the national referral mechanism. I am very disappointed that Damian Green will not pursue that. Trafficking was a major element of the inquiry. I wish that we had more time to talk about it, because some things that came out about it were heart wrenching. We heard extremely sobering evidence that made it clear that, although our knowledge of the nature and extent of trafficking in Scotland is growing, it is still far from adequate for us to be able to take on the traffickers as effectively as we need to. Trafficking is invidious and hidden. I acknowledge the strong stance that the Scottish Government has taken against trafficking and that its efforts are sometimes frustrated because some powers are reserved to the UK Government. Obviously, I would say that, because I think that they are, but I also argue that we all have to raise our game in the face of the problem. Again, I refer to Damian Green’s response. I am disappointed that the UKBA is still refusing to communicate with MSPs on an equal footing and is not giving us parity with MPs. That is a real mistake. I hope that the anti-trafficking provisions in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 will help to bolster the legal fight against traffickers, and I urge the Government to keep a close eye on the impact of those new provisions. Ultimately, nothing will more strongly send the message that Scotland does not tolerate trafficking than a successful prosecution that leads to the conviction of traffickers. As we have heard, that has not yet happened here, but I know that the Scottish Government and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice are working towards that and are committed to achieving it.

I was delighted to read Murdo Fraser’s motion. It is good to see that he has joined the SNP and others in recognising the importance of early intervention. I was almost persuaded that he was praising the SNP Government for the work that it has done so far in early years provision—and that he was looking forward, as we all are, to a second term of the SNP in government. I take it that Mr Fraser has read the early years framework as interestedly as I have, and that he is entirely in favour of the fine ideas and concepts that are embodied in it. I know that he reads everything that is produced by this Government, and that he is always persuaded by the fine arguments and eloquent debating style of SNP members, so I know that he will agree with everything that I say today. It is no exaggeration to say that what happens to children in their earliest years says much about our society and is key to outcomes in adult life. As Helen Eadie has already said, the Jesuits had it in the phrase, “Give me a boy until he is seven, and I will give you the man.” Over the past few decades, research has tended to suggest that there is enormous truth in that. Evidence from education, health, justice and economic experts has leaned towards the earliest years of life as being the most critical for development—much of it suggesting that the Jesuits were in fact taking too long over things. The Scottish early years framework is about giving children the best start in life. It lays out the journey that the Scottish Government, its partners in local government and practitioners in early years services need to take for the benefit of Scotland’s new and small citizens to ensure that they get the very best and that they grow into the best adults they can be. Just as important is that they can enjoy their time as children. That is something that we seem to forget. Some of us took part in a debate not that long ago on children’s play and the importance of developing that. In fact, the framework starts even before those wee citizens put in their first personal appearance. It starts in the pre-birth period, which is a recognition of the importance of pregnancy in influencing later outcomes and of the mother and child having a healthy relationship right at the start, so that birth and the beginning of independent life becomes a critical stage of development. Stewart Stevenson spoke about the impact of music on babies when they are born. Any of us here who has had the privilege of carrying a baby will realise that the baby will usually recognise music and voices before they are born, too. The framework takes the child to eight years old, covering the transition into primary school—through the infant classes into mainstream schooling. There is a good argument that much of the framework is just as relevant to older children, extending into the transition into secondary school and perhaps even beyond that. Sometimes, the first intervention that is recognised for a child comes through the children’s hearings system, and it is generally on welfare grounds. Sometimes, issues are picked up not through health or education but through the children’s hearings system. The reforms to that system will allow that to be recognised earlier and some of the reforms in the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2009 also help with the early identification of problems. As Murdo Fraser will have seen during his lengthy examination of the framework, it is about the very things that he mentions in his motion: the provision of good professionals and their excellent professionalism, the broad interpretation of needs and the provision for those needs in a wide range of settings. The framework recognises the right of young children to high-quality relationships, environments and services that offer an holistic approach to meeting their needs. That runs across the whole spectrum from play, through learning and social relationships, to emotional and physical wellbeing. It is recognised in the framework and the underlying approach that, although such an approach is important for all children, it particularly benefits those children and families who require higher levels of support. Providing support at the intensity required and ensuring that children and their parents are neither left in limbo without help nor smothered by the state is a job that must be done on a case-by-case basis. It cannot be decided here in Parliament, nor can it be prescribed in a textbook or seminar. That is where the professionals are at their most valuable, helpful and effective. The Scottish Government realises that, although we can have as many frameworks, strategies and working groups as we like, it is always the people who are right on the scene who make the difference, as I have found from my experience. We are in a position to create the right frameworks, and the Scottish Government has done that, but that is about the extent of what we can do. We must create the framework, provide the resources and leave those who know what they are doing to get on with it. I agree with Des McNulty—he may not hear that again in the chamber—that a true holistic approach is the most effective way forward. The strategy, the other frameworks and the legislation that we have created on a cross-party basis in Parliament will enable that approach to work and allow the support to be put in place. One of the most important things about the framework—and the one area in which the motion may stray from the path of righteousness—is that a big part of the strategy aims to ensure that professionals enable parents, families and communities to develop their own solutions using the public services as required. Remedies are not imposed, nor does anyone take the decisions for those whom they help. Independence is as important here as it is anywhere else, and I am sure that Murdo Fraser has a deep appreciation of exactly how important independence is. The framework is about ambition—about wanting more for our children, our communities and our nation, and about wanting them all to be better and to be better served. It is about making children’s lives better today so that we all have better lives tomorrow. The changes that had to—and still have to—come in the delivery of our public services reflect that. I congratulate all those who have been involved in developing all the frameworks, the additional support for learning legislation, the reforms to the children’s hearings system and every piece of legislation that we have put in place to support children, and in bringing all those things to this point. I look forward to seeing continuous improvements in our early years provision.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what importance it places on preventive work with vulnerable young people at risk of becoming involved in criminal or antisocial behaviour. (S3O-12943)

I am encouraged that the minister recognises the important work that many local organisations are doing to divert at-risk young people away from potential criminal behaviour. An example is the highly innovative drama project the street, which is run by Regen:fx Youth Trust in Hamilton and which was singled out as an example of excellent practice in the recent report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education into South Lanarkshire Council’s child protection services. I have been lucky enough to see that project. We know from recent comments by Labour’s justice spokesperson that Labour would divert the very successful cashback for communities fund, which helps to finance such vital work, into the general policing budget.

Will the minister reassure me that an SNP Government will protect cashback for communities and continue to invest in crime prevention work with young people?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits it considers will accrue from the completion of the Edinburgh to Glasgow M8 motorway. (S3O-12846)

Will the minister explain how the use of the non-profit-distributing finance model that has been adopted by the Scottish Government will protect the economic benefits to communities in Lanarkshire that he describes?

6. To ask the Scottish Government how many businesses are in receipt of business rates relief under the small business bonus scheme. (S3O-12740)

The cabinet secretary and I both believe that it is the flourishing of small businesses in Scotland that will drive economic growth. Does he agree with the Federation of Small Businesses not only that the small business bonus is important for the survival of small businesses but that “it is now more important than ever that the playing field is level wherever possible” and that his proposal for an additional business rates levy on the largest supermarkets is vital for the future survival of Scotland’s small businesses?

To ask the Scottish Government what provision it has made for local Rape Crisis and Women's Aid services in its 2010-11 draft budget. (S3O-12617)

I thank the minister for that answer, which I know will be warmly welcomed by Rape Crisis and Women's Aid staff and volunteers at national and local level across Scotland. The fact that they provide a vital service and show dedication and commitment to women of all kinds has led to Lanarkshire Rape Crisis Centre in my area being recognised as South Lanarkshire's voluntary organisation of the year in 2010. Does the minister agree that the wider preventive and awareness-raising work that Women's Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland do, in addition to the services that they provide to individual women, is crucial? Will the Government encourage the police, the national health service and local authorities to take advantage of the training and information that Women's Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland provide so that women across Scotland receive the highest possible quality of service from all the public agencies with which they come into contact?

All of them. They are all less than perfect. [ Laughter .]

I thought that the performance of the SNP on education was an excellent choice of subject for debate. It is a brilliant debating subject that gladdens the hearts of SNP members and causes clouds to gather on the horizon for the poor wee downtrodden members to my left—to my left in physical terms only, of course—who wish that they, collectively, had half the ability of any one of the SNP's Cabinet members. Although most of Scotland has welcomed the advances in education under the current and previous education secretaries, Labour MSPs have not been able to find the grace to congratulate the SNP on those advances—nor, indeed, the pupils and staff in our schools who deliver them. Karen Whitefield need not bother getting to her feet; I will answer her points now. The SNP Government has built more schools—330 of them—than Labour dreamed of in its 2007 manifesto. The SNP has brought class sizes down to their lowest-ever levels, introduced the baccalaureate, abolished university tuition fees, is reforming the exam system and is moving Scotland forward, but all we hear from the Labour benches is a long—very long—high-pitched whining sound. Labour members complain when ministers and cabinet secretaries do not intervene, but cry foul when a minister or a cabinet secretary intervenes. Their complaints seem to be never ending, but they are always without foundation, logic, reason, or structure. They have complained that Mike Russell took the time to explain the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 to people who are campaigning to save their school. It is not quite clear whether they are objecting to his making sure that the consultation on the schools is carried out properly or to his taking the time to help parents. The Opposition seems to find it surprising that a busy politician would take the time to meet school campaigners when there are only a few children at the school. That, I suggest, points to the difference between SNP and Opposition members. Whereas their concern is only for votes, our concern is for the people who are affected. I found it enlightening that Mr Russell made sure that the campaigners knew about the Scottish rural schools network—a fine campaigning organisation that cannot be said to be in the pocket of any political party and which, I am sure, gives him no quarter when the subject of rural schools comes up. It gives no one any quarter in its actions to keep rural schools open. Labour's call for an inquiry into Mr Russell's actions, this time in the form of a complaint to the  Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner, is not a new tactic. We have had a series of spurious Labour complaints about SNP ministers, each of which has been turfed out. In fact, the two former Presiding Officers who serve as the independent scrutineers of the ministerial code made it clear in January that they are tiring of complaints being made that have no substance. The point for Labour members is, of course, not to prove any case but to get themselves a newspaper headline. They do not care whether anything wrong has been done; they just want a story. That is cheap and petty politics at its cheapest and most petty, but it is the standard that we have come to expect from Labour members, which is a great shame. They roll in the gutter and call it opposition. Scotland is ill served by people who stand for election but offer no alternatives; people who want to run the country but cannot offer a vision; and people who want to be in office not for what can be done, but for the trappings of office. Any reason to disagree is an ungraceful place for Scottish Labour to be. SNP ministers are not perfect. SNP cabinet secretaries are capable of making mistakes but they do their best to deliver, to make Scotland a better place in which to live. [ Interruption .]

They contribute to driving Scotland forward, and that is what the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning does. At a time when everyone else has abandoned the principle—or even the pretence of the principle—of free education, it was the SNP that abolished the graduate endowment. Labour has no idea how to ensure the principle of free education, as Iain Gray proved on "Newsnight Scotland" the other night. When others were giving up on Scottish education and being content just to talk it down, it was the SNP that turned round attainment and got us climbing back up the programme for international student assessment rankings. After years of declining apprenticeship numbers under the Labour and Lib Dem coalitions, the SNP Government started to grow those numbers. Kenny Gibson cited the numbers earlier, so I will not cite them again, but there have been more apprenticeships under the SNP. Hugh Henry asked about the target of every pupil getting two hours of PE a week. The figure has risen from 5 per cent under Labour to 55 per cent under the SNP—a rise of 1,000 per cent. That is progress indeed—progress that that lot couldnae even imagine. Scottish education is not flourishing yet, but it is getting its first chance in generations to grow and to look towards blooming because the SNP Government has been clearing the weeds of years of Labour misrule. The suffocation is being  lifted and there now is a chance for sunlight to reach the shoots. Scottish education is in good hands now. It is in the hands of a party and a cabinet secretary who actually care about making it better, improving Scotland and moving her forward. We have ambition and hope for Scotland and for Scottish education, which Labour lacks. We look forward to continuous improvement in education, always looking for better attainment performance and improved learning and teaching conditions from nursery to university. Scotland is moving forward with the SNP and Scottish education is moving forward, too. I am absolutely delighted to support the amendment in the name of my colleague.

I echo the comments of all those who have spoken about how well intentioned the bill is. It has certainly put the issues that people with autism face back up the agenda. The consultation on the bill encouraged the minister to reconvene the ASD reference group, which included all the stakeholders, and that group developed a draft strategy that is currently being consulted on. The committee noted that since the bill was introduced, the Scottish Government has consulted on the draft autism strategy, which is entitled, "Towards an Autism Strategy for Scotland". The bill has two main aspects: to develop a strategy and to give local authorities and NHS bodies a duty to "have regard to" that strategy. I pursued the issue of the duty to have regard to the strategy with numerous witnesses during committee evidence sessions, but it was difficult for the committee to take a position on the matter because the witnesses did not seem to know how that would work in practice. The main point is what happens in practice to develop services and to address people's needs. In my opinion, a duty to "have regard to" the strategy would be so open to interpretation that it would not deliver the improvements to service delivery that people with autism need and want. We spoke a lot in the committee about the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2009. One of the best aspects of that act was that it tidied up the legislative landscape of support for children. The act has not been in place long and, in my opinion, it is too early to determine whether it has made any real improvements. I urge the committee that will be given responsibility for education after the election  to undertake a thorough examination of ASL to ascertain whether it is doing what it is supposed to do and making progress in the relevant areas. It is important that we recognise certain symptoms when children are young so that we can identify the children with whom we are concerned as early as possible. One of the other big issues that we face concerns the adults of today who have autism. Legislation that is relevant in that regard includes the Equality Act 2010, which needs time to bed in and to be used effectively by people with autism to ensure that they get access to the services that they need. Nothing would do a bigger disservice to people with autism and to the parents of children with autism who need access to the necessary services than would the creation of new and overlapping legislation through which they would have to find their way before they could claim the support to which they are entitled. Even with the support of those who have been through the system, the process is never easy so we should not make it any harder. My concern is that the bill would disappoint the very people whom it seeks to support. Members of the committee did a lot of soul-searching and discussed the matter publicly and in private in an attempt to work out what the bill would deliver. We heard powerful evidence from adults with autism who bravely and eloquently told us their stories, which were of raised expectations, of continued disappointments, of misdiagnosis, of being pigeonholed in the learning disability category or in the category of people with mental disabilities, and of being given treatments that in some cases did more harm than good. In all honesty, I could not support a bill that would continue to inflict that kind of disappointment on the people who gave us that evidence. I believe that the Government's strategy will help to move the issue forward. I have spoken to the minister on the matter and I urge the Government to monitor the strategy. I also urge the committee that will have responsibility for education after the election to monitor the strategy as well, because that dual scrutiny is important. I congratulate Hugh O'Donnell on bringing the issue to the fore and I encourage everyone who has an interest in the matter to do what they can to keep us politicians on the right track. We must all work together: the stakeholders, the parliamentarians and the service users, who can tell us what they need. If we scrutinise properly what is being done and ensure that it develops in the right way, we can improve services for people with autism through the strategy, without the need for legislation.

The minister has mentioned and is well aware of the importance of apprenticeships to the life chances of Scotland's young people, to economic recovery in Scotland and to addressing the skills gap. In case Mr Whitton missed it, will the minister tell us how many apprenticeship places would be equivalent to the £4.8 million cost of not going ahead with the voluntary severance scheme and how that would fill the important skills gaps for young people in Scotland?

I open by supporting the comments that Elaine Smith has just made and those which Margaret Mitchell made. Post-legislative scrutiny is not only advisable to monitor legislation, but is necessary to ensure that the intention behind the legislation makes a difference to people's lives. I, too, thank the clerks and all the others who contributed to the inquiry, especially some of the children's organisations that support young people with mental health issues, and which gave such passionate evidence. The Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill was passed four years before I became an MSP. I must admit to arriving on the committee a bit late for the work that we are debating; my colleagues had already carefully gathered and assessed some of the evidence before I was appointed to the committee. I pay tribute to the committee members who went before me and kicked off work on the report. However, I have some professional experience from my days with Glasgow City Council social work services, which had to implement some of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, in particular by ensuring that staff were trained to understand what it meant. The committee's thorough examination of the equalities implications of the 2003 act was a sufficient grounding to enable me to grab hold of the issue and to begin to understand it. The report identified some areas of concern, which should be addressed by the Scottish Government, and it identifies both weaknesses and strengths in the operation of the legislation. I hope to hear from the minister a commitment to address those issues and, perhaps, some indication of what she thinks the first steps should be.  As Margaret Mitchell does, I have concerns about the welfare of female prisoners in Cornton Vale. On many occasions, I have heard the Cabinet Secretary for Justice talk about the need to take people who have mental health disorders out of the criminal justice system and to get them into treatment, where they can be helped. I understand that those prisoners represent a substantial chunk of the prison population. One of the committee's previous reports on female prisoners, which was a fantastic piece of work, helped to lay out some of the landscape for us. However, as Elaine Smith said, the report that we are debating today makes clear the problems that female prisoners have in getting access to services that they need, including independent advocacy services. I know that the Scottish Government has already made moves to address the issue—as the report notes—but I hope that the minister will be able to expand a little on what is planned. I am happy to wait for her to write to me, if that would be easier than responding during today's debate, as I know that the issue has come out of left field. If I understand correctly what the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has said in the past, many of Scotland's prisoners—male and female—have mental health problems and should be in treatment, not in prison. That is my opinion and, I think, his opinion: he has said it on the record. If we can find ways of treating people more humanely, of acting to help them instead of incarcerating them, and of looking for solutions to their problems instead of shoving them aside to cure one of our problems, perhaps we will build a better society with fewer damaged people and more people who can find a way of making a positive contribution to society. I welcome the evidence that we received from organisations, especially on issues related to children and young people, and the report's recommendations. I welcome in particular paragraphs 62 to 66, on age-appropriate services for young people. There is a clear understanding that early intervention is the key to effective support and recovery for such young people. I seek specific support for under-16s, which is especially pertinent in ensuring that recovery can take place. Of course, it will not be easy to provide that. It is not easy to choose between doing what is right and doing what is easy, but we should always do what is right, in this respect. I look forward to working with SNP ministers—I am always an optimist—on addressing the issues over the next four and half years. Scotland has started moving in the right direction. The committee did a great job of scrutinising the legislation, but we still have some distance to travel and should get on with doing that.

Regardless of the desirability of introducing a graduate contribution, does the cabinet secretary agree with the Browne review's finding that the practical difficulties of a graduate tax would be almost insurmountable and would mean no substantial revenue for 30 years—a finding that matches our experience of Labour's graduate endowment, which cost graduates more than £26 million but had raised only £57,000 by the time it was abolished in favour of free education by the SNP Government?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussion it has had with representatives of South Lanarkshire Council regarding the local government settlement for 2011-12. (S3O-12423)

The cabinet secretary has delivered a funding package for councils that will help them to protect families, communities and front-line services from the worst impact of the Westminster cuts. However, I am concerned that, some time before the cabinet secretary announced that package, South Lanarkshire Council published a long list of potential savings, which focused primarily on cutting services rather than finding efficiencies in the way in which the council conducts its business. How will the Scottish Government work with COSLA to encourage South Lanarkshire Council and other local authorities to look beyond knee-jerk cuts to services and instead to work with one another to find better and smarter ways of working that deliver maximum value for the public purse?

I will pick up the point that I am sure Anne McLaughlin was just about to make—in lots of cases, people come to us having been to their MP, who has not helped them. That is where the difficulty lies. I congratulate Anne McLaughlin on securing a members' business debate on this subject. It is a problem that is all too familiar to many of us. We have all tried to make representations on behalf of migrant and refugee constituents, and we know that the problem exists. It is also an issue that exemplifies the unfortunate attitudes—I am being charitable here, because I have described the UKBA in other terms—that some, but not all, parts of the Whitehall apparatus continue to have towards the Scottish Parliament and its elected representatives. Colleagues from Glasgow have already spoken powerfully about the recent behaviour of the UKBA towards asylum seekers living in Glasgow, so there is no need for me to say more about that, other than to agree that the approach was deplorable and should be reversed. I will talk about the UKBA's refusal to deal with MSPs who contact it on behalf of their constituents. That behaviour appears to be based on the UKBA's own interpretations of the boundaries of devolution and about the cases MSPs should and should not take up. Apparently, the UKBA believes that it has the right to dictate to elected members of this Parliament what their job is and how they should do it. Other UK Government departments do not do that. The Benefits Agency does not reply to MSPs who write to it with a refusal to answer their questions because welfare benefits are a reserved matter. Quite rightly, it understands that any elected representative—no matter which Parliament they are elected to—is entitled to receive not just a response but a proper response that addresses the query that has been made. The UKBA thinks differently. Like benefits, asylum and immigration is a policy area that may be reserved but which nonetheless has enormous implications for a wide range of devolved areas and which impacts considerably on the lives and welfare of many people living in Scotland. That is a reality which the UKBA refuses to recognise. It will not countenance the possibility that MSPs have a legitimate concern about how asylum and immigration policy affects our constituents, nor recognise our right to take up cases relating to it. The UKBA operates to its own version of the devolved settlement, one in which it can tell members of this Parliament who contact it on behalf of an individual constituent, in so many  words, to go and take a running jump. As the title of Anne McLaughlin's motion says, it is demonstrating contempt, not only for the Scottish Parliament but for the process of democracy in Scotland and the right of our constituents to receive representation from us. I cannot help but wonder whether there is an element of pique in that approach—a wee bit of revenge, perhaps, against this Parliament and its pesky MSPs, who have been frequently and strongly critical of some of the UKBA's more unpleasant practices, such as dawn raids and child detention, particularly in Dungavel in my region. Members of the Equal Opportunities Committee, of which I am one, heard evidence from the UKBA's Scotland director during our inquiry into migration and trafficking earlier this year. He told us that its handling of devolution "is still a challenge, but I suspect that I am told less about us getting it wrong than I am about us getting it right nowadays. However, there is still some way to go."—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 21 September 2010; c 1990.] No kidding—they can say that again. We are telling the UKBA that, in refusing to deal with MSPs who are making representations on behalf of their constituents, it is getting it badly wrong and that it needs to change its approach now. We are elected to the Scottish Parliament to represent everyone in Scotland and I expect the same service from all the reserved agencies across the UK as they would expect from our ministers. The same should apply.

We often contrast our winter weather preparation and survival with those countries that we believe to be far better prepared and far better in the execution than we are. I was therefore surprised to read about the problems that are being faced in Canada this week, with hundreds of motorists on highway 402 being caught in the snow and stranded in their cars for 24 hours from Monday morning. Back in February, a third of Sweden's trains were cancelled, the Stockholm metro system was shut down, schools, nurseries and sports halls were closed, and shops and factories were also shut down. However, I did not hear anyone talking about reputational damage in those countries. Better communication about the problems being faced, the cause of those problems and the movement towards solutions is essential. Preparation is all important, of course, so it was good to see ScotRail moving earlier this week to protect its rolling stock and to prepare for further  severe weather. I understand the concern that members have raised today about ScotRail and its preparedness for last week. ScotRail, determined not to be caught out again, is fitting skirts and hot air blowers to its trains—I am not quite sure whether to expect a hover-train or the rail equivalent of a pair of hot pants. It is a start and, hopefully, it will help ScotRail to avoid any repeat of the widespread disruption of last week. The recently announced Government plan should allow for better winter maintenance to be provided, and it looks like we are at least heading down the right road. Spending on winter maintenance is up. The previous Executive cut it by £5 million in 2003, and it never recovered until 2006. Even then—pardon the pun—it was frozen for the following year, which was the year when the SNP came to power, of course. Resources for routine and winter maintenance have risen in every year in which John Swinney's hands have been on the tiller. They have increased by £10 million over the four years, to just under £62 million. All that can come to nothing if the resources are not properly deployed, which is why the Government is right to change the emphasis that it places on its readiness for severe weather. Being able to shut down parts of the trunk road network for safety reasons or to allow gritting and salting to take place and giving the police the power to move vehicles off the carriageway to allow it to be cleared are sensible moves that complement the excellent efforts of thousands of people—professionals and volunteers—who make the difference in severe weather conditions. I refer to those who look out for a neighbour, clear a path or, like volunteers at the churches in Hamilton and Motherwell, get together to ensure that vulnerable people have hot drinks. The Hamilton Asda staff went out of their way to keep their cafe open to ensure that people had somewhere to get hot food, hot drinks and much-needed sanctuary from the weather. That sense of community holds a nation together and allows it to grow. I am confident that the steps that the Scottish Government has taken this week—the six-point plan and everything that comes with it—ensure that we are as prepared as we can be. I wish it all the best in the coming week.

To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on human trafficking. (S3O-12310)

I ask the cabinet secretary to take account of recent evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee from Amnesty International and in the anti-trafficking monitoring group report that suggests that the national referral mechanism does not cater for children’s needs. Does he agree with the aforementioned organisations that local authority child protection services should determine the trafficked status of children and not the UK Border Agency?

To ask the First Minister what impact a decision to lift the cap on tuition fees at English universities would have on Scottish higher education. (S3F-2766)

Will the First Minister confirm for us once again that there will be no imposition of tuition fees on Scottish students under a Scottish National Party Government? Will he call on the other parties to join the SNP in voting against the changes to tuition fees? In particular, will he encourage the Lib Dems to stick by the pledge that they made during the election campaign earlier this year and ask them to vote against tuition fees?

The motion before us is a very interesting one, and I am delighted that the Lib Dems are finally starting to put forward policy ideas. We have spent only three and a half years in this place listening to Opposition debates that are devoid of policy, but it feels much longer. Jeremy Purvis has obviously given some serious thought to the issues that he explores in the policy paper on which today's motion is based, and he has to be commended for that. There is much on which we can agree. Few of us in the chamber would disagree with the desire to increase the number of business start-ups, for example, or to green up Scotland's business sector. However, there is a prevailing sense throughout the paper that although Jeremy Purvis believes that he has come up with all sorts of new and innovative ideas, he has not necessarily taken the time to look and find out that a lot of what he talks about is happening already. To give just one example, on page 22 the paper discusses the role of Scotland's colleges in driving economic growth, correctly pointing out that "Investing in training and skills makes a real difference." Indeed it does, which is why the SNP Government has not only invested record sums in further education but worked with Scotland's colleges to ensure that they have been able to respond quickly to the challenges that have been presented by the economic downturn—a task that colleges have performed admirably. Additional resources were targeted last year at colleges in the local authority areas that experienced the greatest increases in unemployment and where the rate of unemployment among young people rose the most. The SNP has enabled further education colleges to realise their potential as drivers of economic recovery as they have never been able to do before, with the necessary flexibility to respond to the needs of their own regions as well as to provide support to our national economic recovery.  In my own area, Central Scotland, where the number of young people attending college has grown enormously in recent years, the FE colleges have grasped that agenda. Motherwell, Coatbridge, Cumbernauld and South Lanarkshire Colleges have worked together to take on new courses that will allow them to play their part in addressing the particularly harsh impact that the economic crisis has had in Lanarkshire. It is not that Jeremy Purvis's ideas are all wrong; it is just that, to a large extent, he has arrived a bit late at a party that is already in full swing.

That is a commendable idea. As I said earlier, however, colleges are already working very well with SDS in delivering what Jeremy Purvis has been talking about. Again, perhaps he did not get the invitation to the party. As the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism has made clear, much of what Jeremy Purvis has proposed is unnecessary and potentially destabilises on-going work. Part of it does not look at all radical to me; it looks like a reorganisation. Retain this, don't retain that, shift this bit here, shunt that function over there—it is a moving of desks and a changing of names. Look below the surface of the various new bodies and agency titles and, as Rob Gibson said, it is more like an administrative shuffling of the pack than a genuinely bold policy idea. I seemed to remember that the Lib Dems had a different position for the election in 2007, so I went back and had a look at their manifesto. There is a whole section in it on Scottish Enterprise. Page 24 has quite a lot of interesting information, including: "government should give strong support to the business leaders who invest their time, knowledge and expertise at all levels in Scottish Enterprise". That is interesting in itself, but there is a better bit, which says: "Those who say the enterprise agencies must be scrapped or slashed must explain how they will deliver their functions in skills and training, in investment in industry, in regeneration. Too often other parties call for changes without saying what new bodies they will set up to take over, or complain vociferously if Enterprise agencies suggest cutbacks or changes to the service. We will be consistent." Consistent, indeed.

My colleague must remember that the two previous Ministers for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Jim Wallace and Nicol Stephen, left a mess that Jim Mather had to tidy up. Gavin Brown has talked a number of times this morning about ripping things up and starting again. That reminded me of a great Orange Juice song written by Edwyn Collins. The bit that keeps playing through my head is: "I hope to God you're not as dumb as you make out I hope to God". Another commitment in the Lib Dems manifesto in 2007 was to create a new quango in the shape of an investment and innovation agency. Those commitments seem to run counter to the intent of the motion that is before us today. Of course, I am not saying that reorganisations do not ever have a place, and the streamlining of the cluttered enterprise and skills landscape that the SNP undertook when it entered government was much needed. However, it has been barely three years since the Scottish Government's reforms of the enterprise and skills landscape took place, and for Jeremy Purvis to propose further reorganisation now feels more like doing something for the sake of it rather than an effective policy platform to achieve our shared aim of strengthening the Scottish economy. The opening clause of Jeremy Purvis's motion is: "That the Parliament believes that creating jobs and strengthening the economy is central to Scotland's future prosperity". I could not agree more with that. I would argue, though, that a more effective way to achieve that aim is to support the people whose job it is to build sustainable economic recovery by doing just that.

I add my thanks to all the organisations that have been involved, the bill team, the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre and everyone else who has supported us along the way. I particularly thank committee colleagues who supported my amendments. The children's panel chairs have followed the committee's deliberations every step of the way—that includes our marathon meetings and even our evening meetings. I believe that they were here yesterday, and they are here today, too. I pay tribute to the chairs and to all panel members. It should be remembered that the caring people who make up our panels are volunteers. It is nearly half a century since Kilbrandon reported. In that time, society has changed and the challenges that we and especially young people face have changed. I am immensely proud of Scotland's hearings system, which puts the welfare of the child at its heart. It was time to renew and refresh the system, to allow children to participate effectively, to ensure adequate monitoring of the implementation of hearing decisions and of outcomes, and to ensure that the system is ECHR compliant. The amendments in my name that were agreed to yesterday will ensure that the child's voice is not lost in a room full of adults. Effective advocacy in Moray and Ayrshire has delivered better outcomes for children. Have-your-say forms that are completed before panel meetings by children who have had advocacy support are much more informed and in a number of cases have enabled panel members to come to better decisions for children. The provisions that were added to the bill at stage 2 on the age at which a young person comes to the reporter's attention will go a long way towards supporting young people. The new system will allow young people who are approaching their 16th birthday to be supported through the hearings system rather than put into  the adult system, where they can become lost to society for ever. As I said in the committee, it is important that we acknowledge that a child's vulnerability does not end at the stroke of midnight on their 16th birthday. The bill will provide for a welfare-based, caring approach to our vulnerable young people. Another key provision in the bill is the power to request assistance. The duty to comply is extended to all local authority functions. A request could be made to local authorities and, for the first time, to health boards for assistance in realising a hearing's decisions, to support the care of a young person. The health service will be drawn into the system in a way that has never happened in the past, and the approach will ensure that a young person can have an holistic care plan. The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child is a cause that is close to my heart. The bill places the rights of the child at the heart of the system. It modernises grounds for referral and increases consistency in relation to decision making, training and continuous professional development. It will raise standards throughout Scotland. It will also maintain the independence of the system. It provides a clearer statutory framework and will strengthen protection and improve outcomes for Scotland's children. The new national convener will ensure the involvement of children and young people in the running of the system, so a youthful outlook will be maintained. The bill will also better organise safeguarders, improving training and ensuring consistent standards. There will be a permanent scheme of secure legal representation for children and relevant persons, which is welcome and will ensure that the highest regard is paid to the rights of the child. The system needs to be fit for another half century. I commend the minister, Adam Ingram, and all the other people who have guided and informed us along the way. I welcome the bill becoming law.

Will the cabinet secretary explain what provision has been made in the Scottish Government draft budget to support young people from less well-off backgrounds to continue in education?

Amendment 12 is consequential to amendment 61—if, indeed, amendment 61 is agreed to. I hope that it will be. Amendment 12 is required to remove a contradictory part of the bill that was inserted at stage 2. As members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee will be aware, advocacy services have been the subject of a lot of scrutiny during the passage of the bill. I should note that Ken Macintosh did quite a bit of work in promoting the amendments, which has moved the issue forward. I lodged a probing amendment at stage 2 to see what we could do to improve the services that are available for children who are subject to the panels. I make it clear to members who might not have had the opportunity to follow the arguments closely that advocacy is not about someone speaking on the child's behalf but about helping the child to understand what is going on and to express their opinions to the panel. Advocacy is not about an adult thinking that they know best, but about enhancing the central idea of the children's hearings system, which puts the child and the child's welfare at the centre of proceedings. In that spirit, amendment 61 will place a duty on a panel's chair to ensure that the child knows that the advocacy service is available. That will ensure that the child has access to the help that he or she might need in order to present their case properly.  When the children's hearings system was created, the state took on itself a duty of care for the children who would be involved in the system. Amendment 61 will enhance that duty of care by bringing support to children and helping them to express themselves to panels in the most appropriate way. Each case is different for each child and each child has different needs. It is difficult to put in legislation exactly what will be needed in each case. I hope that the amendment provides a compromise that will make it a bit easier for children to participate in hearings. Amendment 61 is supported by Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People, Children 1st, Children in Scotland and—with a note of caution—the children's panel chairs group. I thank the minister for his considered input and I thank the other committee members for helping to frame the debate properly. I hope that we have an amendment on which we can all agree. I am pleased to bring amendments 12 and 61 to the chamber. I move amendment 12.

I make it clear that the proposed measure is not about representation; it is about giving the child the support to understand what is happening to them through the panel system. I think that it will ensure that the child's voice is not lost. I press amendment 12.  Amendment 12 agreed to.

I welcome the cabinet secretary's confirmation in the budget statement yesterday that he will not use the Scottish Parliament's tax-raising power, which is regressive and would hit only basic-rate taxpayers at a time when they are struggling. Does he agree that the Calman tax proposals that are on offer from the Opposition parties are also regressive, and that the Scottish Parliament needs powers that would allow it to set up a fair and progressive system of taxation that would not place a larger burden on basic-rate taxpayers, compared with people higher up the income scale?

The cabinet secretary has delivered the budget that Scotland needs to protect its services, families and communities during the tough times ahead, although he has had to work within the constraints of the cuts that have been imposed on him by the UK Government. Does he agree that the economic crisis has demonstrated beyond any doubt that the best way in which to enable Scotland to avoid the worst of Tory cuts and pursue a better way for our economy, our jobs and our public services is to give Scotland control of our own economy?

I have been amused by repeated comments in recent months and during this morning's debate about curriculum for excellence being rushed in. I understand that the consideration that led to the renewal of Scotland's curriculum began while Lord McConnell was Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs. Work took off when Cathy Jamieson took on the role of Minister for Education and Young People and initiated a national conversation, and key features of the new landscape were delivered in 2006. Curriculum for excellence is being implemented and is bringing a new, fresh focus to Scottish education. The LTS website tells us that the first qualifications to come from the curriculum review will take place in 2014, after their development by SQA. Teachers are anxious for the qualifications framework to be in place, so that they have a target to aim for. I understand that anxiety and I urge SQA to work on the qualifications timeously. Far from being rushed, curriculum for excellence has sailed slowly, which suggests that there has been careful consideration of the various strands of the process and of the problems that might arise. From what I have seen, progress has gone smoothly for the schools and teachers who prepared for the new curriculum, who are finding that it provides a user-friendly and simple set of tools. It is right that the Parliament should pay tribute to the people who have worked hard to bring it this far, such as the teachers who have taken it on themselves to ensure that they are ready to use the new tools, and all the support staff in schools and education departments.  We must also congratulate LTS, the SQA, HMIE, local government officials and civil servants, who have been working on the new curriculum for some eight years. We should give credit where credit is due to the previous Administration, which got things started. However, Mr McNulty's approving quoting of the anti-Scottish-education comments in today's Daily Mail is proof of Labour's bankrupt and opportunistic approach to education. Continuous improvement in Scottish education is possible only if there is constant effort from everyone who is involved. In curriculum for excellence we appear to have a programme that is heading in the right direction. We must keep developing the programme. Fiona Hyslop, the former Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, made an excellent decision when she ensured that teachers would be involved in the management board. That happened in 2008, to support the implementation of curriculum for excellence. The Government has supported implementation of the curriculum with money and other resources, such as materials and tailored support for individual schools. There have been additional in-service days for teachers and there is an additional implementation year. There is every reason to believe that the change to the curriculum will be made smoothly and will work well. Scotland's Colleges has embraced curriculum for excellence and has been implementing the senior phase. A sector-wide survey has been completed for the management board, areas that need work have been identified, a communications toolkit for learners, staff and everyone else who is involved has been produced, and a website that shares good practice and resources has been developed. All that demonstrates the seriousness with which colleges have embraced and are taking forward the new curriculum. I declare an interest. I am the parent of a first-year pupil at a school in North Lanarkshire. I got my letter from the cabinet secretary—it was welcome, and I thank him. Last week, I attended the first parents night for my son, who has some challenges in his educational experience. I was delighted with what I saw. There were evangelical, motivated teachers, who were impatient to set about teaching kids in a different way and getting them engaged in learning. More important and more serious, I saw children who were seriously enjoying their experience in all their classes, whether they were mathematics, science or physical education classes. My son is even enjoying every aspect of home economics, which is a bit of a challenge for him. My son is thriving, which is what a parent wants to see. What I saw in  the school that night was a group of teachers who are doing a fantastic job. I congratulate them. It is sad that the SSTA maintains its opposition to the implementation of the programme. I urge the union and its members to reconsider their collective and individual positions and to consider the positive contribution that they can make to the smooth implementation of curriculum for excellence. I know that the SSTA has amazing insights to offer, because Ann Ballinger and I have discussed the matter at length—I am happy to say that we are still friends. I recognise and applaud the passion that the teachers to whom I have spoken demonstrate every day in our education system. Something that is close to my heart is the baccalaureate, which the SNP Government introduced. Its birth was smooth, if a little slow. The curriculum for excellence will slip easily into place, and will develop over time, as is the intention with the baccalaureate, which offers Scots pupils the tools that they need to compare their academic performance to that of people of a similar age in other countries. I am delighted that universities will embrace the baccalaureate when they look at entrance qualifications. We have heard this morning that curriculum for excellence embeds literacy and numeracy across the curriculum. They are seen no longer as discrete areas of study but as integral parts of the education of young people in Scotland. We all agree that that has to happen, and we all welcome the foundation qualifications in literacy and numeracy. I welcome the continued debate. We should continue to talk about challenges and experiences and learn from them. As a parliamentarian, I look forward to that. More important, as a parent, I look forward to the continued progress and success of curriculum for excellence. I support the motion in the cabinet secretary's name.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that this is Scotland's first literacy action plan? Does he agree that it shows that the Scottish National Party takes action where it sees need; that it is shameful that Scotland had to wait until the SNP was in power before any action was taken on literacy; and that it is rank opportunism for a party that was in power for 10 years to start whining about it only after the Scottish people consigned them to opposition?

No one else can.

I welcome the refresh of the skills strategy and the new focus on delivering across the board. I like the fact that Scotland's economic recovery is reinforcing the strategy, and creating more opportunities for Scotland to flourish is paramount to that recovery. I was pleased to hear the news that there is to be a review of post-16 education and vocational training, which is due to report by March next year. The value of employer-linked vocational education cannot be overestimated. As a former vocational training officer, I am very interested in it. There is an issue that Willy Roe might look at, which could help us to address the skills shortages in some areas. It may sound a little off-key for the debate, and a bit separate from what we are discussing, but I think that there may be some gender issues to be addressed in the provision of training. There is a traditional view of which jobs should be done by women and which by men, which is, to a great extent, cemented in place by social pressures. It shines through in the gender balance of trainees. Recent statistics from Skills Development  Scotland show a definite divide between the genders in the national training programmes. Agriculture and horticulture are overwhelmingly male dominated, as are construction and engineering. Business administration, health and social care are dominated by female trainees, as are dental nursing and hairdressing. I do not imagine nor pretend to believe that even the current Government can change that situation overnight, but it needs to be changed as quickly as possible. Perhaps it would be appropriate for the review to examine the gender issue. I hope that it will, as equality, flexibility and the distribution of skills throughout the population will help to close the skills gaps. We should look at the stereotypical picture of the boys being builders and the girls being hairdressers. It would be nice to see more female engineers and good to see a few more male dental nurses. When we stop thinking of certain jobs being men's jobs or women's jobs, we will perhaps be a fair and balanced economy and nation. That would help us to go a bit further towards seeing all jobs as equal and all workers as having equal validity. The briefing that we received from Scotland's Colleges highlights an important point that bears repeating. Scotland is fairly well served with people who have high skill levels and has too large a number of people with no or low skill levels, which leaves too small a number of people with intermediate skills. We must tackle that problem as quickly and cost-effectively as possible. We need high-quality training in those intermediate skills. We must pay up to ensure that the training is high quality, but the public purse does not extend to infinity, so the training must be delivered within the tight and tightening budgets that we face. I am glad that we have made a start on that. As Alasdair Allan said, the number of apprenticeships has been rising since 2007, following a decline in the preceding years. The number reduced from more than 21,000 in 2004 to fewer than 16,000 in 2006-07. The number is on its way back up, but we should never be complacent and we should continue to strive to provide as many training places, apprenticeships and other places as possible. Much of our success or otherwise in that will, of course, depend on what money Mr Swinney has for doling out. I am sure that he will divulge the amounts in the fullness of time, as any Government would. While the cabinet secretary is considering that and while the review of post-16 education is doing its job, we should consider whether the modern apprenticeships that are on offer are the ones that are needed to fit the skills gaps now and whether they will provide the necessary skills in the workforce for future years. Perhaps we can call on  Skills Development Scotland to report to Parliament on that. If courses that are being offered at public expense are not delivering the skills sets that we will need, perhaps we can change and update them and provide others that are more appropriate. We must be ready when the recession ends. We must not fall into the trap that we fell into in the 1980s and 1990s, when we were not ready and lost business and investment as a result. While that is being done, we should consider how training providers are policed and how we can ensure that they deliver appropriate training to those in their schemes, particularly when the trainees are youngsters. We should also consider how we can ensure that we get value for public money and that trainees are learning skills that will benefit them personally and society generally. There is still a long way to go, but I believe that we are walking down the right road. We will see what the fiscal tightening and the review bring us. I hope that, as soon as we get the report of that review, we are prepared to begin looking straight away for the next way of improving the skills sets of Scotland's population.

Will the cabinet secretary tell us what reaction he has had from teachers and teaching unions on the issue?

I was delighted by the recent news—which the cabinet secretary mentioned—that the University of Edinburgh would be fast-tracking new students who have passed the Scottish baccalaureate by allowing them to proceed straight into second year, where appropriate. It is heartening that the University of the West of Scotland in my region has committed to the Scottish baccalaureate, too.

I want to make progress. That recognition of the excellence of the award and the hard work that pupils put into gaining the qualification is a very welcome development in Scotland's education system, and the University of Edinburgh, the University of the West of Scotland and all the other institutions that are looking at the baccalaureate should be congratulated on their foresight. The quote in The Herald from Edinburgh's vice-principal, Professor Mary Bownes, makes it quite clear why the university has chosen to mark the qualification. She said: "The breadth and depth of study required is ideal preparation for higher education, and lends itself particularly well to the Scottish degree." It is good to see one of Scotland's universities joining Scotland's business community in acknowledging the Scottish baccalaureate, and I look forward to the other higher and further education institutions across the country following that example, and to the continued growth and success of the baccalaureate as an important part of Scottish education. That, I believe, answers—at least in part—the call in the motion for a more flexible degree structure. We cannot forget that our universities are not public institutions; they are independent of the state, and decisions about their degree structures and cost-effectiveness are for them to make. Ministers have restricted room for manoeuvre here, and that is exactly as it should be. What funding the state is prepared to offer the universities is a different matter, of course, and it is on that issue that we will find political differences. I appreciate where the Conservative motion is coming from, and it may surprise some members to find that I agree with part of it—the part that refers to a graduate contribution. In fact, the graduate contribution is a traditional part of our education system, but it is usually called by another name: income tax. The proposal that was made recently by one of the new Conservatives—one Vince Cable—rested on the idea that graduates who earned the most would make a larger graduate contribution than their peers, so we are talking about not only income tax, but progressive taxation. Who would have thought that the Westminster coalition would have led to the Conservatives advocating progressive taxation in less than six months? I find that I can readily agree with my Conservative colleagues that progressive taxation is the way forward. The times truly are a-changing.  Interestingly, Ed Miliband wrote an article for The Guardian in June that called for a graduate contribution, but not at different levels. Ed is a flat-tax Labour leader who opposes a Conservative coalition that advocates progressive taxation. Westminster is, truly, through the looking glass. Importantly, though, Vince Cable's remarks on research funding impact on Scottish universities because it is the UK research councils that he is talking of cutting into.

No, I do not support those proposals at all. I will quote Vince Cable directly: "My preference is to ration research funding by excellence and back research teams of international quality—and screen out mediocrity—regardless of where they are and what they do." He talked of concentrating funding in the 54 per cent of research that has been identified as world class, and of driving down the number of centres that undertake some forms of research. Let us make that clear: it is the 17 per cent of research across the UK that was defined as "world-leading" in 2008 and the 37 per cent that was defined as "internationally excellent" that Mr Cable thinks should be funded. That would mean cutting funding for the 33 per cent that is "of a quality that is recognised internationally in terms of originality, significance and rigour" and the 11 per cent that is "recognised nationally in terms of originality, significance and rigour". However, I am confident that my enlightened Lib Dem colleagues in the Scottish Parliament are committed to free education, and I believe that they will have an extremely positive impact on the proposed green paper. In the light of the proposed cut in research funding, I took a look at the figures on the website of the Higher Education Funding Council for England. In 1998-99—the year in which tuition fees were introduced in England—the teaching grant for England's universities was £4.68 billion. For this academic year, the teaching grant and Government-funded fees amounted to £5.1 billion. That is a real-terms cut of £1.1 billion—17 per cent of what the English teaching grant would have been if it had just kept pace with inflation. Tuition fees have not added to the income of English universities; they have reduced Government funding and dipped into the pockets of the students.  The motion talks about new funding methods. The Conservatives—both the old-fashioned kind with blue rosettes and the new ones with yellow rosettes—seem to be in favour of a graduate contribution and they have been joined by not-so-red Ed, who is leading the Labour Party into the same paddock.

To save Margaret Smith the trouble, I say that I welcome her reassurances and know that she wears a vibrant, bright yellow rosette and that, like me, she believes that education should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. I turn to widening access. The NUS-Labour claims that Scotland's record is worse on that issue are based on Higher Education Statistics Agency figures, which are based on students who go to Scottish universities rather than on residents of Scotland who go to university. We have more students as a whole than England, so the fact that we have a smaller share of students from non-traditional backgrounds may mean that a similar rate of people from non-traditional backgrounds go to university.

Scottish universities receive a cross-border flow of students, predominantly from higher occupational class backgrounds. HESA figures do not take into account higher national certificates and higher national diplomas. In conclusion, the Institute of Directors' publication concluded—

—that a graduate tax would be a burden on employers. I do not agree—

I am sure that members across the chamber, including Mr Rumbles, will understand those employment concerns. Trying to use them to make a partisan political point cannot be understood. That is little-boy politics, when this country—at this time perhaps more than at any other—needs real, grown-up politics. While the Cabinet Secretary for Justice waits for the recommendations of the review—I note that the motion suggests that they have already been delivered—the Parliament could have spent its time better on other topics. As eloquent as the debate is, it can add nothing without the report having been delivered. We should praise and thank the forensic scientists of the SPSA. Without their help, the job of our police forces, prosecutors and courts would be much harder. We should do those scientists the courtesy of waiting until all the evidence is before us before we debate the future of the service that they provide. The SPSA was established in 2007 and has done a tremendous job since then. It is  reviewing the tools that it needs to do the job effectively. We should allow it to complete its review and we could do with some adult politics when it has done so.

Two successful elements of the support that the Scottish Government has provided to young  people during the recession are the adopt an apprentice scheme and the two-for-one scheme, which aim to promote and encourage the take-up of apprentices by businesses and to ensure that, wherever possible, apprentices have the opportunity to complete their training. Will the minister set out his future plans for those schemes and confirm whether they will continue into next year?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will implement the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. (S3O-11017)

I thank the minister for that very helpful reply. It has been a whole year since the convention was ratified by the UK and progress everywhere seems to be slow. I assume that we can be assured that the Government is making every effort to implement the convention. Does it intend to offer a disability impact assessment on each piece of legislation that it introduces in the future to help to meet the general obligations under article 4 of the convention?

What about the Liberal Democrats' commitment to abolish the Scotland Office?

Two hundred and forty-four million pounds in one year—that is how much money was siphoned out of local authority education budgets straight off last year, before authorities had bought even a pencil. Some £244 million was siphoned off and wasted on paying the private profits of bankers who run the special delivery vehicles of PPP and PFI projects. Nearly quarter of a billion pounds a year has been stripped out of the scarce resources that are available to local authorities for education. The money has been lost as a result of the credit card mortgages that Labour took out on Scotland's school estate, yet Labour members have the brass neck to swan into Parliament with a motion that complains about the scarcity of resources—and that is before we face the cuts that will be imposed by the Lib Dem and  Conservative Government as a result of the massive economic failures of Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling. The biggest irony of all is that PPP/PFI was supposed to be a fantastic way of moving the risk of large-scale capital projects away from the public sector and into the private sector. Somehow it did not turn out that way; what little risk transferred came thundering right back at us when the UK Government started firing our money at the banks. Now we are in the interesting position in which public money is being used to prop up private financing of public projects in which private profit is the overriding concern. The public purse is paying through the nose for the privilege. Some 5 per cent of the education budget has gone. One pound in every £20 has vanished from education resources and the situation will only get worse. Revenue expenditure on education has increased massively under the SNP Government and is more than double the level when Donald Dewar was First Minister. We spend £5,000 per primary school pupil per year, compared with less than £2,000 in 1999, and we spend getting on for £7,000 per secondary school pupil per year, compared with just £3,000 in 1999. The Government has ensured that Scotland's schools are well resourced, and has done so in partnership with local authorities. It respects councils and values their position and their right to run their areas. The resources will help to deliver the important changes that are coming in Scottish education, as will dedicated staff members and committed parents. Like Karen Whitefield, I speak to teachers regularly, most of whom tell me that they are ready to implement the curriculum for excellence and that they are looking forward to doing so. However, they are increasingly telling me that they are sick fed up of hearing politicians talking them down, saying that they are not able to implement the new curriculum and suggesting that they are not professional enough to do their jobs well. They tell me that morale is being affected by the constant onslaught on their professionalism. They say that teachers are feeling the pressure and that parents and pupils are being unnecessarily worried by the harpies' continual wailing, which they want to stop. Politicians should stop talking down Scotland's education system and stop blighting children's lives with petty point scoring and instead get on with the job of delivering improvements in Scottish education. Perhaps Opposition members should listen to the sage advice of Robert Brown MSP, from the old days when he was Deputy Minister for Education and Young People, who said: "The curriculum for excellence programme will produce a curriculum for children from three to 18. Moving to a single  curriculum that starts at age three, with the early stage of the revised curriculum going to the end of primary 1, has the radical potential to extend the child-centred, active learning approaches that are used in nursery into the early years of primary. That is extremely important. Good work is being done in many schools and other establishments across Scotland in that regard. From experience across the sector, we know that transitions are always difficult. Continuing the active learning style of nursery into primary 1 will make the transition from pre-school and nursery to school easier. It is vital that the eagerness and enthusiasm for learning that young children have in early years settings are maintained throughout their school careers."— [ Official Report , 8 February 2007; c 31922-3.]  I could not agree more. Many ministers in the previous Administration did a lot of work to start the development of the system that SNP ministers are now implementing. It is sad that their colleagues appear willing to discard that work for the sake of some newspaper headlines and petty political point scoring. Yes, Ms Whitefield—petty political point scoring indeed. It offers little advantage politically and much damage educationally. Those members might wish to reflect on the fact that ill-considered actions can have serious long-term effects. They might want to remember that the newly qualified teachers who cannot find work now entered teacher training under the previous Administration as a result of hasty decisions based on poor workforce planning by Labour ministers. Those newly qualified teachers who cannot find employment, who are noted in the Labour motion, are unemployed because Labour failed them. They entered teacher training on Labour's watch to fill vacancies that Labour predicted but that never came. Labour played a cruel trick on those young professionals. The motion is based on false premises. Labour hopes to divert attention from its failings. It is just as well that we have an SNP Government that is working to make Scotland smarter and more competitive and to give Scotland's children the best possible start in life.

I, too, express my thanks to everyone involved in giving evidence to the committee, to the clerks and to the organisations that gave us extremely helpful briefings. I also express my thanks to Kenneth Norrie, who has been absolutely invaluable to the committee. The children's hearings system has been an important aspect of the Scottish legal system for nearly 40 years now, and has been examined and copied by other nations. It is a welfare-based system that supports children and families in the most difficult of circumstances. The purpose of the bill is, of course, to enhance and modernise the system rather than to replace it. As the committee report has it: "The Committee also recognises, however, that the children's hearings system is not perfect. It has to be modernised to ensure that it can provide a consistent service across and respond to the needs of a modern society." We are preparing the system for the next four decades of use to protect and nurture children and young people, and we are ensuring that the bill meets the twin challenges of updating the system while not compromising any of its key principles. During evidence taking, it was clear that there is general support and welcome among witnesses for the bill's provisions. As we would expect—and as we heard earlier—concerns and questions were raised about specific details, which the committee will track closely at stage 2. However, the prevailing view can be usefully summarised in the words of Barbara Reid of the University of Glasgow: "Someone has to take control of the system and ensure that standards are set, maintained and inspected."—[ Official Report,  Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 21 April 2010; c 3430.] In that regard, I was interested to hear from witnesses that not every local authority has a training committee or a way of feeding back on the efficacy of training that it gives to panel members. The bill will address that aspect by providing a framework within which best practice can be discussed, agreed on, disseminated, monitored and enforced. That focus on the continual maintenance of standards and development of practice should be an integral part of the system. It is one reason why it is so important that the bill includes the power to  enforce on local authorities a duty to act on panel recommendations. Children's services are not the responsibility solely of local authorities, of course, particularly in these days of partnership working and shared services, which is why I have argued for that power and duty to be extended to cover national health service boards. Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People made very clear representations on that when he came to the committee. I am pleased that the minister indicated during evidence that he will look at that suggestion with an open mind. I also ask the minister to consider including forced marriage as a ground for referral when he considers changes at stage 2. Witnesses were very clear that local authorities had supported the system very well over the years, as I am sure we would expect from every councillor and council officer. I am pleased that the bill will not remove local authority contributions to the panels' work. It is important to maintain that local community link. Another change that comes in with the bill and for which I congratulate the minister is the extension of legal aid provision. It is an excellent move to allow children and other relevant persons the right to apply for legal aid. Additionally, allowing applicants for legal aid to choose their own lawyer from the Scottish Legal Aid Board's list of lawyers allows choice and continuity of representation as well as addressing issues of access to legal assistance in emergency situations. It offers choice, dignity and support to children and young people who are involved with the panels, and to their parents, carers and other relevant people who are involved. It certainly goes a long way towards addressing our responsibilities on human rights legislation and the embedding of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which is a particular interest of mine. Given that the work of the panel involves repairing the lives of children who have been damaged by circumstances, events or, indeed, by the very people whom they should trust to protect them, offering that dignity and legal support is an important step in the right direction. It sends a message that the state is not about to turn its back on those in need, that the weakest members of our society will be protected as far as possible, and that Scotland sets great store by ensuring that the wheels of justice turn for everyone, even if in some circumstances they turn slowly. Being given that measure of choice and support may be part of the process that helps a young person to begin to rebuild their life. The bill is not perfect and it needs some work at stage 2 which, I am pleased to note, the minister has already indicated he is prepared to undertake. I look forward to taking part in the relevant  committee meetings and ensuring that we get the best possible legislation, and I am sure that all my committee colleagues feel the same way. The process that has led us this far began quite some time ago with the previous Scottish Administration and its getting it right for every child proposals. It is only right to note the work that previous ministers did, the wide-ranging consultation and discussion that took place, and the hard work of everyone involved to bring the proposed changes to this stage. That continuing spirit of co-operation and good will will allow the current minister to work with committee members to ensure not only that the hearings system can continue to provide the excellent and improving service that we are used to, but that it can do so within a framework that guarantees the application of consistently high standards of practice and an enhanced level of dignity and choice for all those who come into contact with the panel. As I said, for me, the fact that the children's hearings system is a welfare-based system that puts the child at the heart of the process is vital. I am pleased to have been able to support the bill through stage 1, and I look forward to working constructively on it with all the relevant organisations and groups, my committee colleagues and any other interested parties during stage 2. I support the bill's general principles.

I thank everyone who has stayed in the chamber for the debate and all the members who supported the motion, which received cross-party support from members of all the parties that are represented in the Parliament. I pay tribute to the man who inspired the motion—Duncan Brown, who is in the public gallery tonight. When I say that he is an amateur historian, I mean that in the best sense. He pursues his passion for Scots history out of sheer love and an unshakeable belief in its importance and not for income or recognition. He is not attached to any academic institution and he undertook his research under his own steam, with painstaking dedication. Duncan was lucky enough to count as a friend the late Nigel Tranter, whose books opened my eyes and those of many of us to the endless thrills and excitement that are to be found in the tales of Scottish history. Duncan continues to work in that tradition today. He is also a talented artist and a piper, by the way—I become exhausted just thinking about his talents. Scotland has a long tradition of chroniclers such as Duncan—I lean often on my copy of Blind Harry's work to look back at Scotland's history.  Such chroniclers work in local history and archaeological groups or just beaver away on their own to add layers and nuggets of fact and detail to our nation's story. They are sometimes small and sometimes monumental, but they all enhance our understanding and our enjoyment of Scottish history. It is often said that such amateur historians have provided us with the tales of ordinary lives in towns and villages throughout the land—those of the farmer, the weaver, the rent striker, the dominie or the soldier—that bring depth, richness and colour to Scotland's story. I realise that it is a bit unorthodox to plug items in the chamber, but I hope that members will not mind if I recommend to them all Duncan's book—"My Hero, My Soldier Laddie". The title comes from Robert Burns and the book is in the best tradition of the history that I have described. Half of all the proceeds of sales will go to the Erskine veterans charity. Duncan's search for Scotland's Victoria Cross recipients began by chance when he played the pipes at a wedding in Cheltenham, of all places. A guest mentioned that she believed she had a Scottish ancestor—a David MacKay who had been in a Highland regiment and was awarded the Victoria Cross. Duncan has painstakingly pieced together MacKay's life story. He discovered that MacKay not only took part in the famous thin red line during the Crimean war, but went on to be among the first group of men ever to be awarded the VC for the heroism he displayed during the siege of Lucknow in 1857, having been nominated by his fellow Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders for the honour. MacKay was badly wounded but survived and returned to Lesmahagow, where Duncan eventually traced his remains to an unmarked pauper's grave. Discovering that sad fate of a man who should still be recognised as a Scots hero, regardless of our feelings now about the role of the British empire in India, prompted Duncan to go on to uncover the details of 172 Scottish VCs. He found that no fewer than 14 among them hailed from the towns and villages of Lanarkshire. Before I speak about Lanarkshire, I pay tribute to Thomas Peck Hunter, a Royal Marine who received the Victoria Cross and who happens to be the uncle of a proud John Swinney. In fact, one VC in every 100 awarded has gone to a Lanarkshire man—an astonishing record for our small county. Three recipients came from Carluke alone. I wish that I had time to talk about every one of them but, having spoken about the first, I also want to say something about the last VC recipient, Bill Reid, whom Duncan Brown was able to meet and talk to before his death in 2001. I feel a particular affinity with Bill, because he was  originally a Baillieston native and that is where I live now. In November 1943, the Lancaster bomber that Bill was flying across the Dutch coast towards Germany twice came under attack. His navigator and wireless operator were killed, he himself was badly wounded, the plane's oxygen system ruptured and the hydraulics were damaged. However, instead of turning back, Bill fought his plane back under control, flew on and completed his mission. After recovering from his wounds, Bill joined the 617 Squadron with Leonard Cheshire and, on his first flight, he fouled up his landing and knocked the tail off his plane. He had an endorsement put in his logbook and later joked that he was surely "the only pilot to get a Victoria Cross on one trip and a red endorsement on the next." Bill Reid was an extremely modest man and modest about his bravery. I am sure that some other men would have used it as a great chat-up line but, when Bill got married in 1952, he had not even told his wife. Explaining later how he had been able to act with such heroism, Bill simply said: "When you lost people who were your closest friends, the danger certainly came home to you. If you'd thought it would happen to you, too, you'd simply never have been able to fly again." People such as Bill who did not perform great acts of bravery for Queen and country usually performed them for their band of brothers or the man standing next to them. That is an important piece of history that all our young people should know about. Reading stories such as his brings home not only how much we owe men such as him and his fellow VC recipients, but how important it is that those of us who live in Scotland now and in future generations continue to read and hear those stories and do not forget the extraordinary contributions that ordinary people made to secure our freedom and democracy. If members are ever in Hamilton, I encourage and invite them to visit the memorial to the Lanarkshire VCs in the town square, which was unveiled in 2005 after a campaign by Duncan Brown and a public appeal by the Hamilton Advertiser . The poem inscribed on the memorial is by 12-year-old Anna Smith from Our Lady's high school and it captures the spirit of tonight's debate for me. It reads: "You are heroes in our hearts, and that you'll always stay Courageous and heroic in every possible way.  You sacrificed so much for us - a debt we can't repay.  You fought for us and bled for us and we thank you on this day." I thank all members who are taking part in the debate.

To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support the growth of the manufacturing sector. (S3O-10907)

I am encouraged by the partnership working that the Scottish Government has undertaken with the STUC on the issue. Although its powers in the matter are limited, will the minister confirm that the Scottish Government will make it a priority to do what it can to retain and expand Scotland's manufacturing skills base—such as the expertise that is found at the Philips Lighting plant in Hamilton in my region—and encourage its use as a key driver for securing our economic recovery?

Shocking.

It was a good day for Scotland, a good day for Scottish education, a good day for Scottish students and a good day for the principle of egality when the SNP Scottish Government finally abolished tuition fees in Scotland by getting rid of the graduate endowment tuition fee. That was some eight years after the Lib Dems had said that the removal of tuition fees was non-negotiable, just before they negotiated it. I will take a second or two to quote Jim Wallace, speaking in the chamber on 17 June 1999. At the time, he was the leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats. He is now a member of the Westminster Government, so his comments were pertinent then and still have resonance now. Mr Wallace said: "The Labour Government at Westminster opted for means-tested student loans and means-tested tuition fees. My party accepted that maintenance grants should be turned into loans, but the Liberal Democrats opposed the  introduction of tuition fees—means tested or flat rate. That remains our position."— [ Official Report , 17 June 1999; c 592.]  The Lib Dem manifesto for the recent election contained a commitment that stated, very simply: "We will scrap unfair university tuition fees". In what I am about to say, I do not ignore Margaret Smith's passionate confirmation in her speech that the Liberal Democrats in the Scottish Parliament support free education. However, the question is what the Liberal Democrats consider to be an unfair university tuition fee. Do they think that there might be fair university tuition fees? If so, are they prepared to impose them? At the end of April, on a visit to Oxford Brookes University, Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg said that he would abolish tuition fees but, during his party's conference in September last year, he made clear that he had already decided to dump that pledge as part of his "savage cuts". It has sometimes been said that the Liberal Democrat is the only animal in the world that can sit on the fence and keep an ear to the ground on both sides. I think that that is unfair and would like to believe that there is a firm commitment somewhere in the deep, dark recesses of the Clegg bunker.

Absolutely. It was in the SNP manifesto, but David McLetchie knows that Treasury rules prevented us from doing that. Now that he has friends in the Treasury, perhaps he should ask them to look at it again with a favourable eye and consider whether Scotland can do it. I wonder whether the position of the Advocate General, Baron Wallace of Tankerness, remains the same as it was in the good old days when he was Jim Wallace MSP. Do the Lib Dems still oppose tuition fees, as he suggested they did when we were all young—or maybe when some of us were young—or do they now oppose only unfair tuition fees? Do they believe that there might be fair tuition fees somewhere? Is it the Clegg of the campaign or the Clegg of the conference? Might we see Baron Wallace fix another fudge like the graduate endowment? That is the UK Government's tail. The dog, of course, is the Conservative party. Today, the most senior Conservative in Scotland is the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland, David Mundell MP. In the 1999 debate that I have already mentioned, Mr Mundell,  as an MSP, made clear his opposition to tuition fees when he said: "I hope that Liberal Democrat members will be prepared to follow Neil Wallace's brave words and join us in lifting the iniquitous burden of tuition fees from Scottish students."— [ Official Report , 17 June 1999; c 614.]  I could not agree with him more. Unfortunately, it seems that he will not be holding that position. He must have taken the lady's advice when she said, "You turn if you want to." David Mundell is part of a Government that will raise the top-up fees at English universities because that will be Government policy and because the loyal Opposition at Westminster is the shower that introduced tuition fees in the first place. Increasing top-up fees is a Labour policy from before the election. The Conservatives will push through the increase in university fees with the support of the Labour Party and the Lib Dems will abstain so that they can say, "It wisnae me, guv. A big boy done it and ran away." We know that increased tuition fees will not result in increased funds for the institutions; we know that they are a means of reducing public investment in education; and we know that they will just result in lower public investment in English universities. They might have a knock-on effect for the Scottish budget, as the NUS and others fear. Universities in England are about to be on the end of yet another funding squeeze and another hard round of cuts.

Aye—absolutely. My colleague Kenny Gibson has just answered that from a sedentary position. There will be increased resources at the time. We expect the sun to shine on Scottish education then, and it will continue to shine. If Robert Brown is coming over to the idea that independence is a better idea for the universities, I will send him a membership form. Fortunately, we have a different set of circumstances here in Scotland. While the Labour Government in London in the shape of Peter Mandelson was cutting £398 million from the English universities' budget for the current financial year, the SNP Government was increasing the Scottish universities' budget by £40 million. In 2008, Universities UK produced research called "Devolution and higher education: impact and future trends", which showed that, in 2006, Scottish universities had a funding advantage over English universities of some £454  per student per year. The fact that that gap will now have widened is evidence that the SNP Government has served Scotland well. I wish for England's sake that it had a Government as committed to high-quality provision. We cannot be complacent, though. We are already in a tight financial situation and the news from south of the border suggests that it will not be getting better any time soon. I do not believe that any party in the Parliament will be able to guarantee any future budget without reservation. Access to education should be based on the ability to learn and not on the ability to pay. I am delighted to be in a country that still has free education, but we have a hard task ahead of us to ensure that it remains. I am clear that we should ensure that the principle of free education remains in Scotland.

The committee was unanimous in its approval of the code, after it had received a tiny bit of clarification from the Scottish Government about the consultation process. The renewal of the code was made necessary by the 2009 act, which amended the 2004 act. I hope that pupils with additional support needs and their parents and carers are now finding things a little easier, as they seek the help that they need. It must seem to them that we move terribly slowly in this place, but I am sure that they will agree that it is important that, instead of just dashing through things, we take the time to get things right, so that we get the best legislation for the children who need it. As members can see from my copy of the code, it was an easy night-time read. The code contains some important provisions. I welcome the fact that it sets out the functions and duties of education authorities in relation to additional support needs. The benefit of co-ordinated support plans was teased out well during consideration of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill. The guidance in the code is helpful in setting out what local authorities must do and what parents need to know. All members will know that the transitions from primary school to secondary school and from there on leaving school always pose particular challenges. The code emphasises the importance of exchange of information and the merits of a detailed co-ordinated support plan. It is very important that the child's views are taken into account. The code of practice will ensure that local authorities and agencies fulfil their roles and responsibilities with regard to children with additional support needs, and it will give parents and carers the guidance that they need to support their children through their learning. I commend it to Parliament.

I make it clear that I will never turn my back on my trade union involvement, which I have continued and which will be persistent. In preparing to discuss emergency workers issues last year, I submitted a freedom of information request and received all the documents and communications between the ministers and the trade unions that there were at the time. I see nothing in those about Labour taking up any of the issues in question at the time. I have with me the public record of what happened, and am taking my lead from that.

I was intrigued by the motion—intrigued because I was a supporter of the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 and an active member of the social work team in Unison when the bill was out for consultation. The act gives protection to police officers, firefighters, ambulance crews and other emergency staff as they carry out their duties. I wondered what connected the act to shop workers, given that it was conceived specifically as a piece of legislation that would make it an offence to impede those who are seeking to save the lives of others. I do not for one minute believe that Hugh Henry would want to dilute the effects of the act; I believe that he would stand four-square behind our emergency services in ensuring that they are adequately protected. There has been discussion with trade unions and the Government to extend the provisions of the act to retail staff. The narrow terms of the act do not allow us to do that. In 2003, a number of us in the trade union movement—Unison, the Educational Institute of Scotland, the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association and the Transport and General Workers Union, which is now Unite—called for legislation not just for emergency workers but for all workers who undertake duties that could put them in danger of assault. That call was not answered. I felt that child protection staff, mental health officers and care staff in particular deserved their call to be answered, and I used the very example that Hugh Henry used in his speech, of a child protection worker going into a home. During the passage of the bill, we lobbied the Labour Party hard to include public sector and shop workers. However, it refused to do so. On 15 January 2004, Andy Kerr said: "The common law is flexible: it can deal with attacks on public service workers whatever the circumstances. However, if we introduce a specific offence of statutory aggravation for attacks on all public service workers, that flexibility will be removed."— [ Official Report , 15 January 2004; c 4907.]  Hugh Henry will not be surprised to hear that I did not agree with that view at the time. Extending the act now would take away its specific focus on protecting our police officers, firefighters and ambulance staff, and all the other staff that it deals with. It would be unfortunate if one of the shining lights of good legislation from the previous Administration were to lose its focus. There are issues of protection and safety for shop workers; by and large, those are issues that their employers should be addressing. Proper safety at work is the responsibility of every employer, and retail employers are no different.

Karen Whitefield picked me up wrong. It was in 2003 that I lobbied for the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill to be extended to all public service staff. The unions are not wrong, but the legislation should have been extended then. We had the opportunity to do so then, and you did not take it. The scope of the law is now too narrow to be extended. You know that, and your colleagues know that. Health and safety is the responsibility of the employer, with trade unions pointing out some of the issues. I hope that no member considers it appropriate for us to ask someone else to take up the burden of the duty of care that we owe our staff; likewise, no other employer should think that it would be appropriate for them to hand over that burden to someone else. Given that Retailers Against Crime is an umbrella group that covers most of the larger retailers—Asda, Tesco and Sainsbury's among them—I am almost certain that it would encourage its members to ensure that their staff are safe at work. Surely they are responsible employers and have the best interests of their staff at heart. The figures in the motion are interesting. The motion mentions a 78 per cent increase in violence and abuse against shop staff over the past three years. I could not find that figure on the Retailers Against Crime website; all I could find was a note in the organisation's annual report that incidents dropped by 9 per cent last year. It is important to get that 78 per cent figure out into the public domain, and I would welcome Retailers Against Crime updating the figures on its website.  I commend USDAW for its freedom from fear campaign. It has raised the awareness of all of us about the issue. It did so in 2003, but was not listened to; the fact that it is being listened to now is important. Recent crime statistics in the Scottish Government's statistical bulletin show that, last year, assaults were at their lowest level for 10 years and possibly more—the figures only go back to 1999. Robberies were at their lowest for 10 years, and crimes of dishonesty at their second-lowest level—only the previous year's level was lower. Scotland appears to be a safer and more law-abiding place. However, we must address the fact that that is not the perception of workers in the public sector. I wonder, then, whether Mr Henry might be able to point us all to the figures that suggest that there has been that 78 per cent rise in violence against and abuse of shop staff, as opposed to the 9 per cent drop in the Retailers Against Crime annual report or the excellent progress indicated in the Government figures. I found a figure that showed that there have been 13,000 physical attacks. That figure is way too high, and the Parliament can work on reducing it. I ask Hugh Henry to tell us about the figures because it is in all our interests to ensure that people are safe at work and that we get the specifics right so that we can address any problems. We need all the information that is available if we are to make the right choices to protect staff. The Retailers Against Crime annual report says that less than 15 per cent of all the incidents reported to its members involved violence or abuse. Again, we need to clarify that figure. I am glad that it is so low—I hope that it is a true reflection of what is happening. Although very little of the organisation's workload involves threats to the safety of its members' staff, I would like to know whether there are ways in which we can make the situation safer still.

Obviously, my experience is a bit different from yours. I have met employers who are listening to their trade unions. However, we should have been listening in 2003 to everyone who called for the provision at the time. We have extra police on our streets, a justice system that is improving and crime figures that are going down. We need to clarify all the figures that have been mentioned today. With proper co-operation throughout the Parliament, we can help to drive those crime figures even lower and make this country a safer and better place in which to  live. However, we need to do that with proper and accurate evidence to hand. We need the all figures. I welcome Hugh Henry's impassioned support for all workers. I say again that I wish that those workers had been listened to in 2003. I look forward to working with Hugh Henry on his proposed bill, to which I will pay great attention when we start to discuss it properly because it could improve the lives and working conditions of everyone in Scotland. Working with other members, trade unions, other organisations and good employers, we can make the workplace safer for us all.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will make representations to the United Kingdom Government for the restoration of a fiscal stimulus programme for the Scottish economy. (S3O-10516)

Now that we live in this Con-Dem nation, does the cabinet secretary agree that the key issue for Scotland remains the need to secure the recovery? Is it not still the case that an acceleration of capital spending should be an essential part of the Scottish Government's arsenal for job creation and economic growth?

Given the concern about the paths that deer use and the issues that that can cause, will the minister update the Parliament on the outcome of the investigation into the leaking of correspondence between her and the Home Office on paths in Balmoral? I suggest that she is owed an apology from some individuals in the Parliament and that the voters in the Rutherglen  and Hamilton West constituency deserve to know the full truth—

I open by declaring an interest. Last year, I was honoured to become a social work champion, as part of the ADSW's social work changes lives campaign, which, I am delighted to hear, has just been extended for a further year. I am also a local champion, but I am a social work champion and my employment before I was elected was in the training and assessing of social care workers. I have first-hand knowledge of the dedication and commitment of those who work in social services and stand in admiration of the professionalism that they display day in, day out. As we have heard, the Scottish Government recognised the need to strengthen leadership in the sector and to create a single, integrated qualification and professional development framework. The Scottish Social Services Council responded admirably. I pay tribute to the work of the Scottish Social Services Council, noting the development of the childhood practice award, which helps to develop the professional skill set that workers in social work need. The approach has been centred on the needs of the children who use social work services, and that is the right approach to take. It is a development from the service sector with minimum interference from Government, which draws on the knowledge and experience of the best practice and the best practitioners to develop a qualification that prepares students for the delivery of high quality care in education. It is a development that is attracting interest from around the world—again, Scotland blazing the trail. The council is also driving forward the development of leadership in the profession, as we have heard today. The Scottish Government chairs a steering group that has been set up to provide strategic direction in partnership with the council and others. It will develop a clear strategic vision for leadership in social services, using a model of accessible, flexible learning, which I benefited from greatly in my career. It will improve senior leadership capacity within social services and will review the current leadership model. That focus on leadership—that lighting of the lamp to guide the  footsteps of the profession—provides a solid foundation on which the professionals can build. No system is perfect, and no group of workers is perfect. There are problems and challenges in every walk of life. Social workers and social carers are people whose employment sends them into some of the most challenging situations in domestic life. They are people who see and seek to mend some of the damaged lives in our society. They are people who seek to improve other people's lives. However, I do not claim beatification for them or set them apart from the rest of society. They are people with flaws, vices and virtues and, in my experience, a lot of compassion. We ask them to do a difficult job and they accept it. We ask them to help hold society together and they respond with generosity. Social capital is the glue of society and is enhanced by the proper treatment of the most vulnerable members of society. We can judge the health of our society by the manner in which it protects its weakest. Our social work services renew our social capital every day, and we should seek to nurture and improve those services. That is why I praise the minister for his foresight in launching the continuous learning framework to improve outcomes for people who use social services by supporting everyone working in social services in Scotland to be the best that they can be. I understand that the council has a project team working with the learning networks and other partners to spread the word about the framework. It has already helped 112 organisations, and the work continues. With the framework growing and proper registration due to be complete in just a few years' time, the service is growing in professionalism. When the council was first established, only 20 per cent of the workforce had the relevant qualification for their job—my first job, when I first started training in social work, was to get everyone in learning disability services in Glasgow trained to the minimum level, and it was an absolute privilege, as I met some amazing people who were working in some challenging situations. By 2015, however, all of the workforce will be qualified and registered. That is great, and should be welcomed. As we have heard, registration and regulation will mean that all social service workers will have a qualification that is relevant to their job, which will raise the professionalism and status of the sector and ensure that people who use the services can rely on a trained and trusted workforce. That will be an embodiment of the "confident, competent" workforce that is referred to in the motion. There is supposed to be a Chinese curse that goes, "May you live in interesting times." We are  certainly living in interesting times in politics right now. However, that curse is reputed to be the weakest of three, the other two being, "May the government be aware of you" and "May you find what you are looking for." Thanks to the Scottish Social Services Council, social services staff live in interesting times; the Government is most definitely aware of them; and I think that they might just find what they are looking for—but that is not a curse; it is a positive thing. The profession is developing from the inside and is doing so without politicians getting too involved. It is a great success story for the profession and for Scotland—a professional service being developed and delivered by professionals intent on improving the services that they provide. I look forward to seeing a gradual and on-going improvement in the outcomes of inspections as the on-going improvements in the qualifications, training and professionalism of the sector continue. I applaud the council and its partners for the excellent work that they have done and are doing. I am pleased to support the motion in the name of Adam Ingram.

Staff working in child protection do a difficult and sensitive job. Although all of us are shocked and disturbed by the high-profile cases of children who tragically fall through the net, those are not the norm. We do not hear about the many cases in which children are successfully protected and families are supported. Will the minister reaffirm the Scottish Government's support for the dedicated staff who work in such difficult circumstances?

It is always nice to warm our hands at a wee bonfire and it is lovely to have a wee toastie fire of the things that we do not need. I am delighted to see the first flames licking around the feet of the  quango state. Being an accomplished fire walker, I know how that feels. I like the fact that the Government will be able to change the functions and operations of quangos much more easily in the future. The role that Parliament will have in any decisions that ministers want to take in relation to quangos means that parliamentary scrutiny of the quango state will carry with it a rather large stick. I appreciate that some members might disagree with me on that point, but I am sure that they will come round in the fullness of time. There are serious safeguards in the legislation now. The powers to change quangos, which the bill will introduce, are similar to the powers in the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003. I like the parts that require public bodies to publish details about their financial transactions and the pay of their top cats. I also like the idea that details of payments to special advisers will be published. Open and transparent government is one of the founding principles of this place. I also like the idea of social care and social work improvement Scotland and the model that has been presented for it. Social work has so often been the Cinderella of public services, but it provides important services to our society. If we can create one single cohesive body that will benchmark services throughout the country, offer advice on improvements and produce regular reports on performance, we might go some way towards matching the professionalism of the modern social worker with the regulatory system that governs their working life. Of course, SCSWIS will not stand alone. Part 6 of the bill will require scrutiny bodies to focus on service users and co-operate across agencies up to and including having joint inspections, where that is appropriate. I know that my colleague Karen Whitefield sought to place a requirement on SCSWIS to work jointly with Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education on inspections, but that already exists and SCSWIS will have that expertise. The extension of joint inspections to adult services is particularly welcome, especially for the most vulnerable adults in our communities. Each of the scrutiny bodies will have to ensure that it is delivering the best possible service and support for front-line workers. When we clean up the landscape, we see the safe roads and the pitfalls ahead of us and the benefits and disadvantages stand in starker relief. Quangos will operate in a more streamlined and publicly accountable manner, with minds focused more on the job at hand. When the bill is passed later today, there will be a good reason for quangocrats to keep a weather  eye on what their organisation is doing and how well it is doing it, lest some of us politicians decide to have a closer look. I believe that Scotland will be well served by the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill.

Another education debate has sprung upon us and we march merrily into the chamber to offer members the pearls of our wisdom—and some vinegar in which to dissolve them. The Conservatives want us to examine models from elsewhere in the world. I read in the newspaper that Liz Smith fancies the Swedish model. I am more of a fan of Swedish music, but I am delighted that the Conservatives are at last taking an interest in what happens in Scandinavia and are thinking about how it benefits a nation's people to believe in society and consider what will benefit society rather than individuals. I look forward to hearing Liz Smith persuade her colleagues, with a cry of "Take a chance on me", to embrace other Swedish models. Progressive taxation is one such model—[ Interruption .] I look forward to hearing George Osborne and Derek Brownlee argue for that. I know that they want to do so. No doubt we will hear Conservative calls for an upper rate of income tax of nearly 60 per cent. I think that I can hear Derek Brownlee singing "Money, Money, Money".

Like Derek Brownlee's party, we advocated lower taxes for business. So, there we go: I am just giving him an example of the Swedish model. I hope that he will consider that, because that is how the Swedes pay for their education: money, money, money. They regard investment in good education as an important part of building decency into communities and building a progressive society that will deliver benefits across the board. They believe that education should be state funded through a fair taxation system—they had that dream and that dream came true. I am sure that the Conservatives' attraction to the Swedish system relies to a great extent on the voucher system—knapsack funding—but they might be missing something, because the voucher system does not allow independent schools to set the curriculum. The Swedish Government centrally sets the curriculum, the programme goals and the syllabus, subject by subject. There is no postcode lottery in education in Sweden. I am sure that Liz Smith would be delighted to see the SNP Scottish Government set all those areas, but I might be mistaken.  Another important difference between Scottish and Swedish education is that the spend on education in Sweden is fairly large: it is nearly 80,000 kroner per child in what we would consider primary school education and nearly 90,000 kroner per child in what we would consider secondary school education. That is the equivalent of £7,500 for every primary school pupil, whereas the equivalent spend in Scotland is just over £4,500, which is a difference of £3,000 for every pupil in every Scottish primary school. There is no better news for older pupils, because Sweden spends the equivalent of nearly £8,500 for every secondary school pupil, while Scotland's spend for such pupils is less than £6,500 per pupil. I am positive that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning would jump at the chance to give our schools another £3,000 per pupil, and I am certain that John "Super Trouper" Swinney would be delighted to hand over millions more to local authorities to pump into school budgets, but I wonder where the Conservatives see such money coming from.

My point is that we are all looking at different models across the world and at what does and does not work, and comparing what is being done, which is exactly what Jeremy Purvis has just done. As I said, I wonder where the Conservatives see the extra money coming from, when both of the people who might be Chancellor of the Exchequer in a couple of months have said that cuts are coming our way. Given the polls, I wonder whether the winner will take it all.

I will elaborate later on what Councillor Berry said. We could play fantasy politics and pretend that the Lib Dems are in a position to influence spending decisions. Tavish Scott has promised us an extra £300 million and, I believe, a pony for every little girl. Margaret Smith, with her tango last  week with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, is quickly becoming our resident dancing queen. What Tavish Scott proposes would mean an extra £440 for each pupil—just another £1.7 billion to find. I wonder where all that money will come from.

Sorry, but I have taken loads of interventions. Scottish education is getting some serious funding, but there is a big gap between our funding and the funding afforded to the Swedish system, which is because of Sweden's willingness to pay high taxes to fund the very best public services. I am delighted that the Conservatives are coming on board with that, and I look forward to their championing fair taxation. Another reason why the Swedish education system is so good is that it is delivered by local authorities to a central plan under, believe it or not, an historic concordat. It is true that it is difficult to get a better model than a good Swedish model, and I congratulate Liz Smith on taking a second look at that model. East Lothian is not quite as far away from here as Sweden is, but it has a forward-thinking SNP council that is trying to find innovative ways, using the resources at its disposal, to improve the education system. East Lothian Council is looking at a raft of measures, and I wish it well; perhaps it will do things that we can take forward. Finding ways of spending money more wisely rather than in greater quantities is a bit like searching for the holy grail, but at least SNP councils have set out on the hunt—I wish them well in that. Their job could be made even harder, though, when the cuts start coming through from Westminster. The task must be not to improve parental choice but to improve school education. Our professionals—our teachers—have been striving to do that, and they continue to push that improvement forward. Scotland's education system is in fairly decent health and is moving forward steadily. Slow, steady progress is what is needed: a gradual movement towards improvement. The improvements that the Scottish Government has already put in place will continue to filter through. I am always pleased to take part in education debates in the chamber. I look forward to next week's instalment.

For generations, Scotland has been proud of its education system. Scots laud it as being the best in the world and are not shy in letting other people know how good we are. There was a time when Scotland's commitment to teach every child to read and write was unmatched by other nations, which meant that we had the best education system in the world. However, those days are some way behind us and we need to move on and be honest about the challenges that our education system faces and what we need to do to improve it. It is important to acknowledge the hard work and professionalism of teaching staff in schools and support staff in local authorities, as well as the efforts of all school pupils and their parents, which have resulted in high attainment year after year. It is easy to get bogged down in the negative aspects of what we must deal with, but we should congratulate the kids who get out there and get on with it every day. However, there will always be  doom-mongers—they are usually to be found in the red corner of the chamber—who see a half-empty glass as one that is missing a portion, unlike those of us who see a half-full glass as one that has another half-glass-worth of potential. I should say that the glasses have milk in them and minimum pricing does not apply, although dairy farmers might wish that it did. Scotland certainly has the potential to fill the glass and keep improving. The skills that we teach our pupils in schools will be the skills that they use to build a better future for themselves and the country. They will build on those skills in further and higher education and in lifelong learning. I agree with the Government motion—that is no surprise—where it says that we must ensure that "young people are equipped with the skills and capacities needed to succeed in the global marketplace". That is why I am concerned that the most recent figures on school-leaver qualifications, which were published last year and are for school year 2007-08, show that only one in 20 leavers, which means fewer than 1,500 people, had French at Scottish credit and qualifications framework level 6—for the benefit of members who have not kept up with changes to the qualifications system, that is a higher in old money. The lack of success in French was not made up for by success in other languages. Only 1.8 per cent of leavers had achieved level 6 in German, 1.3 per cent in Spanish and 0.2 per cent in Italian. One of the most important skills for success in the global marketplace is in precious short supply. We need to teach and expose young people to languages. Perhaps there will be better news on that front. I look forward to hearing about that today or in due course. I am a monoglot who holidays abroad once in a while and I am amazed by the language skills of people from other nations and a little embarrassed that Scotland does not yet have the accomplishments that come from looking outwards rather than inwards.

Yes.

Aye. My colleague Aileen Campbell has just pointed out to me that I have a guid Scots tongue in ma heid. I should have stayed on my feet and finished this part of my speech, which would probably have answered Margo MacDonald's point. If the figures to come do not show a dramatic improvement, we will have to address a serious issue in the future if we are to equip Scotland's youngsters for the global marketplace. An important point in that regard, which should be addressed, is that not all the important modern foreign languages are European languages. I urge the cabinet secretary to look at, in the near future, the provision of modern Chinese and Russian learning and teaching facilities, and then to consider other Slavic tongues, Asian languages and, of course, the Nordic languages. It is often said that English is the international language of business but that seems complacent to me. Latin was once the international language of business, medicine and religion. If Scotland is to compete in the global marketplace, we need to be able to communicate, and that has to start in our schools. I appreciate that the problem is a long-standing one—it is decades old, and much older than me, of course—and that the solution requires more than training a few teachers and sliding them into schools. I believe that it is one of the most important issues that we have to face in training the pupils of today for the challenges of tomorrow. We have to ensure that pupils are educated to see not only Scotland's place in the world, but how Scotland can interact with the world. The broadening of horizons has to be one of the major thrusts of any education system, and Scotland must get serious about that. Last night, along with the Mercy Corps, I hosted an event in Parliament for the Middle East youth festival. The event involved the global citizen corps, which is the youth wing of the Mercy Corps. My colleague, Hugh O'Donnell, was also there and will say a few words about it. Youngsters from Lebanon, Jordan, the United States of America, Scotland and Ireland—and places further afield—engaged in a global peer education programme. It was absolutely fantastic. Looking at the young people whom I met last night, and the effort that they put into their work and the week that they served on the festival, I think that the world is in good hands for the future. Let us have more modern language success and get school pupils travelling abroad and experiencing other cultures. We should encourage the Erasmus programme, but also see about getting younger people abroad as well. Our pupils  should learn about Scotland as their home nation, but they should also learn about Europe as their home continent. Internationalism must be the touchstone of Scotland's future success. We should start it by running it in our classrooms now.

Will the member give way?

At the weekend, I watched with interest "The Politics Show", because that is what all of us do at the weekend. Glenn Campbell was interviewing Colin Sutherland, head of North Berwick high school and chair of School Leaders Scotland, which is the new incarnation of the Headteachers Association of Scotland. If I recall Mr Sutherland's comments correctly, he said that the Scottish Government had issued all the high-level documents for the curriculum for excellence, that the preparatory work had been done properly and that, as long as the implementation timescale was followed properly, we were, in his words, "good to go". Mr Sutherland told all of us who had gathered around our tellies for our weekend fix of political news that the Scottish Government had already given teaching staff extra time to prepare for the introduction of the curriculum for excellence—extra in-service days and so on—and that headteachers were grateful for that consideration. He winged a wee warning or two across the bows, saying that we are now trying to peer into the future with the curriculum for excellence, that staff need to know where it is leading, that timelines must be adhered to and that qualifications must be well prepared. However, by and large, he was positive and upbeat about the implementation of the curriculum.

I do not believe Margaret Smith—I think that, just like me, she was in front of her telly on Sunday watching "The Politics Show". I understand that Mr Sutherland made the point to which Margaret Smith refers. All of us recognise that financial pressures will affect every issue that comes up in the circle of politics at the moment. If headteachers are not only content with the implementation programme but positive enough to sound upbeat—just like Margaret Smith—we must be heading in the right direction. As with everything else in these times of tightening fiscal belts, finances are a worry, but Mr Sutherland made clear on the BBC that implementing the curriculum for excellence should not cost money in most subjects and can be done at nearly neutral cost overall; he is very positive. Where there are funding requirements—I assume that the cabinet secretary will correct me if I am wrong—the Scottish Government will ensure that the resources that are needed to implement the curriculum will be made available.

In my opinion, the curriculum for excellence is a good move for Scottish education. For the first time ever, Scotland will have a unified system from three to 18—a through-school experience to aid pupils' learning. That is a prize for which it is worth competing and undertaking some change. We must wrangle clarity over the qualifications landscape that will come into being over the next few years; concerns have been expressed about that issue. The introduction of the baccalaureate was a good start, but we must go further by developing it and extending it to cover other subject areas. The baccalaureate is a high-level, high-quality qualification that allows Scottish pupils to benchmark their qualifications against others internationally and to demonstrate their outstanding ability. I have seen some of the pupils who undertook the first course, and they seemed to enjoy it a great deal. I believe that the baccalaureate will be a success. We know what it will entail for all subjects as it is rolled out, but we must clarify what is coming down the line. We must get the details for national 4 and national 5 tidied up and presented properly, so that teachers who are teaching now know in what direction pupils will head in later years.  I should declare an interest. I have a son in primary 7, who is heading to high school after the summer. As a parent, I have some concerns, but I must say that some of the subjects that he is studying in primary school, some of the things that he is coming home with and some of the things that he is involved in have sparked in him an interest in subjects that perhaps would not have interested him in the past. It is a different style of learning, but he seems to be really enjoying it and it is working for him. My son has his new manual for secondary school, and North Lanarkshire Council has done a brilliant job in explaining to parents what the curriculum for excellence is, how it will be merged into all the subjects, and how it will work. As a parent, I have some concerns, but the excellent work that I can see going on allays my fears. We need the details on new awards and assessments of literacy and numeracy to be laid out as soon as possible and the review of higher and advanced higher courses to be completed and solidified in short order. It would seem from Colin Sutherland's upbeat interview that our schools are confident that they can get there and that they are comfortable with the curriculum. If we can address the few minor concerns, it is clear that the curriculum will deliver what we want it to deliver and within the planned timescale.

As a relatively new member of the committee, I did not have the benefit of sitting through the evidence sessions and going on the visits, although I welcomed the report when it came out, as the subject of female offenders is one that I am really interested in. I pay tribute to and thank my colleagues and the committee clerks for the support that they gave me. I also pay tribute to the committee system of the Parliament. The committee's report clearly shows how the system can address serious issues in Scotland—it just shows what can be done when a committee works together as one force. The justice system has been changing rapidly over the past few years, and we expect it to continue to do so over the next few years. We are modernising it in many ways, bringing both the law and practice right up to date. I look forward to the continuing debates on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill and to our continuing consideration of penal provisions—it all interlocks. The demographics of the people whom we incarcerate and the special problems that they face have been political issues—if not quite the hottest political issues—for some time. There is also an important social matter. Those issues have been kept alive by doughty campaigners and  dedicated politicians from all points of the spectrum, who believe that we should examine both the way in which we treat prisoners and the effects of that treatment, and thereby seek to improve the conditions in which prisoners are kept and the effectiveness or otherwise of prison for ending reoffending behaviour. In particular, I note the trenchant criticisms that have been made by the chief inspector, and the changes that have come about as a result of that catalyst. Such critical examination has been particularly well focused on the issue of female prisoners, and it is only appropriate to pay tribute to previous Administrations and the work that was done by the Parliament in previous sessions to find and use alternatives to custody. The principle has been well established in the debate that short, sharp shocks, mandatory sentences and so-called zero-tolerance policies that lead directly to jail for crimes short of capital crimes are, by and large, ineffective at producing the results that society needs for its justice system. I acknowledge the position of the justice secretary that sentencing decisions are for sheriffs and judges to make, having taken into account all the factors in a case, including any plea in mitigation or plea for clemency on behalf of the accused. I think that he and I are on the same wavelength in thinking that the disposal of cases should be left to the court, although the court must have the full range of disposals available for consideration. One worthy development has been the making available of an offer option, in which the accused pays something back to her or his community without having to go to court. I am sure that I will be corrected if I am slightly wrong, but I believe that procurators fiscal have had their power to determine whether prosecution is in the public interest extended, and that they can now also consider disposing of cases by means of a compensation order, which offers the offender the chance to compensate the victim quickly—rather than dragging a relatively minor case through the courts—and which allows the public interest test to be set against whatever benefits there are to the community and to the victim. The committee's report specifically mentions the 218 centre, which is a smashing example of effective work with female offenders. The report highlights the use of such projects in the prevention of reoffending behaviour, which I think is worth pursuing. Of particular interest to me is the work offers project, which, as the Government's response to the report mentions, has been piloted in Hamilton, Inverness, West Lothian and West  Dunbartonshire. The pilots appear to involve compensation offers of community service. I understand that offenders who have taken up those offers have cleaned up parks and beaches and have learned other skills such as painting and decorating, which may improve their future employment prospects and help them to stay out of trouble. As a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, I believe that education is an extremely important way of helping people not to reoffend. Someone once said that education can set you free; in the context of the situation that we are discussing, that freedom is physical and spiritual. In my research for the debate, I read in The Journal Online that one young offender who had done 30 hours of service in a charity shop decided to volunteer there and has carried on helping that shop. That shows the importance of such work, which, along with the cashback for communities initiative, is delivering benefits for all our communities. We should applaud that. I firmly believe that women who have mental health issues need care rather than imprisonment. There has been some mention of social inquiry reports not addressing such issues. I believe that the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 contains a provision whereby a court can request a social inquiry report from a mental health officer. If courts and sheriffs made such requests, perhaps women with mental health issues who are at present incarcerated would have better outcomes. I applaud the steps that the justice secretary has taken to address the gender imbalance in sentencing that has been all too apparent in Scotland. Mr MacAskill, along with other colleagues, has pointed to the harsher sentencing that women have faced in Scotland's courts. I was astonished to discover that 70 per cent of the women who have been sent to Cornton Vale over the past 10 years have served a maximum of six months in prison. It is incredible that we spent public money in that way over such a long period when we know that short sentences are ineffectual at best and may even be counterproductive. If someone has an issue such as a mental health problem that puts them or others in danger, they need a hospital bed rather than a prison cell, and that must be properly supported. My view on that issue is the opposite of my colleague Bill Aitken's. The fact that the number of female prisoners rose by 90 per cent over the past 10 years indicates that something was not working properly. I find Robert Brown's comments on the issue, as they were reported in The Herald , a trifle bizarre. He said that that sentencing pattern suggested  "an element of old fashioned male gentility when it comes to sentencing women". However, in his speech today, which was most welcome, he moved on his argument a little, just as the committee moves the issue on in its report. To an extent, we are testing the boundaries. The positive response from the Government suggests that movement is being made to address many of the issues surrounding female offenders. I welcome that, and I look forward to an interesting debate on justice policy over the next year. I commend the committee and its report.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the introduction of arbitrary six-month mandatory sentences for carrying a knife, which take no account of the crime's context or circumstances, will simply clog up the courts and prison system with offenders, many of whom will be young first-time offenders who could more appropriately be dealt with through other types of disposal? Does he also agree—

Does the cabinet secretary agree that effective policing and education represent the best way of tackling and preventing knife crime?

That is a first.

So far, there has been a remarkable degree of accord across the chamber. I know that there is always consensus and never a raised voice, a gibe tossed from bench to bench, a cross word or a sly dig here, but this debate has had more "Hail fellow well met" comments than most—except Margaret Smith's amendment, of course, although her speech was a bit more positive. I am sure that she meant what she said in the best, most constructive and friendliest of manners. It is important to recognise the efforts that everyone has made in trying to close the skills gap in our economy, including those of previous devolved Administrations and Administrations before devolution across what was once a great divide in the political spectrum. We should also note John Park's efforts in keeping his personal favourite cause of apprenticeships—which is also one of my favourite causes—to the forefront of political debate in Scotland. I say well done to him for that. He and I may disagree on details, but we agree on other things. I am sure that he agrees  that we should do what we can to encourage proper on-the-job training, proper apprenticeships and people having a thorough grounding in the techniques of trades. I am also sure that he will be only too pleased to welcome the efforts that the Scottish Government has made over the past couple of years and the effects of those endeavours. Members may come to the issue from different angles, but we all have essentially the same purpose in mind: to upskill the Scottish workforce to enable people to play an active part in wealth creation—both private and social wealth—in Scotland; to be competitive in the employment market; to help to build social capital; and to create social mobility in our society. The path of sustainable economic development has not been easy to follow recently, with the chill winds of recession blowing from the south, but it is the central focus of the Scottish Government, and we have seen delivery on that since the election in 2007. As Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop announced and delivered increased funding for the Scottish union learning fund only months into government. That is another cause of mine: John Park and I agree on its importance. That increase in funding has been maintained, and the Government's partnership in learning with the unions has continued to develop. People are learning while in work to improve themselves and their prospects, and thus improve the society in which they live. That is important to me. I should declare an interest: I was a training officer who supported people in work to gain qualifications. The unions do excellent work on that fund and the Government does excellent work in supporting it. Scotland's Government's support for the unions is providing learning opportunities to union members. The Scottish union learning annual report for 2008-09 says: "Through this funding, trade unions are putting sustainable learning infrastructures into place, ultimately making a difference in the lifelong chances of their members." The fund was established in 2000 and has delivered a legacy that will continue to benefit Scotland for many years to come. Funding was increased in 2008, which the annual report says allowed "a significant increase in activity from previous rounds." The report states: "In the first year of SULF 7, there were 1379 individuals who accessed learning opportunities ... 787 Individual Learning Accounts were taken up and 27 new learning agreements were signed with employers."  The trade unions do a great job in supporting their members' learning, and they should be praised for that, but the Scottish Government should also be praised, as it does a great job in supporting the unions to support their members' learning. Ministers should be specially praised for that. It was also Fiona Hyslop who moved quickly to set up ScotAction when the need for it became clear. Apprenticeships were supported, apprentices were sponsored in the workplace, and resources were provided to keep as many apprentices in post as possible. Of course, there is no way to deliver apprentices if there are no employers who are able to take them on. That is why the recession has been so bad for apprenticeships and why we must do what we can to ensure that Scotland is out of recession and building again. It is also why we could have done with an additional acceleration in capital spending, which Iain Gray asked for, and why the small business bonus was important for apprenticeships, because it allowed small businesses to survive and gave them the chance to thrive and take on apprentices. The skills debate and the provision of skills do not exist in isolation. Without economic growth, we will not have businesses to employ apprentices, never mind skilled workers, and without available and circulating money in the economy, there will be no way for the sole trader—the plumber, joiner or electrician—to survive. On people surviving, I want to mention information that was sent to all members from Carers Scotland and the Princess Royal Trust for Carers on the employment and training challenges for carers, especially young carers in the 16-plus group. In summing up, will the minister give me an assurance that the skills strategy will take into account the challenges experienced by young carers and the carers network across Lanarkshire? As I said, the debate about skills and their provision does not exist in isolation. We cannot keep pumping borrowed money into the economy—it has to be paid back some time—but now is the time for boosting public capital expenditure. The skills gaps are changing and training provision must change with them. Technology and science are prime examples of subjects in which postgraduate qualifications will be necessary for many employment opportunities, but sub-degree qualifications will be just as important for others. The nature of the beast is changing. Scotland needs flexibility in our training providers, training delivery channels and employers to deliver skills training for the future. We need the ability to change to match the circumstances that Scotland finds herself in and the political will to make that happen. I believe that  we have general agreement on that among the parties. I am happy to support the motion in Keith Brown's name.

To ask the Scottish Government what South Lanarkshire Council's financial commitment to private finance initiative/public-private partnership contracts is expected to be in 2010-11 and 2011-12. (S3O-9347)

Is the cabinet secretary as concerned as I am about the on-going impact on local authority budgets of servicing PFI/PPP contracts? The figures that he has just given for South Lanarkshire constitute a huge burden on the council's available resources at a time when local budgets are being squeezed as a result of cuts from Westminster. Does he agree that it is more important than ever to provide local authorities with mechanisms for infrastructure investment that provide far better value for the public purse than those that were available under previous Administrations?

I welcome the report of Labour's literacy commission. Indeed, I am delighted to find my Labour Party colleagues so intent on making such a positive contribution to the education debate. I hope that they will be similarly constructive in all our other public policy debates. I was extremely interested to see the quality of the members that Labour managed to get together for this exercise. For example, the commission included Iain McMillan of the Confederation of British Industry, who was serving on another commission at the time; Lindsay Roy, who was fresh from his by-election victory and who put his considerable knowledge of education to good use; and Ian Rankin, who stepped out from behind the pages of his books to see what could be done to encourage more people to read—of course, there might have been a little self-interest in that, but it was in the service of our coming generations. The membership also included various local authority staff from Glasgow, Midlothian and East Renfrewshire; John Loughton of "Big Brother"  fame; Keir Bloomer, who worked on the curriculum for excellence; Geraldine Gammell of the Prince's Trust; Gordon Matheson of Glasgow City Council; and Graeme Waddell, who provided some real business experience. There was also input on the psychology front from Tommy MacKay, the architect of the West Dunbartonshire literacy initiative and the East Renfrewshire self-declaration study and a past president of the British Psychological Society, and Dr Gavin Reid, who I believe is an expert in the learning challenges caused by dyslexia. The commission itself was chaired by Judith Gillespie. I pay tribute to the commission for producing a concise report of 24 pages from tip to tail. If more of the documents that we got were as brief, we might save a forest or two. That said, although I welcome the report and the contribution that it will make to the debate, I have a couple of queries that I hope the sponsoring Labour members will be able to clear up, and one small point of disagreement. Reluctantly, I must take issue with the comment in the introduction that Scotland has "tolerated the intolerable" and accepted the fact that some youngsters leave school "functionally illiterate". I simply do not believe that. A quick search on the Scottish Government website reveals that concerns about literacy rates were raised and action taken as far back as 1999. The actions that Scottish Government ministers have taken since 2007 to improve literacy mirror the efforts made by previous Administrations and their education ministers. Indeed, the literacy commission refers to one of the fruits of the efforts of the first Scottish Executive: the 2001 publication "Adult Literacy and Numeracy in Scotland", which laid the foundations for the subsequent work that has effectively tackled literacy rates in Scotland.

I agree that our nation's education should be an on-going project on which we should all focus. However, I might be able to respond to Rhona Brankin's comments as I develop my point.  It is only fair to recognise the efforts of past education ministers and to pay tribute to their commitment to literacy. I should apologise to the Conservatives for not looking back far enough to see what they did when they were in government, but I am confident that those in the blue corner will be relatively supportive of the collective effort to raise standards. The commission can be easily forgiven for using a bit of hype to give its points some bite—something, of course, that no politician would ever do, honest. I hope, though, that Des McNulty or one of his colleagues might, in the winding-up speeches, clear up a couple of points of information for me. The commission defines literacy as the ability to function in an adult society, which "equates to a midpoint between levels C and D in the 5-14 programme". Given that, according to the 2005 attainment figures, only 9 per cent of primary 7 pupils failed to reach level C in reading or writing and only 16 per cent failed to reach level D by the second year of secondary school, I was left wondering where the commission got the figure of 18.5 per cent for the percentage of pupils leaving primary school who were functionally illiterate. Unfortunately, the report provides no reference for the figure, so I was unable to check it for myself. The fact is that three quarters of Scotland's pupils reach level D by the end of primary school—in other words, above the level of literacy that the commission wants for adults. While, of course, keeping a weather eye on those who need a bit more help, we should celebrate and applaud such success and congratulate pupils as well as their teachers and parents for hitting that standard. They will only continue to improve throughout their school career. I would also be grateful if Labour members could clarify the report's claim that 1 million Scots adults are illiterate. Again, there is no reference for the figure. However, according to the 2001 publication mentioned in the report, the figure at that time was 800,000. Also, the Scottish Government labour market statistics show that the percentage of adults with literacy issues has fallen from 23 per cent in 2001 to 14.8 per cent now, due in large degree to the efforts of the previous Administration. However, 14.8 per cent of Scotland's adult population is about 607,000, which is some way short of the million highlighted in the report. As I say, I would be grateful for some clarification to help to inform the debate. Like Karen Whitefield, I pay tribute to the STUC and the Scottish Union Learning centres for their valuable contribution to developing an educated workforce in order to benefit our nation. Given that, as the Scottish Union Learning briefing tells  us, people with literacy challenges are less likely to vote, it is important and indeed in the interests of everyone in the chamber to ensure that our nation not only is literate but has the support to develop its literacy skills. I welcome the report's contribution to the debate, look forward to continuing our efforts to improve literacy in Scotland, and congratulate pupils, teachers, parents, the commission and everyone else on their efforts in this area.

Don't worry—there is a numeracy debate next week.

When suffering a bout of insomnia, the cabinet secretary might have read Labour's 2007 manifesto, which referred to the commitment to build or refurbish 250 schools over the four years to 2011 as an acceleration. Will he confirm that we have now exceeded that total in two and a half years? Will he say whether that acceleration is above and beyond anything that Labour could ever think of?

To ask the Scottish Government in what proportion of domestic violence crimes alcohol is believed to be a contributing factor. (S3O-08841)

According to Scottish Women's Aid, research has shown that around a third of all reported domestic abuse incidents involve alcohol, which would account for approximately 18,000 recorded incidents in Scotland last year. Although it would be wrong to imply that there is a straightforward causal link between alcohol and domestic violence, research shows that there is a complex relationship between them, with alcohol functioning variously as an intensifier, an excuse and a method of exerting control when it figures in domestic violence incidents. Does the cabinet secretary agree that people on the receiving end of the worst excesses of Scotland's relationship with alcohol include many victims of domestic violence? Can he confirm that the Scottish Government will consider radical action to address that destructive relationship?

The amendment states: "almost half of the 30 councils inspected were assessed as weak or unsatisfactory in relation to the assessment of risks and needs". Eleven were assessed as "weak" and two were assessed as "unsatisfactory". The two that landed in the "unsatisfactory" bracket will have taken immediate action to address the problems that the inspectorate identified. The 11 that were assessed as "weak" will take stock of the report, and the professionals who are involved in the care of children will take steps to make their service better. They are caring professionals who deserve our support. They will accept constructive criticism from the inspectors, because it helps them to do their jobs properly—it helps them to improve the services that they offer and to make things better for children in their area. As my colleague Angela Constance said, we should aspire to excellence in the service. On the indicator "Children benefit from strategies to minimise harm", only one council showed weaknesses and none sits in the "unsatisfactory" category. That is one of the primary indicators—it is not among the secondary indicators that are mentioned in the amendment. There might be cause for concern over another primary indicator, on which one council has been assessed as "unsatisfactory" in meeting children's needs. However, politicians should allow the professionals and inspectors to work together to improve the service. We should wait for the follow-up reports and then take stock. Only then will we see whether the system is working properly. Resources are available for the services and councils will review their deployment in the light of the reports that they have received so that they can improve their services. I pay tribute to North Lanarkshire Council, South Lanarkshire Council and NHS Lanarkshire for the progress that they have made on the implementation of their GIRFEC pathfinder project. "Pathfinder" is a very appropriate word in that context. Getting it right for every child is about rebalancing and refocusing support so that it tends  towards the child-centric. The one-team support for families, and greater trust and information sharing between professionals, lead to better services for the child. The programme is a framework for developing multilayered service provision in a simple and easy-to-understand way. The initial results have been impressive and significant indications of better outcomes for children are coming from the pathfinder programmes. There also appear to be social advantages; a welcome consequence of earlier child-centred interventions has been that more time is freed up for social workers to do their job and therefore to take on more cases. The programme is a continuation of work that was begun in 2004 under the previous Administration. We had waited too long for that work, so it was a welcome step when it was begun, and its further development is equally welcome. The cross-cutting work that the programme encourages knits agencies together in delivery. We should acknowledge those agencies' efforts in that delivery. That applies especially to Scotland's councils, which should get credit for helping to deliver the vision of a safe and supportive childhood for all. No child is an island, but all children are individuals, which I believe is reflected in the GIRFEC ethos. The early intervention that GIRFEC has facilitated and enabled comes from the enhanced capacity of professionals to gather a holistic assessment of the child using the better information that is available as a result of cross-agency working. That early intervention delivers results. There is evidence across all the wellbeing indicators that progress is being made and that children are reaping greater benefits. Some of that might come from one important innovation, which is that the professionals have turned round service delivery, so that they ask the children who are involved for their views and seek to ensure that the children understand the decisions and the options that are given to them. No longer will parents and children have to try to find a way of negotiating their way around a confusing system; streamlined services will be delivered. We are talking about wraparound care that embraces the child and the family, ensuring that their needs are met. The involvement of all agencies working together will make it less likely that any child will fall through the gaps. As a Parliament, we have a duty to work to keep our young people safe from harm and to do everything we can to safeguard them. The framework, together with input from HMIE, will give us the clearest and most comprehensive impression of how children's services are performing across the country. With the report in our hands, we can ask the professionals on the  ground to use it to improve outcomes for children, through improving service delivery. The mutual respect that is created when professionals in their various fields take a considered approach creates an open exchange and a central role for the children who are involved. That policy shift is welcome; it is long overdue. Praise is due to the ministerial team who started the work in 2004, as it is to the ministerial team who continued the work after 2007. I am pleased to support the motion.

Mike Rumbles made that up.

I welcome Michael Russell to his role and wish him well in it. The SNP Government and Fiona Hyslop have a record to be proud of on education. It is a record of achievement and care for Scottish education that far outshines anything that went before under devolution. Labour's first stab was Sam Galbraith, who ran the examination system into the ground with the SQA farce, thereby doing massive damage to Scotland's education system. Thousands of pupils got the wrong exam results, there was distress for all involved, there were logjams in university  applications and, as a result, there was general chaos. Then Jack McConnell took over at education but with Europe and external relations added to the portfolio. Wendy Alexander took over lifelong learning from Henry McLeish, but it was lumped with transport and enterprise. It was like a bad episode of a bad soap opera, in which Scottish education was treated with contempt. When Cathy Jamieson took over at education and the external relations bit was stripped out of the portfolio, there was at least a minister trying hard—if not successfully—to improve the education system, but she still did not have responsibility for tertiary education. After Wendy Alexander's slightly bizarre early morning resignation, Iain Gray took over Labour's mismanagement of Scottish higher and further education until he lost his seat at the election. Cathy Jamieson was then succeeded by Peter Peacock, who was succeeded in turn by Hugh Henry; Wendy Alexander was followed by Jim Wallace and Nicol Stephen. That made eight Labour and two Liberal Democrat ministers over eight years whose record in the job does not stand comparison with what Fiona Hyslop achieved in two and a half years. I will give members a few examples. In 1999, Jim Wallace said that the abolition of tuition fees was non-negotiable. He was right, but only once the SNP took power eight years later in 2007. Through eight years of Labour-Lib Dem coalition, university tuition fees stayed on the books, lurking there as the artist formerly known as the graduate endowment. Fiona Hyslop moved to abolish them within one month of taking office and they were gone eight months later. Labour nearly destroyed our exam system. Not only did the SNP Government save and reform it, but Fiona Hyslop introduced the baccalaureate to give Scottish exams an international comparator and Scots pupils more opportunities. The Treasury would not change the rules to allow student grants to be paid instead of loans, but the Scottish Government still managed to find an additional £30 million to pump into student support. The Labour and Lib Dem years were years marked by failure. They were lost years for a generation of Scottish pupils, but the SNP years—though only a quarter of the time the last lot spent in office—have been years of success and achievement. We have delivered the smallest ever class sizes and the free school meals pledge—we should nourish children's bodies and minds. We have delivered on matching Labour's school building programme brick for brick. Karen Whitefield should go and speak to the puppet  master in Westminster about getting borrowing powers to build more schools and perhaps we can get on with it. We have delivered a massive increase in nursery provision, restored free education, improved funding for teachers' professional development and taken action on apprenticeships. I will take no lessons on delivering in education from the Laurel and Hardy parties who did so much to damage Scottish education and hold back the ambitions of our school pupils. The SNP Government has pumped capital resources into our universities to start addressing the massive backlog of repairs and development that built up under the last lot, introduced the ScotAction package to help apprentices through the tough times as Labour's recession started to bite and sorted out the mess in additional support needs that the last bunch left behind. Fiona Hyslop steered the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill through the Parliament and brought in protection for rural schools. The SNP Scottish Government has delivered real improvements, real change and real benefits to school education. It has shown that Scottish education can be a world leader again and can give Scottish pupils the advantages that we believe they deserve. All that has held Scotland back is the lack of political will that previous Administrations demonstrated and, now that things are moving in the right direction, we should keep adding momentum. The small-minded, inward-looking petty point scoring that the motion before us exemplifies sums up what is wrong in Scotland. The ambition and determination to succeed that Fiona Hyslop showed demonstrates that we are moving Scotland in the right direction. She can be proud of what she achieved in education and the Scottish Government can be proud of what has been done to improve education. I am proud to support a Government that will put Scotland first, put Scottish education at the forefront of progressive intent and give Scotland's children the best possible start in life.

I congratulate my colleague Sandra White not only on securing the debate, but on the 10 years and more in which she has resolutely campaigned on the issue, along with Linda Fabiani and—as we have heard—members of other parties. Since I became an MSP, I have been pleased to be able to add my voice to the voices of other members in deploring the on-going detention of children in Dungavel and other UK immigration detention centres. It is, of course, not only members of this Parliament who stand opposed to child detention: many groups and individuals throughout civic Scotland have spoken out against a practice that they regard as an affront to every basic notion about the welfare not only of vulnerable children, but of any child. One such group is the justice and peace group in Lanarkshire and Ayrshire, which gathers regularly at Dungavel to demonstrate its solidarity with and support for those who are detained inside. Linda Fabiani and I joined the group in its annual mother's day vigil earlier this year, and on Sunday I was privileged to address its St Andrew's day gathering. The group's members live by the simple maxim that we should treat others as we would wish to be treated ourselves, and treat the children of others as we would wish our children to be treated. Members should not be in any doubt that Dungavel is a prison: it has 20ft fences topped with razor wire. I am pleased that Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People has voiced his support for Sandra White's motion. He has a remit to speak up for all of Scotland's children, regardless of their—or their parents'—national origin, or the method by which they came to live here. It is therefore no surprise that he deplores the fact that a small group is singled out for such harsh treatment. I am also encouraged that more and more voices from other parts of the UK are being raised in protest at the detention of children. I have been in contact with a recently formed citizens campaign group in England, end child detention now, which has impressively quickly mobilised Westminster MPs, including a number of principled Labour MPs, to make public their opposition to the UK Government's policy on detention. The members of that campaign aim to achieve in England the same media and public awareness of child detention that has been built up in Scotland. They are greatly encouraged by the Scottish Government's consistent opposition to child detention and its efforts to find alternatives. The assiduous efforts of all those who have campaigned against child detention in Scotland  have had some effect. Children are now detained in Dungavel for no longer than 72 hours, and the UK Border Agency has been persuaded to partner the Scottish and United Kingdom Governments in piloting community alternatives to detention, although whether it is respecting the spirit or even acknowledging the existence of the initiative is a moot point, as Sandra White pointed out. However, that is not enough—not by a long shot. Children and families are still routinely detained at Dungavel and then moved to Yarl's Wood, where detention can go on for much longer—sometimes very much longer, as we have heard. All the evidence shows that the cumulative effect of each day of detention on a child's emotional, physical and mental health is devastating. I do not believe that the UK's immigration ministers are deliberately cruel or callous people, but, perhaps because they have become so wedded to a political rhetoric that emphasises toughness on asylum seekers and migrants, they persist in pursuing a cruel policy. It is true that it is discriminatory, unethical and violates the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, but what most appals me and others is the inherent cruelty in the act of depriving children who have committed no offence of not only their liberty but almost every aspect of a decent childhood. Detention wrecks children's lives, pure and simple. No immigration or asylum policy justifies it, and it must end now.

Culloden is not.

There is an awfy temptation for Scots to ask, "Wha's like us?" and to answer by saying, "Damn few and they're a' deid." That is the knee-jerk reaction of a people who have felt disfranchised and have reacted with a prickly pride. We can reel off lists of Scots who have done marvellous things and we are, quite rightly, proud to be associated with them. What we do not seem  to be able to do easily is place those characters in the period in which they lived. We have no sense of the nation in which they lived and no taste of the air that they breathed. Many of us will punt the greatness of the Scottish enlightenment by quoting Voltaire, who said: "We look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilisation." We will praise David Hume's "A Treatise of Human Nature" and argue about whether Adam Smith was a socialist. However, few of us can place those people in the stretch of history. We have a pantheon with no walls—an unfinished monument to mirror the national monument on Calton Hill. Surely our duty is to ensure that coming generations have a context for their heroes, know what social forces in Dundee helped Mary Slessor to choose her life as a missionary and understand how difficult it was for Elsie Inglis to practise medicine and how Mary Fairfax Somerville came to write influential scientific tomes in the first half of the 19 th century. Delivering a view of the past that explains the country that they inherit is essential for a child in any nation and it is no less so in Scotland.

The member will know better than I do that Culloden is just one choice of all the things that children can visit. My son is going to visit something in Glasgow during the week, which is subsidised by the local authority, too. Whether it is coming from the Government or the local authority, it is all coming from the one pot. It is great learning for our kids. Delivering a view of the past that explains the country that they inherit is essential for a child in any nation and it is no less so in Scotland. I have repeated that sentence, because it needs to be repeated. Scottish pupils should be aware of the Glasgow rent strikes; the radicals who echoed the calls of the French revolution; how the Church of Scotland made Scotland the most literate nation in the world; how Scottish merchants seized the opportunities of empire; and why Scots cannot walk away gently from the wrongs that were committed in building and maintaining that empire—they should remember that Scots, too, were involved in the slave trade and they should remember, with pride, that they were involved in its abolition.

I cannot add anything to that. Perhaps if there was a better general understanding of Scotland's history and our links with Ireland—viewed with a less jaundiced eye—we might step along the road to addressing some of the irrational itches of sectarianism. When our children can easily access the treasure troves of art and architecture from Scotland's past and present, mark our nation's remarkable role in the development of modern medicine, banking and commerce and be inspired by the exploration and adventures of Scots who criss-crossed the world, they will have more chance of becoming bigger people than we currently imagine. We have a remarkable country with a remarkable history. We have made an incredible contribution to the world and we have an incredible contribution still to make. We should help Scotland's children to celebrate that. There is great strength in a nation that can look at its own history, mark it well, bask in the reflected glow of achievement, note its downfalls and learn from all of it. We do not own the past and we cannot prescribe or narrow it. That is not our job. We set a framework and we let the teachers teach. We do not tell them what to teach and we do not check their jotters. What is taught in Scottish history classes will be the decision of those who set the classes, those who set the exams and those who inspect them. Politicians cannot and will not interfere. I have some respect for Murdo Fraser and I suspect that he wrote his amendment in haste. I imagine that he did not mean to insult our history teachers by suggesting that they would promote a political agenda through their teachings. I am sure that he knows as well as the rest of us do that Scotland's teachers are professional and dedicated individuals who will ensure the best possible scholastic results for pupils and who would resist strongly any attempt by any politician to interfere with that and with how they teach children in the classroom. Likewise, I am sure that Margaret Smith did not seek to disparage the good work and professionalism of our teachers with the empty phrase in her amendment "history should be taught without political interference". I am sure that she will make it clear at the earliest opportunity that she does not suspect that Scotland's teachers would impose their political beliefs on their pupils.  I am sure that the framers of all the amendments—I include Ken Macintosh, of course—know that the Government reports to Parliament regularly and is scrutinised by Parliament every sitting week, and particularly at noon on Thursdays. I look forward to Parliament continuing to follow the progress and improvements in Scottish education that the Government is bringing about and I look forward to members welcoming those improvements. The subject is important not because studying history lodges facts, names and dates in young Scots' minds but because it gives them a panorama of time and a vista of the nation's experience that can inform their thinking and their concepts about the nation and the world in which they live. If memory serves, it was Ken Macintosh who said that in the chamber a while back. History belongs to the nation. [ Interruption. ] I am pleased to support the motion.

The passing of the bill will mark a major milestone  in the development of Scottish education. It will be a welcome step for many communities that have been or will be affected by proposed changes to their local school estate and other changes to the schooling in their areas. The bill will not introduce a raft of new measures, but it will enshrine the best practices of our education authorities. Introducing a legislative presumption against rural school closures was a 2007 Scottish National Party manifesto commitment. That has evolved through consultation and exploration of the issue into a generalised strengthening of consultation procedures across both rural and urban schools. The bill introduces provisions that are stronger than a simple presumption against the closure of rural schools—the consideration that is given to rural schools will have to be much wider than that which is given to urban schools in recognition of the very particular role that schools and school buildings play in rural communities. That is a victory for the Scottish rural schools network more than anyone else, and I congratulate it on getting there, although I am sure that the bill does not mean that its troubles are over, and that it will continue to campaign for the interests of rural schools and to remind politicians from all parties and across the country of the importance of rural schools. We should all heed that memento mori. When the bill becomes an act—I realise that I am presuming a vote in favour; I always like to look at the positive, as I am a glass-half-full girl—

Watch it! The act will change the emphasis of consultations. An education authority that proposes a closure will be required to show the educational benefits of its proposals and how the changed landscape will satisfy the educational needs of those whom the authority serves. The changes that the bill will bring about include expanding the list of people and organisations that are to be consulted when a school closure is proposed to include pupils, staff, staff unions, community councils and Bòrd na Gàidhlig, where Gaelic-medium education is affected. Also particularly welcome is the extension of the consultation timescale to at least six weeks, which will include at least 30 term-time days. The bill will also require education authorities to publish an educational benefits statement that sets out, as the basis of their case, specifically how the changes will improve education overall. The bill will also require HMIE to consider the educational aspects of every school closure proposal and all other relevant proposals. The bill will introduce a requirement on education authorities to take account of allegations of inaccuracies. We debated that openly in  committee. Education authorities will have to respond by correcting matters or taking appropriate proportionate action when needed. The bill will also require education authorities to publish a consultation report at the end of the consultation period and will prevent education authorities taking their final decision until three weeks after the consultation report has been published. A crucial safeguard is to be established: the process of automatic referral to ministers is to be replaced with a call-in facility, similar to the one in the planning process. The call-in process will reassure those who are affected by a school closure proposal that a safeguard exists in the rare circumstances where it appears that the statutory duties in the bill have not been properly fulfilled. The educational aspects will also require to be demonstrated to HMIE, which I presume will lead to the educational aspects becoming pre-eminent in any education authority proposals. Educational aspects will become more and more important as public spending is slashed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in London and we have less and less room for manoeuvre in the Scottish budget. Councils will face financial constraints like every other public body will, and although they will continue to want to improve education in their areas, as they have always done, I have no doubt that the pressure to find savings will be intense and that there will be a temptation here and there to look at closing schools for financial rather than educational reasons. I believe that the people who stand for election to councils, including those who are successful, do so with the intention of improving services, and that none of them stand with a secret desire to close schools. Equally, I am sure that no councillor is elected with an ambition to find large savings from their municipal budgets. I am sure, too, that the discipline of preparing the educational arguments for HMIE will help our councillors to crystallise their thoughts on education provision in the areas for which they are responsible. That discipline will help them to improve on the already excellent work that they do. The bill will certainly not centralise decisions on the school estate. Our local authorities are responsible for the delivery of school education and they should be trusted to get on with it within the framework that is laid down by Government. It will still be for local authorities to determine education provision, working in partnership with the Government. The Scottish Government might lay the framework and provide the finances, but it is the local authorities that have to deliver. It is because the Government works in partnership with local authorities that COSLA felt able to say:  "COSLA is completely supportive of this legislation. It has been carefully developed in a collaborative way which we believe has produced a balanced and considered bill." The supreme example of that, of course, is the historic concordat and the outcome agreements. That is why we now have the smallest ever classes in Scotland, that is how we are delivering for Scotland's pupils and that is how we are going to keep delivering for them. I am proud to be a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, which worked closely on taking the bill through all its stages and supported its evolution into the constructive and positive bill that we have in front of us today. I echo my colleagues in congratulating and thanking the clerks, the SPICe researchers and everybody who came to the committee to give evidence. They all deserve our thanks for their help in developing the bill. The bill will enshrine in law the best practices of local authorities. It will smooth out the differences between education authorities and give parents, teachers, trade unions and, most important, pupils a benchmark against which to measure the actions of their councils. It is a good piece of legislation and I am delighted to support its passage into law.

The SNP Government came to power with the principle that access to education should be based  on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. Today, Labour called for tuition fees in Scottish education. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that the principle of free education remains a policy of the SNP Government and that she will not introduce any proposals for the reintroduction of tuition fees in Scotland?

To have any school in Scotland in a substandard state is unacceptable; to have 260,000 pupils in schools that are in a poor or bad condition is absolutely disgraceful. However, that is exactly the mess that Labour left behind when it was turfed out of office in 2007; another mess that Labour left us in, another Labour failure, and another Labour round of "It wisnae me" from Rhona Brankin. It is just as well that the SNP ended Labour's time in office in 2007 and replaced it with a Government that is determined to improve Scotland and a team with the imagination to dream a better country. We now have 100,000 more children in better schools. The SNP pledged to match Labour's school building programme "brick for brick" as the first step towards sorting the problems in Scotland's school estate. We realised that Labour's plans actually consisted of just a number in a manifesto, that Labour had not planned the 250 schools that it imagined it would build. Unplanned, unfunded and disorganised—that is quintessential Labour. Like so much else that Labour does, there was plenty of packaging but not much product—plenty of fur coat but a distinct lack of lingerie. The SNP Government has already delivered all the schools that Labour planned and is well on the way to delivering the full 250 schools that we promised to build. In the first two years of this Administration, the SNP has built 200 schools, which means that it has two years left in which to deliver the remaining 50—I think that it will deliver more than that. I think that a Government in this excellent condition should be able to make that pledge.

Rhona Brankin obviously did not listen to what Dave Thompson said about the absolutely disgusting cost and the privateers and the profiteers who were courted by the Labour Party. I inform Rhona Brankin that it took six years of running the Scottish Office and the devolved Scottish Government before Labour even checked on the condition of the school estate in Scotland. I will take no lessons from Labour. Not only will this Government pass the target of 250 new schools within one parliamentary session, but the cabinet secretary has already started work on the tranche after that. She recently announced another £1.2 billion agreement with local authorities for new schools to be built after the election, with another 14 secondary schools announced and the primary schools still to come. The primary schools will start to be delivered in 2011, and the secondary schools will follow them. Building schools properly instead of building the absolutely rubbish schools that were built at the start of the PPP process is a better way forward. I take it that Rhona Brankin will want to welcome that forward planning, especially given that a replacement for Lasswade high school in her constituency is featured in those plans. Labour never built it, but the SNP is going to. She will also want to welcome the £25.5 million investment that has already been made in Midlothian Council's school plus programme and the eight schools that have been completed in her constituency. Iain Gray will want to welcome the improvement project for 11 schools in East Lothian, as well as the infrastructure investment plans for Dunbar, Letham and Wallyford primaries and the two primaries and one high school that have been finished in East Lothian. Lord Foulkes will want to welcome Edinburgh's wave 3 schools, which are to be completed within two years, and the eight primary schools that have already been completed. In Glasgow, 12 schools have been completed, in North Lanarkshire 16 have been completed, and in South Lanarkshire 22 have been completed. Thousands of pupils are in better schools today because of the actions of the SNP Government—thousands of pupils whom Labour abandoned. Not only is the SNP Government meeting and beating our manifesto pledge and Labour's manifesto non-pledge, it is planning for the future. The SNP is investing in the future of our country rather than following Labour's failures of the past. Then SNP is a party that puts Scotland first and  seeks to create a better country. We are building Scotland up; Labour should stop talking Scotland down. I support the amendment in Fiona Hyslop's name.

I read the Labour motion for today's debate with some interest. The motion—this epistle of doom—points an accusing finger at the professionals who work in council child protection departments and suggests, as Michael McMahon has just done, that they are not up to the job. The motion conveniently ignores the 77 per cent of inspection reports in which child protection services were rated as good and as having already reached the standard that others are striving to reach. The motion also ignores the fact that staff whose council receives a negative report will use the report as constructive criticism to help to improve service performance. The time to assess a report's overall effect is after the follow-up inspection, when it can be seen what actions have been taken as a result of the comments that were made in the initial inspection report.

Rhona Brankin quotes only a small part of that epistle of doom. Michael McMahon has just claimed that the Association of Directors of Social Work is happy with low standards. I do not believe that the professionals who are on the front line every day are happy with low standards. I was on the front line with them for 19 years of my career, and I will not have that profession done down by Labour members. Serious professional people who do a serious professional job deserve better than to have their efforts taken out of context in an attempt to score petty party-political points. Let us get the matter straight by considering what the professionals say about the proposed national inquiry—although we have not heard much about that today because, I believe, Iain Gray has dropped the proposal after taking on board the professionals' opinion. The Association of Directors of Social Work says: "We do not want to see an inquiry into child protection, which will divert energy and scarce resources away from service delivery; our inspection regime is delivering results and the majority of councils and their partners are delivering good services; those that are not are being supported to improve".  I am glad to see that Iain Gray has taken on board those comments of the front-line professionals. Four of the 32 councils received reports in which the actions taken by child protection staff in response to immediate concerns were rated as unacceptable. Four out of 32 is not good, but those four will strive to improve so that they get a better result next time. Only one of the 32 councils—only 3 per cent of the total—received a report in which the service was rated as unacceptable on whether children's needs are met. That council will strive to improve. No council was rated as "unsatisfactory" on listening to, understanding and respecting children, and I hope that we will hear some acknowledgement from Labour members that those workers deserve some praise. On what is surely the prime indicator for child protection services—whether children benefit from strategies to minimise harm, which means whether child protection services actually protect children—no council was rated as "unsatisfactory". I hope that Labour will have the good grace to recognise that. Weaknesses are identified in the reports—11 authorities were rated as "weak" across four indicators—and those weaknesses need to be addressed. I believe that they will be addressed by the professionals on the ground, who deserve our support and thanks rather than any criticism. Those five "unsatisfactory" reports and 11 "weak" reports represent only seven councils out of all those that were inspected. Recently, Susan Deacon said: "My heart also sinks when I hear one party somehow implying that either they have the best ideas or another party's failing. This is a classic area where politicians have to be able to get together across party lines, look beyond legislative solutions and act in the best interests of their society as a whole." I believe that Susan Deacon is right. The Parliament should praise those councils that have received good reports and acknowledge that councils will strive to improve things by using the reports that they have received. We should encourage those councils that have not got there yet to lift their performance. Having worked on the front line, I have seen at first hand the amazing work that goes on in child protection and early intervention teams. Those workers go out every day to do a job that our society needs them to do but that we wish was not necessary. They deserve our support, and they have mine.

Bringing together groups of staff from different agencies who are employed under different terms and conditions is always a complex and sensitive matter. However, the minister will agree that that  should not be a barrier to the integration of public services in order to drive effectiveness and improvement. Can the minister reassure the staff who work in the organisations that will be affected by the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill not only that their statutory employment rights will be respected and adhered to at all times, but that the lessons that have been learned from previous cross-service integrations—such as the creation of community health and care partnerships—will be applied and that good practice will be followed?

I add my condolences to those of my colleagues from throughout the Parliament to Ewan Williamson's family, friends and colleagues. I pay tribute to all our fire services and take this opportunity to remember the fallen and the injured. As Cathie Craigie said, speaking so late in an informative and good debate poses its own challenges. I am reminded of a story about Professor Neil MacCormick, who was a great friend of mine, when he was speaking at a hustings and was eighth on the list. He came on and won everybody's heart by saying, "Being eighth in the debate is like being a husband of Elizabeth Taylor—you know exactly what to do on the wedding night, but the trick is to make it interesting." So here goes. The Labour amendment refers to "health and safety standards". I am sure that Mr Martin did not mean to imply in any way that firefighters in Scotland are anything other than rigorous in enforcing those standards. I am sure that no one thinks that people who put their lives on the line in the course of their employment would be lax about health and safety.

I absolutely understood that that was the tone of the amendment. The member will hear what I think about health and safety. We can be certain that Scotland's firefighters will be careful to ensure that their health and safety protection is as complete as it  should be. The firefighters have the most to gain from the consistent and rigorous enforcement of health and safety standards in fire and rescue services, and they are best placed to know what needs to be done in their working environment, hence the on-going work with the FBU on health and safety issues. I applaud the minister for engaging properly with the FBU and ensuring that it had a seat at the table when the framework was developed. Such invaluable input must have helped the framework to move in the most appropriate direction. I congratulate the minister on that wise decision. I do not encourage him on much, so I hope that he enjoys it while he can. Although I am encouraged by the inclusion of the FBU in the framework's construction, I note that the union has voiced concerns, and I ask the minister to take note of them. I do not expect an answer today, but I hope that he will take proper note of the concerns and factor them into his thinking in the next few weeks and months. The union has argued that the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 has been found wanting in its operation. The framework states: "While FRAs should continue to place greater emphasis on preventing fires from happening, the need to respond swiftly and professionally to those incidents that do occur is not diminished." I echo Elaine Smith's concerns about front-line jobs. The FBU points out that every fire and rescue authority in Scotland has reduced front-line firefighter numbers. As Elaine Smith said, the union estimates that there are now 220 fewer front-line firefighters than there were in 2005. I am sure that the minister will want to ensure that the number of firefighters who can respond to live incidents, whether or not they are emergency calls, is maintained. I acknowledge that fire and rescue authorities are autonomous to a great degree and are therefore not subject to the direction of the Government. However, I encourage the minister to do what he can to ensure that, at the very least, numbers are maintained and to aim to get the number of front-line firefighters back up at the earliest possible opportunity. It should be noted that Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service is taking steps to reverse the trend, which I welcome. There was a long-term trend of reducing the number of fire deaths, but since the 2005 act came into force that has tended to reverse. In 2007, fire deaths increased to the same level as in 1959, and the number has increased further since. None of us wants that to continue. Stewart Maxwell described the causes of fires and talked about smoking. The increase is a worrying development, and even more so when we consider that the number of fires has continued to  decline. That is a salient point—the number of fires has declined, but the number of deaths has increased. The immediate temptation is to conclude that fires are now more dangerous, with fewer fires causing a greater number of deaths and injuries. That might be the case, but I ask the minister to have the evidence examined, so that we know for sure the cause of the increase in fatalities, which will allow us to take the necessary steps to address the problem. The integrated risk management that is mentioned in the framework will go some way to addressing the problem, particularly in relation to firefighters' safety. However, I would be grateful for an indication from the minister that he will consider fire deaths as a stand-alone issue. The 2005 act added several fairly onerous responsibilities to firefighters' duties, but the number of front-line staff has decreased. I know that the minister will be concerned about those issues and that he is probably already considering them, but I would be grateful for an indication that that is the case, to ease the FBU's concerns. I will restate Angela Constance's point about the contention that fire authorities have used the process of integrated fire risk management as a tool to argue for efficiency savings in the fire and rescue service, which has led to cuts in the number of front-line firefighters. I hope that we can be sure that fire safety is not being compromised by such decisions. It will not be easy for the minister to ensure that, but I know that his main concern is getting it right rather than having an easy time. I hope that he will take on board those concerns and consider ways of addressing them. I fully support the minister in carrying out the task that is before him, and I congratulate him on bringing the framework so far. I encourage him to continue to drive forward the agenda and to keep making Scotland's fire and rescue service the very best that it can be.

It is important that we leave party politics behind when considering this issue, which is about vulnerable families and child protection. It serves Scotland's interests better if we leave party badges outside. Let us be clear about what annulment today of the statutory instrument will do: it will remove a provision that has been in place since June this year. We cannot have a slopping-out situation all over again. We are talking about the provision of  legal advice, at the state's expense, to adults who are obliged to attend a children's panel but who are incapable of understanding or taking an active part in the proceedings without a solicitor or advocate to act on their behalf. The decision is made by the chair of the panel, who observes that the person is in need of legal assistance. The provision is intended for people who cannot themselves afford such assistance. The principle of access to legal assistance at hearings is not new. People who can afford legal representation have always been able to be accompanied by a solicitor. The SSI addresses an injustice that has been embedded in the system and to annul it today would be to say that Parliament thinks that although people who can afford a solicitor should be entitled to representation, vulnerable members of our society—people who are most in need of a solicitor's assistance—who cannot afford to pay should be denied the help that is available to people who have bigger bank accounts. Such an approach runs counter to the basic principles that we expect to find in Scotland, and I think that it runs counter to the intentions of nearly every member, if not all members, of the Scottish Parliament. A rights-based system that enshrines the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and the ECHR is best for Scotland. I will strive to achieve such a system. It is regrettable that those lofty ideals appear not to have triumphed on this occasion. We should legislate before there is a problem, not after the fact. Committee members said that the SSI should not remain in force because the minister could not tell us exactly how many people it will affect, but if one person's rights are breached, that will be one person too many for me. The minister gave a ballpark estimate that was deemed to be inadequate, but no minister of the current Government, the previous Executive or the pre-devolution Governments has ever been able to predict the exact number of legal aid cases there would be in the coming year. We expect much of our Government, but we should not expect clairvoyance. The committee heard that some people think that children's hearings might be changed if the SSI remains in force. However, at last week's reception in Parliament I spoke to a number of panel chairs, and I have spoken to another panel chair in Glasgow, who told me that the measure is not only necessary, but good. The only change is that people who are vulnerable and poor have the same access to legal assistance as people who can afford it. We measure society by the way in which it treats its most vulnerable people. Let us be clear: we are talking not about changing how the children's  hearings system operates but about fairness and justice. Panel chairs have the power to appoint when it is deemed necessary to do so, and they have the protection of knowing that they have adhered to the principles in the ECHR. The SSI removes unfairness, undoes an injustice, imports decency into our legal provisions and makes our society better. I urge members carefully to consider what to do and to vote to allow the provision to continue.

Stage 1 has been an interesting journey, and I look forward to an in-depth examination of the bill at stage 2. I echo Fiona Hyslop and my colleagues in thanking the clerks, SPICe and all the witnesses who provided oral and written evidence to bring the report to a conclusion. The cabinet secretary has laid out some of the background. The bill was a manifesto commitment of the SNP in 2007, and it is another promise that we are keeping. Murdo Fraser also edged his way into the issue with his member's bill proposal earlier in this session of Parliament. I congratulate him on the new addition to his family. I say to Murdo that, as always, I welcome his support for SNP policy. I welcome the bill in great measure. It is a welcome development that will give parents and communities some say in how the schools in their area are organised. Like Karen Whitefield, I particularly welcome the involvement of children in the consultation. Many of the rights that are enshrined in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child—in articles 12, 28 and 3, as we have heard—are met fully in the bill. The incorporation of the convention into as much of Scots procedure as possible is very important to me, and I am proud of the fact that those rights are in the bill. I am sure that Sandy Longmuir will not allow any of us to rest until we have amended the law so that there is some degree of presumption against the closure of rural schools. The special place that rural schools occupy in their communities must be recognised. Aileen Campbell did that very well in her speech. Schools in urban areas contribute to their local communities, too, but in rural settings the contribution is more important simply because fewer facilities are available in those communities. Consultation right across communities that are affected by changes to schooling in their areas is appropriate and right, and I congratulate the cabinet secretary on ensuring that such consultation will take place. She is being brave in putting ministerial action at the front and centre, requiring the minister to be aware of changes to school provision and to be responsible for calling in any closure decision that falls outwith the provisions of the bill. That is brave, but it is the  right thing to do. Too often, in the past, ministers have washed their hands of any responsibility for school closures and have referred to the guidance for referral instead of taking any proactive role. I appreciate that much of the consultation process that is outlined in the bill formalises what is already best practice, but it is of benefit to have that practice formalised in legislation. That gives education authorities a measure against which to stand and it gives communities the option of calling a foul when they think that they see one. Additionally, the educational benefits statements that are proposed in the bill will ensure that education authorities will have to publish their thinking on how the changes to the school estate will affect education. I am sure that education authorities already undertake such analysis in each case. Surely, no councillor would vote to rationalise the school estate without having that information to hand. Nevertheless, it is better all round if we have those details out in the open, so that everyone can see them and debate their merits—the teachers whose employment is affected, the children whose education is affected, the parents who are trying to do their best for their children and the communities whose future might be affected by the proposals. The idea of producing cost benefit analyses, which some witnesses suggested, was interesting, and the committee urged the Government to press education authorities to include them in their proposal papers for school estate changes. However, having had time to consider the issue over the summer recess, I now question whether there would be any great advantage in producing such analyses, because they appear to be exercises in bureaucracy that would not inform the debate to any great extent. I believe that the educational benefits statement will contribute more to the process than will a cost-counting exercise. I appreciate where the witnesses were coming from—particularly Professor Kay—but I suggest that a cost benefit analysis might be of more academic benefit than of help in forming opinions. I am sure that such a wealth of information would be of interest, but it would not be of practical value. I cannot see how the adding up of a balance sheet should be the deciding factor in considering the school estate. Access to education and education provision should be centred on the benefits that it brings to the child, not the investment that the education authority is required to make. Perhaps we should not seek to add a burden for so little benefit. Likewise, I disagree gently with my committee colleagues on the additional measures for rural schools. Rural schools have special needs that non-rural schools do not have. On that subject, however, I am persuaded by some—although not  all—of the evidence that was submitted by Western Isles Council, which pointed out that the presumption against beginning a consultation before considering the three additional factors could mean that pupils would have to stay in a school that was unsuited to their educational needs. I am sure that the cabinet secretary can address those issues, and I look forward to her reassurances. In general, I endorse the view of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee that the bill should proceed to stage 2.

To ask the Scottish Government what role  it envisages for local employment partnerships between national health service boards and other agencies during the current economic climate. (S3O-7537)

I am glad to hear the cabinet secretary recognise the crucial relationship between employment and health. I will give one example of the success that a cross-agency approach to the issue can have. As of March this year, NHS Lanarkshire's pathways to work partnership with Jobcentre Plus had helped 3,000 people to return to work. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the already important role that employment partnerships play in addressing the health and income inequalities that result from decades of neglect of Scotland's poorest communities will become even more crucial in light of the increase in ill health that can be expected to result from rising unemployment caused by Gordon Brown's recession? Will she encourage NHS boards to step up their activities in the area as part of the Government's strategy finally to tackle Scotland's shocking record of health inequality?

I thank everyone who signed the motion, thereby allowing this debate to happen. I have to declare an interest, of sorts, as I was recently privileged enough to be named as a social work champion, and my employment before I was elected was in training and assessing social care workers. Yesterday saw the publication of a report by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education on child protection services in Dundee. It did not make pleasant reading. It is quite clear that the services in Dundee are in need of major improvement. I was pleased to note that Fiona Hyslop and Adam Ingram had already set the ball rolling on that, having met people from the child protection services in Dundee last week. We should note that four additional social workers have been employed by Dundee City Council since the report was written, in February and March, which is good news for those who rely on those services. I am confident that there will be improvements in the system in Dundee, with the ministers' intervention and the commitment of the professionals in the city. We heard today that the follow-through report for Aberdeen is positive. It is not a glowing report, but it is definitely a step in the right direction. I am sure that we will be hearing more from Dundee in the near future. As well as indicating the problems, the Dundee report demonstrates the massive pressure under  which social workers are operating. No one wants to fail children or the vulnerable in our society, and no one wants to turn a blind eye. No social worker wants to leave a child in a situation until it approaches crisis point, and no social carer wants to have to act in an emergency rather than earlier. No system is perfect, and no group of workers is perfect. There are problems and challenges in every walk of life. Social workers and social carers are people whose employment sends them into some of the most challenging situations in domestic life. They are people who see and seek to mend some of the damaged lives in our society. They are people who seek to improve other people's lives. I do not claim beatification for them or set them apart from the rest of society—they are people with flaws, vices and virtues and, in my experience, compassion. However, their jobs are difficult and stressful, and they should not be asked to carry the additional burdens of accusation and finger pointing. There is no benefit from or upside to an accusatory national inquiry. Social work services, particularly child protection services, are regulated and inspected under a strong and robust system. That is why recent reports have recommended improvements in the services of three councils, although not because the councils were failing to meet their duty of care or because social workers were found wanting; improvements were recommended because the inspections found room for them. The social workers, social carers and other staff who are involved in delivering social work services will rise to the challenge of making those changes and they will improve their services. They are the professionals who are there when society needs a safety net for some of the most vulnerable. They are the workers who are there when no one else is. There will be times when they make mistakes—as we all do—and times when the judgment call is wrong. However, we should never forget that, when evil acts are perpetrated, the blame lies with the evil men and women who perpetrate them, not with those who try to prevent them. We have a responsibility to protect the weakest. Laws alone will not do that, and nor will national inquiries. What does not and cannot help, and what takes away rather than adds, is the blame culture in which a scapegoat is sought rather than a problem solved. We should not add that burden to our social work professionals. Social capital is the glue of society and is enhanced by the proper treatment of the most vulnerable members of society. We can judge the health of a society by the manner in which it protects its weakest. Our social workers and social carers are our improvement corps. Our social work services are the mechanism by which the firmness  of the foundation of our society is maintained. It is our duty and responsibility as politicians and as the current custodians of our society to protect and nurture that foundation and to pass it on, improved and enhanced. The best way forward is to give praise where praise is due and constructive criticism where it will help. Step by step, we can help to improve our country and, day by day, we can make it stronger. We need to applaud and congratulate those who stand guard over our vulnerable. We need to reward their efforts with our thanks. Social workers and social carers improve lives throughout the country and they enhance our communities and empower people to improve their own lives. They are not magicians, they do not work miracles and they are not angels or saints. By and large, they are dedicated, compassionate and hard-working individuals who make improvements bit by bit and day by day. Because much of what we value in society depends on the egalitarian treatment of our vulnerable, we must value our social workers. Because many of us will need help for ourselves or our families at some point in our lives, we need to value our social workers. Because society demands so much from those professionals, we should let them know that we value their contribution. I am proud to be a social work champion and to praise the work that is done and the service that is provided. I am proud to support the social work changes lives campaign, and I am proud to salute our social workers and social carers.

It is refreshing to have a Government that takes the time to get the right solution rather than rushing into a massive mistake. That brings me to PFI. Bad design, poor building and poor value for money have been the hallmarks of PFI and PPP. How will the Scottish Government ensure that Scotland's future schools are well designed, well built and environmentally sustainable?

The importance of young people being able to sit standard grades at general and foundation levels or at general and credit levels in the current system was raised in the consultation. That allows pupils to aim high while running much less risk of missing out entirely. Will there be flexibility between national 4 and national 5, so that pupils do not have to play it safe and perhaps sell themselves short?

Will the minister tell us whether targets are being set for the area covered by the restoration programme and what measures are being put in place to protect our peatlands in future?

To ask the Scottish Government what progress there has been on the alternatives-to-detention pilot for asylum-seeking families. (S3O-7169)

Does the minister agree that Fatou Felicite Gaye and her United Kingdom-born four-year-old son, Arouna, would have been excellent candidates for such a pilot? I have been unable to confirm whether Fatou and Arouna were deported to the Ivory Coast at 8.30 this morning. Will he join me in deploring that situation?

Is the minister aware of the situation with the David Livingstone centre in Blantyre? It was confirmed in a letter to me from the National Trust for Scotland that a £100,000 legacy is being held until a decision is made on the centre's future. Will the minister raise that issue with the NTS when he and I visit the centre next Tuesday?

Following the detention of Fatou Felicite Gaye and Arouna Gaye, what progress has been made to stop the detention of children in Dungavel detention centre in Lanarkshire and what contact has the Scottish Government had with the UK Border Agency?

I am shocked by Claire Baker's motion—[ Interruption. ] Wait for it; it will be worth it. Despite the massive turmoil in the world economy, which has been caused by the unsustainable debt that her party leader and the Labour Government in London encouraged, she wants to pile more debt on to students before they have a chance to get started in life. Labour is talking about loans of £7,000. What a tuition fee that would be for a poor student who was caught in the pitiless grip of Labour's failed economic policies. Not content with plunging the country into an economic vortex, in which Government debt is on target to be about 80 per cent of gross domestic product in four years' time, Labour politicians want to capture each individual and make them suffer for the misfortune of living under a Labour Government. Throughout the UK there are record levels of personal debt, which has been encouraged by Labour's philosophy of borrow, buy and consume.

Margaret Smith need look no further for a response than a report from the Association of Scotland's Colleges, which concluded: "A large majority of higher education students in colleges find their debt levels to be a significant problem and would far rather have greater financial hardship than be in debt."

I want to make progress. Since 1997, Labour has encouraged people across our islands to borrow more than they can afford to borrow. Labour relaxed banking regulations to make irrational lending the norm. For Labour, location, location, location became far more important than education, education, education. Money, not wealth, has been the touchstone of Labour's years in power. There has been a fascination with piles of filthy lucre, with no idea how they would be paid for. Bankruptcies are increasing throughout the UK under Labour and more and more people are finding it impossible to survive under Gordon Brown's economic miracle. In Scotland, bankruptcies among students and graduates soared while Labour and the Lib Dems were in power. There was a 380 per cent increase in such bankruptcies between 1999 and 2007. Thank goodness for the election of an SNP Government. The number of young people facing bankruptcy was cut by 11 per cent in our first year in office. How was that achieved? Not through the naive, simplistic and populist posturing in which Labour engages but through good, solid policy work. We abolished the graduate endowment fee. We put £84 million more into student support than Labour put in. We put £38 million into grants for up to 20,000 part-time students, as Fiona Hyslop said. I never thought that I would hear a Labour member complain about part-time students getting support from the Government.

The grant reduces the overall burden by £500. I know students in colleges throughout Lanarkshire who welcomed it.  The SNP has put £16 million into student hardship funds—that is 14 per cent more than Labour put in. It is unbelievable that Labour wants to move away from supporting students and prefers to drive students' economic prospects further underground. We all face decades of paying back the money that Labour is borrowing to try to bail itself out of the catastrophic failure of its economic and regulatory policies, so this is not the time to tell the people on whom we rely to create tomorrow's wealth that they must shoulder the burden of a massive personal debt that has been forced on them by the state. That would not be a good idea at any time, but it is barking mad when we are facing the economic tsunami that Labour created. There is one comfort for us all: Labour is no longer in power in Scotland. We continue to suffer the effects of the mess that a Labour Government in London has made of our economy, but we are at least spared the double whammy of Labour making things worse in Scotland. Instead of offering policies that might be good for the country and engaging in the debate to find the most appropriate way forward, Claire Baker, like the rest of her party, is more interested in trying to score party political points. While Labour continues to whinge and complain, the SNP will continue to make Scotland a better place to be. Why? Because we have got what it takes.

Can the member explain why we all agreed at stage 1 to the principles of the bill even though it did not have a financial resolution at the time?

Will Ken Macintosh tell us what will happen to kids who are not on the list, such as kids who are suffering from grief or family breakdown?

I note with interest that Italy is devolving taxation and borrowing powers to its regional Governments in a move that has been described as fiscal federalism. Italy started its devolution process after we did, with its 20 regions gaining power over health, education and welfare provision in 2001, but it is moving ahead of us in financial devolution. How embarrassing it is that we started first but have turned out to be the tortoise rather than the hare. Adding taxation powers to the already strong toolbox that the Italian regions have gives them the opportunity to become economic powerhouses, altering income and expenditure to suit local economic conditions and increasing their opportunities to exploit their resources and deliver for their peoples. The contrast with our position could not be more stark. We have no power to borrow money and no means of altering the tax system to give our businesses an advantage or give our people a break to make their lives better. We have no way to raise additional moneys to pay for improved services and no way to lever in extra financing for better services. Worst of all, though, is that we must cope with the intolerable burden of UK incompetence, with a Labour Prime Minister who cannot even remember when he is supposed to make a statement and a chancellor who claimed recently that he could see the green shoots of recovery and then proceeded to pour economic weedkiller on those green shoots before they had a chance to break the surface. The Darling budget is a continuation of the catalogue of failure that marks the Labour Government in London. Quite how Mr Darling thought that there would be recovery next year, when he predicts that the economy will shrink by 3.5 per cent this year, is anyone's guess. It is about as clever as Iain Gray's budget tactics have been for the past couple of years—it is almost like they work together. Government debt will rise to four fifths of GDP by 2013. Labour's failure to manage the economy over the past 11 years and Gordon Brown's failure as chancellor means that Alistair Darling will slash the Scottish budget to pay for the economic inadequacy of yet another Labour Government. Stronger together, weaker apart, they say—aye, right. The UK damages Scotland and Labour  damages Scotland, and the sooner we get shot of the pair of them, the better for all of us. The shocking failure of Gordon Brown and, now, Alistair Darling to address the economic problems facing Scotland and other parts of these islands amounts to a dereliction of duty on the part of those two Labour leaders. The harmful effects of 12 years of Labour misrule are more than evident: recession, worklessness and despair—the hallmarks of Labour government. Labour keeps claiming that it is a global recession, but it is not. For example, Australia and Canada are showing that well-regulated and well-managed financial sectors and well-run economies can survive when poorly run countries are going to the wall. As Linda Fabiani told us, Peter Mandelson, at the behest of Labour in London, will go cap in hand to the IMF looking for a bail-out—echoes of 1976. Andy Kerr likes to remind us of 1979, but there was Labour irresponsibility in 1976 and there is irresponsible Labour government now. We should perhaps cast a glance across the North Sea to our friends in Norway, who are paying in—yes, paying in—vast additional sums to the IMF to help out those countries that have not managed their natural resources well. How shameful is it that Scotland, a country as rich as Norway, is to be bailed out while Norway does the bailing out? Members of the Labour Government in London should be ashamed. I will tell you what happens with Labour Governments. They start with a far-fetched raft of policies that are "pickled into a rigid dogma, a code," then they "go through the years sticking to that, out-dated, misplaced, irrelevant to the real needs" of the country. Then it ends "in the grotesque chaos of a Labour" Government—a Labour Government—cutting public spending and scuttling round the country "handing out redundancy notices" to public sector workers. "I'm telling you—and you'll listen—you can't play politics with people's jobs", people's homes and "people's services." I think that those will all be familiar words. We have had far too much failure from Labour, far too much incompetence and far too much pain for the many as welI as for the few. The Labour legacy will be pensioners, students, families, banks and businesses in debt—a shameful record.  It is time for Labour to go and for the power to set the economic agenda to be returned to Scotland. It is time we set our own budgets and took responsibility for our own future. We have got what it takes in the SNP Government to take on that responsibility. Quite simply, it is time for independence.

Does the First Minister share my disgust at the Labour Party demanding increases in student support after ignoring students throughout the time that it was in office, and demanding that Scotland pays students £7,000 a year, tax free, while Labour supports without complaint a UK Government that pays a state pension that is £2,500 less than that? Given that the state pension is taxable and earned, does the First Minister find it strange that Labour members have nothing to say in defence of Scotland's pensioners against their Government at Westminster?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Do Robert Brown and Des McNulty agree that spending £500 million on a tramline is a complete waste of money that could have been used for projects in the west of Scotland, such as Dalmarnock station?

I thank Kathleen Marshall for the job that she has done. She has served this Parliament and Scotland's children very well, and I wish her all the best in her future plans. I believe that she will be a really hard act to follow. She leaves the organisation in great shape for Tam Baillie to take over. I thank and commend everyone who was involved in the nomination process, including Louise Rose, the clerks and all those who helped the selection panel. In particular, I thank the kids who were involved, who were absolutely fantastic. I would be a bit feart to be interviewed by some of them, who asked pretty probing questions.  I thank all the other applicants. The standard was extremely high. As my colleague Karen Whitefield said, any of the five shortlisted candidates could have made a fantastic commissioner. All five of them are engaged in practice with children and young people. It is good that there are amazing people working in that field. Tam Baillie's career is exemplary, as Karen Whitefield mentioned. He has worked in social work and the voluntary sector for a number of years. Recently, I kicked off the social work champion project for the next year. I was honoured to be one of Scotland's first social work champions, but in my opinion, with all his front-line experience, Tam Baillie is a true champion of children's rights. Tam Baillie's commitment is demonstrated by his long career in children's services, and by his involvement in a cause that is close to my heart, which is the incorporation into law of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. His job is a virtuous one, and it is one in which he will be required to make us politicians feel uncomfortable. That is a good thing. We will work well together, and I welcome Tam Baillie to the post and look forward to the work that we will do together. I wish him and his organisation all the best. I support the motion in the name of Karen Whitefield.

I congratulate the Scottish Government on its attempts to address a problem that many over the years have bewailed but on which few have taken any action. Is there any indication of how much might be saved for the public purse by properly addressing the twin concerns of drug and alcohol misuse and of the likely scale of resources that will be freed up for alternative investment? [ Interruption. ]

The First Minister is, of course, aware that there was £14.04 million in discretionary funds in 2006-07, which the SNP inherited from the Liberal Democrat-Labour Administration. Is he also aware that the Student Awards Agency for Scotland also budgeted £14 million in 1999-2000 and that the previous Administration's legacy was discretionary funds that stood still in the face of student hardship but are now finally getting the increases that they deserve under the SNP?

It is interesting to hear that Margaret Smith feels that Scotland's students have been let down by the SNP Government. What breathtaking duplicity from the party that imposed the graduate endowment tuition fee on Scotland's students. It took an SNP Government to get rid of that Lib Dem tax on learning and I welcome Margaret Smith's congratulations on that. Then again, what did Margaret Smith say during the debates on the introduction and the abolition of that Lib Dem learning tax? Absolutely nothing. She is obviously a long-standing champion of our students. Picking up Jeremy Purvis's point, I find it shameful that the Treasury refused to allow the resources that are currently processed as student loans to come within the departmental expenditure limit and be paid as grants. It is incredible that the chancellor should treat his own constituents in such a manner. That decision has deprived the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament of the ability to deliver what would have been a massive improvement in the lives and life chances of Scotland's students. That opportunity has been lost for the meantime, but it is not lost forever. The SNP will continue to press for fairness for all Scotland's students. People should be under no illusion about student loans. They burden today's students with massive debts that restrict their life chances, and remove from the economy money that would otherwise have helped to drive it. Student loans make the recession worse. Anyone would have thought that politicians would be eager to change that system for something far more sensible, but they would be wrong—only one party has put forward a proposal to change it. The SNP believes in access to education based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay, and we will continue to drive Scottish education in that direction. That is why, when part-time students—who are often the least well-off—had their loans turned into grants, the SNP Government delivered the first part of its programme to provide grants, not loans, thereby improving the lives of 20,000 students. Important research has been published by the Association of Scotland's Colleges. Entitled "Supporting Scotland's Future: A Research Report by Scotland's Colleges", the report is based on  feedback from 1,000 students and the Opposition would do well to read it. A couple of points leap out of that study. First, 74 per cent of students at college are concerned about the debt that is being built up under their student loan. Secondly, 71 per cent of students would rather suffer hardship than incur debt. I congratulate Scotland's colleges on taking the time to talk to students to find out what their position is. There is evidence in that report that potential students are deterred from studying by the debt that is incurred under student loans. People who have taken steps to improve their lives, who have taken the decision to get themselves on to the learning ladder and who have been through the hardest part of the process arrive at the doorstep only to find themselves turned away by the dementor of student loans and graduate debt. We must change that situation, and the SNP intends to change it. Judging by the ignorance and intransigence of the Treasury, we might need independence to deliver that. Nevertheless, I can guarantee that the SNP will continue to press for proper access to that money for Scotland's students. The Liberal Democrat motion calls for a minimum income guarantee of £7,000 from grants, loans and parental contributions, but with no indication of how those proportions would be decided. Margaret Smith would happily—perhaps even jauntily—increase the burden of debt under student loans to £7,000 a year. What a tuition fee that would be—£7,000 plus interest for a higher national certificate; £14,000 plus interest for a higher national diploma; £28,000 plus interest for most Scottish degrees; and £35,000 plus interest to qualify as a doctor or a dentist. That shocking proposal would make the graduate endowment tuition fee a minor insult by comparison. Such education policies are a poisonous recipe for Scotland and should be rejected. I would have thought that even the Lib Dems could recognise the disasters that have been wrought around the world by unsustainable debt. It would be far better for all concerned if we followed the SNP's lead and continued to drive the student support system—

I congratulate Cathy Peattie on bringing this debate to the chamber in the week that we are celebrating the events for international women's day. Cathy Peattie referred to last year's "Sex and Power" report, in which I was mentioned as one of a diminishing group of female politicians in the Scottish Parliament. We have restored the balance slightly, as Shirley-Anne Somerville and Anne McLaughlin are now here, although tonight I am part of a shrinking group on these benches—I am the sole female cheerleader for the Scottish National Party in this debate. Sandra White wanted to be here, but she has a constituency engagement—she wanted me to say that she is here in spirit and in sisterhood. One of the things that struck me in the "Sex and Power" report was the idea of prejudice. All through my working life I have been involved, as part of the trade union movement, in trying to address the equal pay issue. There are issues with regard to being a woman in a world in which you are trying to get ahead. I worked in social work, which was quite female dominated, but the big positions always went to men. There was a boys' club network: the method of promotion was to go for a pint with the boss. If you were a female who wisnae inclined to go for a pint or play a round of golf with the boss, you faced a barrier to promotion. As Cathy Peattie said, that was usually because women had two weans waiting at hame for their dinner and they had to get back and sort them out, run one to the fitba and the other to  something else. Prejudice is still endemic in the working world, and there is still a network of boys' clubs, especially in top jobs in the private and civic sectors. Another thing that struck me in the "Sex and Power" report concerned female ambition. If a female is described as ambitious and puts herself forward, she is usually described as a nippy sweetie or an aggressive woman, or as someone who is trying to act like a man in a man's world. A woman does not have to act like a man, by which I mean no discredit to any of my male colleagues; she just needs to act like herself—but that is sometimes tough because there is a preconception that if you are an ambitious woman, you are aggressive, which is quite wrong. There is still an expectation in today's society that the female is the main care giver in a family. That has been an issue for me—I have always been the main care giver. I have been expected to be that person. We should address the long hours culture and resistance to flexible working, and give rights to parents—not just female parents, but all parents—to allow them to have a good work-life balance. That would go some way towards allowing women to advance their career further. I was going to mention some of the events for international women's day, but Cathy Peattie has already done that. One of the things that brought me into politics and being part of society was my gran, who passed away last year at the age of 98. She went through her young life as part of the suffragette movement, and I have a brooch on today, which one of my friends gave to me, that has the suffragette colours in it. It is a butterfly, which represents rebirth and beauty. We women always have to undergo rebirth and become something else. The Edinburgh Festival Fringe presents an award for female comedians every year—on which I congratulate it. Last year, I had the real privilege of giving the award to Janey Godley. She uses her issues and concerns, and the challenges and barriers that she faces every day as a woman in the workplace and in the family, as humour. She won the award because she has been on a journey through being a woman in a man's world, which led to her success. Our responsibility as females in the world is to encourage, mentor and empower. Women who, like us, are in positions of power should be the cheerleaders for that. When I was first elected and did my wee interview, I was asked who inspired me the most and who I would have to dinner. A lot of people have inspired me. The interviewer said, "I suppose it would be Winnie Ewing." In a political sense, Winnie Ewing has always been an inspiration to me, but one of my inspirations is Rosa Parks—

Rosa Parks was involved in the civil rights movement, and she said that sometimes you have to sit down to stand up for yourself. On that note, Presiding Officer, I will sit down.

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

rose—

I am delighted to take part in this stage 1 debate. I add to the chorus of congratulations for my colleague Anne McLaughlin's fine maiden speech—well done to her for that. Let me also add to what George Foulkes said about the concerns around financing. The £500 million-worth of cuts that are coming from Westminster to the Scottish Government will also have an impact, which should be borne in mind in any discussion about cuts across the board. As others have said, additional support for learning is a complicated issue, on which the committee took lots of detailed in-depth evidence from witnesses from across the board. As the issue not only causes great concern to parents and education staff, but has the potential to cause concern for the pupils involved, it is important that we get it right. Therefore, I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and the Minister for Children and Early Years on their efforts in introducing the bill. I also record my thanks for the excellent verbal and written evidence that we received from all the organisations and individuals who contributed. For me, the committee's round-table exercise was invaluable in providing an insight into how people deal with the issues at the chalkface. Let me also—this will probably come as a surprise to some—commend all my committee colleagues. We had a tough job in taking lots of evidence and doing a lot of detailed work, but we have come to the end of it with consensus on a plan that puts children at the centre. The 2004 act was passed as consensual legislation—or so I am told, as I was not then a member of the Parliament, although I was aware that it was happening—but concerns were raised by parents at the time about some elements of it. Clearly, the act was a huge improvement on the previous legislation, but there is substantial anecdotal evidence that the legislation is not perfect and needs to be improved. That is why I think that it was right for the cabinet secretary to carry out a consultation and to introduce the bill to improve matters. I appeal to the Government to maintain its scrutiny of the implementation and effects of the 2004 act. I also appeal to parents and teachers to do what they do and continue to remind us about all those issues.  In the five years since the passing of the 2004 act, we have had time to see how the legislation has performed, so I hope that we will be able to see a spirit of consensus infusing our consideration of the new bill. I hope that Parliament can once again distinguish itself in its conduct in the way that it legislates. To pick up another positive point that was made by my colleague George Foulkes, we should be aware that the Scottish Parliament has really stood out on this issue and we should be proud of that. I note that the tone of the committee's deliberations provides hope that consensus in our consideration of the bill will be achieved. Concern is, I am sure, shared by all parties about the implications of Court of Session judgments that have interpreted the 2004 act. I was particularly concerned about the possible implications of the 2007 judgment in the case of WD v Glasgow City Council, in which the court ruled that the tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear appeals on out-of-area placing request decisions, and that parents of children who have co-ordinated support plans cannot make out-of-area placing requests. I am sure that that was not the intention of the ministers who introduced the original bill, nor of the members who took evidence and deliberated on it. I suspect that the court judgment also poses difficulties in cases where specialist support provision for a particular set of additional support needs cannot reasonably be provided by every local authority, which means that the proper support can be provided only by travelling across local authority boundaries. I can offer as an example Donaldson's deaf school, which I visited with a delegation of committee members on what was an absolutely fantastic day. What a fine example that school provides of an institution that is at the forefront of dealing with children who have issues with hearing. As the school has recently moved from Edinburgh to Bathgate, the implication of the WD v Glasgow City Council ruling is that Edinburgh parents, who could until recently have made a placing request on which the tribunal would have had the jurisdiction to hear an appeal, would no longer have that right because the issue would have been removed from the tribunal's jurisdiction. Such a result could not have been the intention of the members who worked on the original legislation. As someone who has always had an interest in issues affecting looked-after and accommodated children—on which colleagues from other parties have also expressed concerns—I am particularly concerned about how corporate parenting can become an issue. If a young person in care has only the corporate parent to champion their rights, any appeal that is made to the local authority involves the corporate parent appealing against  the corporation. That poses some concerns for me. Such children need a champion who will speak on their behalf, as Aileen Campbell said. Another thing that I have noticed over the years—my background is in social work—is that, for some children, at issue is their behaviour in the classroom rather than what causes that behaviour. A particular example is children who have dyslexia, who might not be able to participate in the classroom, which results in disruption that puts the focus on their behaviour rather than on supporting the child. I am therefore absolutely delighted that Jackie Stewart, who has been a true champion for the dyslexia awareness cause, is involved. Another piece of worrying evidence that came to the committee was the disproportionate number of children with problems such as dyslexia coming from financially challenged households. We need to bear that in mind. The fundamental principle that underpins the 2004 act is that the best interests of the child should be served rather than the interests of the authorities, education and support staff or, indeed, the parents. That should be the underpinning principle that carries us through our deliberations today and during the following stages of the bill. I was pleased to note from COSLA's briefing, which arrived at noon, that COSLA underscores its support for the general principles of the bill, but warns of the possible consequences of putting too many new burdens on local authorities. I am sure that, although the minister intends to accept reasonable and balanced amendments at stage 2, he will keep caution in mind during his deliberations. I am sure that he and my colleagues on the committee will seek to balance the concerns of COSLA and the understandable aspirations of children in Scotland. It is the balance that is really important. We need gold-plated legislation: if we can get the balance right, that will come about. Similarly, the position of other interested organisations, such as the "for Scotland's disabled children" liaison project and the National Deaf Children's Society, will have to be weighed at stage 2. The process will have to be delicate and thorough in order to ensure that we emerge at the other end with improved and effective legislation. We should also keep in mind the principles of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. This morning, I had the privilege of opening a conference for teachers in Glasgow on continuing professional development. The opening act was a group of children from Merkland school. They sang songs and were absolutely fantastic, and I pay tribute to the staff and pupils at that school. I acknowledge that some schools are doing absolutely fantastic work.  In supporting the proposed legislation, there is a job to be done. I am sure that, if we work together, we will get the legislation through. I look forward to working with the committee on a consensual basis at stage 2.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement. I, too, welcome Keith Brown to the front bench. How will the Government promote services such as ILA 500—which has been transformed from a  loan into a grant—and the modern apprenticeship programme? How will the website that the cabinet secretary mentioned in her statement add to the Government's promotional efforts?

Unsurprisingly, I welcome the SNP Government's commitment to preparing and implementing a proper early years framework. That has been welcomed by professionals throughout the sector, who are delighted at last to have the chance of some resolution to the succession of issues that they have faced. It is regrettable that we had to wait for so long after devolution to get the  commitment, but at least we have it now and we can get on with doing the business. The amendment in the name of Karen Whitefield is based on false information. It alleges that teacher numbers in pre-school are declining, in spite of assurances by the First Minister that they are increasing. The First Minister's answer in September last year was clear that the SNP Government had demanded clarity in the figures and ensured that that was delivered.

Under the previous Administration, teachers who taught in more than one centre were counted in each centre in which they worked, resulting in about 200 ghost teachers—there in spirit, but not in body; there in statistics, but not in the classroom. I hope that that cold splash of reality will not induce a depression on the Labour benches.

I will not take any interventions, because the misinformation that the Labour Party has doled out today in the Parliament should not be continued. The figures that have been released under the SNP have removed those 200 ghosts, because peripatetic teachers are now counted separately from teachers who are based in one centre. Not only is that approach far more honest, open and transparent than Labour's system, it helps professionals who work in early years education to gain a clear understanding of the situation, and it helps local authorities and partner organisations with workforce planning. I hope that Labour members have the good grace to accept that. Before Karen Whitefield lodged her amendment, if she had just asked her colleague Ken Macintosh—who is sitting right next to her—about the issue, he could have told her that he had asked a parliamentary question on the subject, which was answered at the beginning of December. For ease of reference, I inform members that the question number is S3W-18040 and that it was answered by the Minister for Children and Early Years, Adam Ingram. In fact, to save members the effort of looking up the answer, I will quote it. It states: "In the census for 2008, pre-school centres were asked for the first time to report numbers of peripatetic teachers, who work across more than one centre, separately from teachers employed in their centre only. In 2008, the headcount figures for teachers employed in only one centre was approximately the same as that for all teachers in 2007. In addition, a head count of 600 was reported for peripatetic teachers, equating to 204"— yes, 204—  "whole-time-equivalent staff."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 5 December 2008; S3W-18040.]  There are now 600 more teachers than there were under Labour, and 204 more full-time equivalents under the SNP than under Labour. That increase in qualified staff is allowing the SNP Government to move towards fulfilling our election commitment to give all pre-school children access to a teacher. That commitment was, of course, included in the historic concordat between the SNP Government and local authorities—which is an example of central Government trusting local government to do what it was elected to do, rather than an example of central Government micromanaging and mismanaging.

Presiding Officer, I have already said that I will not take any interventions from members on the Labour benches. Their negative scaremongering and their use of figures are a disgrace to this chamber. A total of 66 per cent of all pre-school children now have access to a teacher registered with the General Teaching Council for Scotland, and that figure increases—yes, increases—

Thank you for that clarification, Presiding Officer. In local authority centres, 81 per cent of pre-school children have access to a GTCS-registered teacher. That is another SNP election promise being fulfilled, and it is good progress for Scotland's children. We still do not think that it is enough and we will continue to push to make it better, but it is good news for Scotland's children. There may be even better news coming up. If members have a spare few minutes, they might like to read "Pre-school and Childcare Statistics 2008", to which Labour's amendment refers, including the footnotes. For example, table 22 has a footnote that reads: "The number of pre-school children who had access to a GTCS teacher during census week may be an undercount as 159 centres using teachers did not provide this information." I hope that Karen Whitefield will have the good grace to withdraw her amendment and let the  Parliament continue to make progress on this issue in the spirit of consensus that was shown so clearly on the budget yesterday. In that spirit, I am sure that we can agree with the Aberlour Child Care Trust that "the Framework sets the right aspirational tone", and with Children in Scotland that "this Framework provides a 10-year vision for achieving a coherent and community-based approach to supporting families with young children throughout Scotland." Play Scotland says that it is looking for a statutory duty for play, while welcoming the inclusion of play as one of the eight priorities and looking forward to the inspiring Scotland play fund. Getting it right for Scotland's children is important not because they are the adults of the future, but because they are the children of today. Having said that, the on-going societal and economic benefits to society of giving children a decent start in life are well documented. They have been well described by my colleague Liz Smith. I support the Government and the early years framework. I am confident that we are providing a decent future for Scotland, as well as moving to improve the life experiences of today's children. Unsurprisingly, I support the motion.

To ask the Scottish Government what support it has provided for police and firefighters' pensions. (S3O-5838)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is right and proper that employers take cognisance of the behaviour of their employees, and of any criminal behaviour in particular? Does he agree that it is disgraceful that a convicted rapist is using legal aid to seek to restore his pension rights? Will he consider amending the legal aid rules?

I join the chorus of congratulations for Murdo Fraser on securing the debate. It serves Parliament well that we are united across the chamber on this issue. I echo his commendation of the International Justice Mission in combating sex trafficking, and I pledge my support to that aim. I commend the work of the justice and peace movement. A group from Cupar used very persuasive lobbying skills to encourage me to put together a motion that I have lodged on the issue. I also give particular mention to the group in Lanarkshire—the area that I represent—and I commend other groups Scotland-wide that have called on parliamentarians to raise awareness of the issue. Murdo Fraser and Margaret Mitchell both mentioned the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association conference that Margaret and I attended at Westminster this week. International migration and human trafficking were on the agenda. One of the lovely things about the conference was that it brought together parliamentarians, speakers and academics from around the world to consider the causes and effects of human trafficking and to consider good practice in supporting trafficked individuals and in supporting Governments, organisations and law-enforcement agencies in combating the despicable trade in human beings. One of the questions that were asked at the conference was very simple: what is human trafficking? It was right that the question was asked, because there seems to be some doubt about the answer—especially among those who would like to justify some of the human trafficking  that goes on. Margaret Mitchell has already stated—it is worth repeating—that human trafficking is "the movement of people by force, fraud or deception in order to exploit them for sexual purposes or forced labour." An associated issue is the movement of children within and between countries, which also amounts to trafficking. We heard a powerful true story about a baby who was, because of an issue within that family, trafficked away from its family and never seen again. There is legislation that makes it a statutory offence to traffic a person for the purposes of sexual exploitation but I am not sure, after attending the conference on migration and trafficking, whether it goes far enough. There is a lot of good practice in all the countries that were represented there, but we need to consider many questions. One of the guest speakers at the conference was Dr Bridget Anderson, who is a senior researcher at COMPAS—the centre on migration, policy and society—at the University of Oxford. She said that as of December 2008, there had been 96 convictions of individuals for trafficking and exploiting vulnerable human beings. Of course, 96 is better than none, but I think we can do much better than that. It was also asked at the conference why it matters. It matters in Scotland because this is a modern country in which trafficking, using and exploiting human beings should not be countenanced. The trafficking of human beings is a lucrative business, so we need to strengthen legislation to deal with it. I gather from the speeches that were made at the conference that it is a major plank of organised crime throughout the world, which we must target. We heard at the conference that greed and profit are the driving forces. Scotland is a caring and egalitarian nation, so we need to ensure that the traffickers are put out of business. We need to get rid of the greed and the profit that drives that business. We need a two-pronged approach, which outlaws and convicts traffickers, and which also changes the attitudes of the people who create the demand. We heard a powerful contribution from the Swedish delegates about how they had managed to change a whole country's attitude to sexual trafficking and the business of sexual exploitation. I commend to members the "Handbook for parliamentarians: The Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings". I have had a quick look through it, and it is a really good piece of work. I congratulate the Scottish and UK Governments, which have both signed up to it. I also welcome the Scottish  Government's tailored guidance, which fits in with UK guidance on Scottish legislation, practices and policies for best practice and with a partnership agreement between both Governments. The Scottish human trafficking group is sharing good practice among law enforcement agencies, which is to be commended. An organisation in Glasgow called TARA—the trafficking awareness-raising alliance—is doing a great amount of work. It is a pilot project, and I ask the minister—I hope that he will not think that I am being too cheeky—to consider continuing it. I have some fears about the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Bill, which is currently going through the UK Parliament. The bill will criminalise people who do not have travel documents, which would immediately affect people who have been trafficked. We need to consider that, although we have been assured that prosecutors would perhaps not prosecute such people. We have a moral, political and personal responsibility to bring an end to the horrific practice of trafficking, and I lend my support to the motion.

I ask the cabinet secretary how the Government is working with family mediation groups to ensure that breaches of residency and contact orders are kept to a minimum.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in providing specialist nurses for motor neurone disease sufferers. (S3O-5542)

I ask the minister to encourage health boards to work with the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association to support the 327 people in Scotland who have been diagnosed as having motor neurone disease—the highest recorded number yet—and to join me in sending best wishes to the association for the launch of its new identity at Stirling castle next week.

In light of the announcement that was made a few days ago about new approaches to the welfare of children who are seeking asylum, is the cabinet secretary pleased about the proposal for a pilot for alternatives to detention, and in particular about  the ending of the detention of children in Dungavel detention centre in my region?

To ask the First Minister what implications the decision by HM Treasury to refuse the proposed funding package for the new Forth crossing will have for capital spending by the Scottish Government. (S3F-1346)

Does the First Minister agree that what that case and the current economic situation show is that it is essential that the anomaly whereby local authorities and Network Rail have borrowing powers but the Scottish Government does not is rectified as soon as possible?

I am delighted to be back—happy new year to everyone. I most pleased to see, Presiding Officer, that you have lost none of your wit, charm or grace over the festive period. Those qualities cannot be taught, even by the best teachers in the best schools. As for the rest of the population, we will just have to make do with a review of the national qualifications system, which is welcome. Fortunately, we are well down that road. Scotland has a decent education system that we take to be one of the best in the world—an assertion that has found some support from the OECD. The gradual improvement in the perceived standard of our education system is also reflected in UCAS's recent decision to uprate the tariffs that it awards for Scottish qualifications, as Kenneth Gibson said. Merit for that belongs to the teachers and pupils in our schools, and we can all be proud of it. However, we should not be complacent and think that our system cannot be improved. I am fairly confident that members generally agree with that assertion. Each party and its members will agree that we should be looking to improve our education system for the benefit of those pupils who are currently in the system and those who will be making their way through it in the future, and for the general benefit of the country and the rest of us. The Howie report, which was published 16 years ago, in 1992, suggested improvements to Scottish education. It was a far-sighted publication and might be updated to reflect the changes that have taken place since it was published. In a recent article in The Herald , John Howie said: "Standard Grades are certainly useful diagnostically: are you likely to pass a Higher next year, or the year after, or not at all? But both the Howie Report and the minister believe that the diagnosis should take place in the third rather than the fourth year, and both see this assessment as focusing on core skills." Assessment in S3 is the way forward for our young people. As well as a review of national qualifications, the Howie report recommended the introduction of the baccalaureate, which we have heard a bit about today. The baccalaureate would be an academically demanding qualification that would allow the most able pupils to demonstrate their ability. I am more than pleased to note that the introduction of that qualification by the Scottish Government received John Howie's support in the article that I mentioned.  John Howie's approval was echoed by Professor Jack Jackson, visiting professor of curricular studies at the University of Strathclyde, who said: "The interdisciplinary project which will form part of the Science Baccalaureate should give S6 pupils an opportunity to further develop independent learning skills and to take greater responsibility for aspects of their work." He also said that he hoped that "higher education will recognise the added value of the interdisciplinary project and the more rounded qualification provided by the Baccalaureate." That interdisciplinary project, showing that the pupil has the ability to think, study and work on their own initiative, is the jewel at the centre of the qualification. Employers look for those values in potential employees, and universities seek them from potential students. I note that there are some concerns about the introduction of a baccalaureate. In particular, in Elizabeth Smith's response to the consultation, she asked why no equivalent qualification is being proposed for social science or the arts. I hope that the cabinet secretary will reassure her and the rest of us that the SQA will be able to propose extending the baccalaureate qualification into other areas when it makes its proposals for reviewing qualifications. In addition, Labour's 2007 election manifesto called for "radical reforms to ensure that young Scots have much greater opportunities to learn and excel in globally useful skills, and in particular languages and science." The baccalaureate would do exactly that—I am pleased to see that we agree. The stretching of pupils' talents would be matched by proposals to allow greater flexibility for individual pupils to tailor their examination schedules. We have heard a lot today about exams taking place when pupils are ready for them, and we should strive for that so that pupils can get what they are looking for when they need it. Provided that there is a fallback position to give confidence to those who bypass exams to reach for the next level, such flexibility in the system should encourage many more young Scots to ask how far they can go, rather than how safe it is to take the next step. I learned that lesson when my son sat his standard grades last year and was thinking about what he would do next. A flexible system would have been more helpful to him, rather than his obsessing over whether he should stay on to do highers. Inspiring confidence in pupils, encouraging them to take control of their own learning and providing a framework within which they can seek excellence will help to provide young Scots with the tools that they will need to build a successful career, and educationists with the evidence base  that they need to determine the next steps in improving the Scottish education system. A renewal of our national qualifications is due and represents an opportunity for us to set out a fresh feast for advancement, to delineate the dishes that are on offer and to make them healthy options—I think that I have had too much Christmas pudding. We can set Scottish education on a route that ensures that our education system remains among the best in the world, learning from the past but not thirled to it, celebrating success but not blinded by it, and acknowledging improvement but never being subdued by it. The chamber contains plenty of the enthusiasm that we need to make the improvements that Scottish education needs, and I look forward to working with my colleagues across the party divides to help deliver a better education system for current and future generations of Scotland's school pupils. I support the motion in Fiona Hyslop's name.

The fact is that today's economic climate is very different from that in which we went through last year's budget process. Our individual and collective task in this chamber and as part of the privileged office that we hold as MSPs is to do what we can to improve the situation for all the people of Scotland. As a nationalist, I will always believe and argue that the levers of economic power are better wielded in Scotland by a Scottish exchequer working in harmony with our European partners. I appreciate that one or two members in this chamber are otherwise minded. Until my colleagues and I can persuade those dissenting voices of our views, we will just have to agree to differ.

Mr Purvis will just have to let me continue. I think that there is cross-party agreement on the importance of putting money into the pockets of individuals who will spend it—it is, if you like, a fiscal stimulus—and that there is broad though perhaps not universal agreement that accelerated capital spend by Government will have benefits. I am also confident that we agree that support to help small businesses survive is important. In fact, it seems clear that support for small businesses will help to put the Scottish economy on course for a full recovery when the situation improves, as those businesses will be the drivers of Scotland's improved economic performance. In that context, the cut in business rates for small businesses, including the complete removal of rates from the smallest businesses that was begun in last year's budget and will be completed this  year, is one of the most important measures that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has brought to the table. Of course, that measure would have much more of an impact if the Government had the power to remove some of the burden of corporation tax, but we can debate that issue on another occasion. Over the past decade, corporation tax has risen slightly, and I hope that the Westminster Government will consider reducing it soon. For now, however, we must content ourselves with welcoming the introduction of relief from fixed overhead business rates, which is already benefiting businesses throughout the country and will continue to benefit them next year and the year after. I believe that John Swinney is to be congratulated on his farsightedness in introducing the reduction in and the partial removal of rates and, indeed, that we will have further cause to thank him for doing so. We should welcome the bringing forward of capital spend, which the Government has begun to lay out, and I was pleased by the Finance Committee's welcome of the Government's early plans in that respect. We should welcome not only the support for Scottish jobs that the move will provide in these difficult times, but its knock-on effects as money filters through the system and helps to keep others working. We might find ourselves on less harmonious ground with regard to measures that the Scottish Government has been able to take—and has taken—to put money into the pockets of individuals throughout the country. Other members have pointed out that last year, under the deal between the cabinet secretary and COSLA, Scottish councils were given additional revenue resources to freeze council tax. That freeze represented a real-terms tax cut for everyone in Scotland and was particularly helpful to households on fixed incomes who have to plan expenditure well in advance. This year, the cabinet secretary has provided local authorities with another slice of the pie, which will be enough to allow authorities to maintain council tax rates at the same level. With that move, the cabinet secretary has, in partnership with the councils, created another real-terms tax cut, putting money into the pockets of Scots, creating what financial stimulus is possible with devolution's limited powers and giving people across the country just a little relief from the onerous burden that council tax represents for far too many households. By putting money into the pockets of those who will spend it, this Government is not only creating a financial stimulus that benefits the country but doing what we all know to be right; it is reducing the burden  for the poorest in society, especially in tough times. That is why I believe that the Scottish Government was right to maintain the budget lines on the pensions for people who have retired from the public sector in Scotland. I know that there will be general agreement across the chamber that those who through no fault of their own have been overpaid should not have their pensions reduced to compensate for mistakes made at Westminster Government level. I also believe that we will generally agree that the Scottish Government's action in the circumstances is the most appropriate one and that a short-term adjustment in those pensions should be avoided. We still face uncertain times; indeed, one Whitehall minister has described this recession as the most serious that we have seen. However, the Scottish Government should be commended for doing what it can within its restricted powers and the budget that the cabinet secretary has laid before Parliament should be welcomed as being in Scotland's best interests.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made in relation to preventing the poisoning of raptors. (S3O-5222)

Although it is encouraging that progress has been made, does the minister think that progress can be sustained, given the removal of powers under European cross-compliance rules? Does he agree that cross-compliance has been the most significant tool in his armoury for forcing change and driving out the cowboys and criminals who still think that laying poisoned bait is acceptable behaviour in the 21 st century?

Anyone who takes an interest in what the Labour Party has to say about kinship care will not take long to get through it. A wee search of Scottish Labour's website reveals only two references to kinship care. In its manifesto for older people for last year's election, "Active Ageing—Labour's Vision for Older Scots", Labour said that it would "consider the future of grand-parenting in fostering and kinship care". There was no mention of any other type of parenting—involving aunts, uncles, brothers or sisters—and certainly no mention of money.  Marvellous. What a commitment—or is it a non-commitment? The policy was further developed after the election, right enough. During her excellent period of leadership, Wendy Alexander published a paper titled, "Scottish Labour: new directions—Change is what we do". In that truly visionary document, she laid out a future for the Labour Party in Scotland. She mentioned kinship care in that document. She asked: "Why have we not resolved the funding of kinship care"? Why not, indeed? At that point, Labour had been in power in Westminster for 10 years and had been in Government for eight years in Edinburgh. True to form, Labour failed to take action on the issue, just as it failed to take action on any of the issues that were pressing hard in Scotland. Unfortunately, like so many other Labour members, Wendy Alexander offered no solutions to the questions that she posed. It is easier just to wail that things are not right than to put them right. It is just as well that an SNP Government was elected to start to develop the structures around kinship care. Through the concordat, we are working with and trusting local authorities to start providing delivery on the ground and around the country. In his own passionate style, my colleague Bob Doris has laid out the shameful position of the London Government, which wants to claw back any payment made to kinship carers in Scotland who are in receipt of benefits. That will be a matter for the consciences of Labour Party members.

Sorry, I have only four minutes. Labour members will need to decide for themselves whether they are content to remain members of a party that would do such a thing. The SNP Government, on the other hand, is delivering. In response to a parliamentary question in April from Elaine Murray, the Minister for Children and Early Years, Adam Ingram, made it clear that children who are subject to section 11 orders are not excluded from support from local authorities, as Elaine Murray had alleged in her usual scaremongering style. Local authorities have discretion to provide payments to children in families in need. Dumfries and Galloway Council, which Elaine Murray asked about in another parliamentary question, has had to take steps to reassure kinship carers since then—it is shocking that it had to do so. At a coffee morning meeting at the Ruddicot Hotel on 3 June, a council officer assured carers that the discretionary payments would commence on 1  October. It is a scandal that kinship carers had to seek section 11 orders just to ensure security of income, but that is an issue that Labour ignored. The Labour motion alleges that the payments for kinship carers have not materialised. The minister made the money available in October. The money was welcomed by groups such as Children 1 st , which stated: "today's announcement is good news for foster and kinship carers in Scotland and good news for the thousands of vulnerable children currently being looked after away from home." Good work is being done by councils across the country in support of kinship carers. Labour members should have the decency to recognise that, especially as some of those councils are Labour controlled. There will be problems that need to be addressed, but those will not be addressed by turning the issue into a party-political football for the sake of scoring petty, party-political points. I trust in the good will and hard work of the Minister for Children and Early Years, and I support the amendment in his name.

One thing we can never accuse the Labour Party of is having a good sense of timing. Calling a debate on the ScotRail franchise for the day after the Scottish Government announced investment of £3 billion over 10 years in the maintenance and safe operation of Scotland's railways—yes, that was £3 billion—was a stroke of genius, and I congratulate Des McNulty on it. Of course, there was also other investment in our railways: up to £2.5 billion for the electrification  of our rail network, and about time as well; millions on reducing journey times and on park-and-ride schemes and integrated ticketing; and up to £250 million on rail enhancements. That was excellent news for rail users, from a Government that cares about making Scotland better. The other excellent news for rail users is that the extension of the franchise gives everyone a chance to have a proper look at what is going on in Scotland's railways today—and it will allow some organisations the time that they need to prepare a bid to run Scotland's railways.

Yes, the member obviously has a point. However, the contract was set in place in 2002—by Iain Gray. As I was saying, I understand that one of those bids is now likely to come from the railway unions—and I take it that Des McNulty and his Labour colleagues will be keen to welcome that interest from the unions and will welcome the contract extension that gives them the time to prepare a bid. Or perhaps not—because Labour members do not appear to remember much. In a Labour Party news release from 28 November, Des McNulty is quoted as claiming that the SNP negotiated a deal in private to extend the ScotRail franchise. The truth is, of course, that it was the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration that negotiated the contract. In fact, I am sure that Labour members will be delighted to be reminded that the transport minister who negotiated that contract with the extension option was a fellow by the name of Iain Gray. I wonder what he is up to these days—he is not reading Labour motions, that is for sure. I am glad that the motion "notes the Audit Scotland report". On page 17, that report states: "Transport Scotland reviewed the contract using a rigorous appraisal process". Well said, Audit Scotland. The report also noted the £73 million investment that will come from First ScotRail as a result of the franchise extension. I am sure that even the Labour Party will welcome some of the fruits of that investment—it is certainly a better dividend than the one that we get from the  union. There will be additional rolling stock to help improve services, even if they carry the saltire livery that Lord Foulkes insists is nationalism by stealth. There will be extra services down the west coast to Ayrshire; extra services between Glasgow and Edinburgh; extra services up the east coast; some long-awaited improvements in the Highlands; wireless internet access on trains between Glasgow and Edinburgh, which I am sure will help some MSPs when they are working while they are on the train; extra customer service staff; improvements in stations across the country; a profit cap mechanism to pump more money into improvements in our railway; and fare protection, which was completely missed from the original contract, which I believe is a travesty. The Scottish Government is delivering so well that George Foulkes will soon be accusing us of making things better on purpose. I am delighted to be able to contrast the record of improving our railways with the atrocious record of the Labour Party. As one Labour councillor was heard to remark: "God bless the SNP government." While Gordon Brown thinks that he is saving the world, the SNP will just carry on making Scotland better.

Will the minister join me in congratulating those who run Scotland's museums and buildings of historic importance—including Bothwell castle in my area—on marking St Andrew's day by offering free admission? Does she agree that St Andrew's day is an appropriate time to celebrate Scotland's heritage and culture and will she encourage people to take up that free admission offer?

When we offer a decent future to children, we offer a secure future for our nation. I am pleased that yesterday we took a small step towards achieving the ambition—as expressed in the instrument that was debated—of ending discrimination against, and stigmatisation of, some children, through the decision to pass the statutory instrument enabling the provision of free school meals to every child in primaries 1, 2 and 3. I presume that those who opposed that measure will take time to consider the evidence of the benefits of it over the next few years and will ensure that the additional benefits to society of the provision of that nutrition are examined properly. As always, however, we must move on to another challenge. The inadequacies of provision for looked-after children are well documented, but that does not reflect the dedication and professionalism of the people who are involved in the provision of that care. Their efforts should be acknowledged by everyone, as they have been in the chamber. I assume that every member of Parliament will agree that their work should be applauded. Neither is it the case that we have had politicians ruling our country who would wish harm, neglect or failure to thrive on any child.  Much as the SNP Government is clearly superior, I cannot believe that any Scottish politician would want anything less than the best outcomes for all children in Scotland. The devil, therefore, is in the delivery. I will focus on a couple of areas rather than try to cover the whole spectrum. I was pleased to learn recently that the Equality and Human Rights Commission's legal committee has agreed to inquire into the rights of looked-after children in accessing additional support for learning in Scotland. The additional support needs tribunal can hear appeals against local authority decisions about ASL provision, but children cannot bring appeals to the tribunal—only parents can do that, or those who have left childhood. On the other hand, sheriff courts can hear claims of disability discrimination in schools and children can bring claims in their own names. That seems to be an issue that we should address, especially for looked-after children. No matter how dedicated the staff are, it is a lot harder for a person who is not the parent—natural parent, foster parent or adoptive parent—to ensure that they do not miss important points. The right of the child to speak for herself must also be clear. Unfortunately, that is not the only issue that we will have to address. In 2005, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education identified problems for looked-after children in respect of implementation of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004. In particular, the report identified concerns about access to service provision and advocacy services for looked-after children and young people. It also identified other problems in respect of communication with them. I was, therefore, heartened by the commitment that was made in the chamber a few weeks ago to consider ways in which to incorporate into Scots law the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. That has been welcomed by everyone in the chamber and by all the children's organisations that have contacted me in the past few weeks. The report recommended action by Government and children's services—we have a duty to ensure that we can deliver on that now. I am aware that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, in her Opposition days, raised concerns about some of the measures in the 2004 act when it was going through Parliament. I am therefore confident that she will be determined to improve the legislation. I am also aware, however, that the bill progressed through Parliament on a consensual cross-party basis, and that no party can claim the moral high ground above any other. The whole Parliament—all the parties, some of which are no longer in Parliament—can take the credit for the legislation.  I look forward to the same consensual way of working throughout the passage of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill. I understand that organisations that will respond to the stage 1 consultation will raise concerns about the additional support needs of looked-after children. I look forward to that engagement and to a multilateral attempt to address those concerns. I note that little—if any—research has been conducted into ASL needs and looked-after children. I hope that the ministers will take that into account in planning the next round of Government research and will seek to provide us with appropriate research findings in due course.

The Liberal Democrat/SNP-run City of Edinburgh Council will obviously look at that. I hope that the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill will address such issues, as well. However, I remind Rhona Brankin that Glasgow faces the same issues, and Glasgow City Council is not a Liberal Democrat/SNP-run council.

Let us get serious. I will move on. There are specific concerns that I hope that we can examine. Most important, perhaps, is the fact that children who are looked after by their local authority are in the strange situation of their parent also being the body that makes decisions about their additional support for learning needs—surely, a conflict of interests. We could address that, too. There are also concerns—which I understand will be raised in evidence—about access to education for looked-after children, and about protection of the human rights of those children. We will address those issues during our scrutiny of the bill. I trust that the cabinet secretary and her ministers will provide us with their views throughout. One of the key issues regarding looked-after children is their low level of educational attainment. The standard among them is considerably worse than among other children. Members from throughout the chamber will speak about that this morning, as some already have. This nation is proud of its ability to rebuild and refashion itself, and we have come a long way in the past few years. I trust that we will continue to  make good progress when opportunities to do so present themselves in the future. I support the motion.

To ask the Scottish Government what support it is giving to architecture and design services. (S3O-4828)

Will the minister expand on what she is doing to encourage education and outreach through the support that she is providing to architecture and design services?

Presiding Officer, I would not presume to lecture you or the Parliament on the importance of the basic rights of the child. I am well aware of the long legacy of many members in campaigning for basic human rights and in standing up for those who are less able to speak out. Those efforts, which have been allied to the efforts of other people in Scotland, reflect well on our nation. I admit that I was pleased but surprised when the UK Government announced its intention to sign up to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child—albeit 17 years after ratification. For 17 years, the UK retained an opt-out on the convention, allowing child migrants and asylum seekers to be locked up without judicial scrutiny. I could not put it better than Shami Chakrabarti, who said: "We weep hot tears for kids suffering all over the world but if they have the audacity to seek asylum here they can look forward to degradation and detention." I rejoiced when I heard that the UK Government was to sign up to the convention, and I am sure that many people here did, too. I thought that we were seeing justice at last, and I thought that the UK governmental machine was at last approaching decency. I thought that the rights of the child were finally being brought home. The Government in London has indeed signed up to the convention, but there has been no indication that it has any intention of incorporating the convention into law. Much as I would love to stand here today and admit that the campaign has been successful, I cannot. With regret, I inform members that we still have a job to do. If we feel the need, we can point to schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 and note that Westminster obliges us to observe and implement international obligations, even when Westminster ignores them.  I think that we are better than that, that this Parliament is better than that, that Scotland is better than that and that the Scottish branches of the UK parties are better than that. I am extremely proud to be a back-bench member of the Scottish National Party Government, which has put children at the heart of its plans for Scotland's future. However, let us not take my word for it, let us consider the words of Barnardo's Scotland, in its briefing for today's debate: "Barnardo's Scotland recognises that there have been several positive developments in Scotland in the field of children's rights. These include: Scottish Government has taken a positive stance in the treatment of children of Asylum seekers through access to nursery and tertiary education Scottish Government has established a Children's Rights Unit within the Education and Lifelong Learning Directorate. This was positively commented in the Concluding Observations The Scottish Government Children's Rights Unit has established a Partnership Group consisting of a range of groups relevant to the children's rights field The Cross Party Group on Children and the Cross Party Group on Human Rights", which is convened by my colleague Jamie Hepburn, "will jointly host an evening reception in the Scottish Parliament to celebrate the International Day of Children's Rights on 20 th November." That can be added to the Scottish Government's framework for tackling poverty, inequality and deprivation, its early years strategy, the extension of eligibility to free school meals, the commitment to free school meals for all pupils in primaries 1 to 3, reduced class sizes, the curriculum for excellence and, most important, the continued pressure on the UK Government to end the detention of children in Dungavel. Those commitments, along with others that Fiona Hyslop detailed, are welcome. I wish to add a new burden to the Scottish ministers' load, but it is a burden that I know our cabinet secretaries and ministers will be pleased to take on. I want the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child to be incorporated into Scots domestic law. I would be delighted if the UK Government and the London Parliament were making that happen in other areas, too, but I want our Government and our Parliament to deliver that for children in Scotland. We could introduce a children's rights bill or incorporate provisions into other legislation, perhaps by amending the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 or using some other method—the means is not important.  The Scottish Government has not sought to make landmark legislation to prove a point; it has legislated in the interests of the country and has done so only when necessary. What is important for us is the result of our legislation. What comes out at the end is far more important than the poses that we strike while legislating. Ensuring that the law is right for the country and that it is functional is more important than making headlines along the way. This Parliament has the opportunity once again to be at the forefront of improvements in rights and provision. I hope that we can take it.

I can tell the Presiding Officer and members that I saw "Stone of Destiny" on the weekend that it opened, and my family and I loved it—[ Interruption. ] Surprisingly, yes. Does the minister think that new possibilities have opened up for Scottish Screen?

I am sure that every member welcomes the minister's commitment to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Will he seek to write the convention into domestic legislation at the earliest opportunity?

When Blair Jenkins gave evidence to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, he made it clear that there was a pressing need for the provision of news broadcasting in Scotland to be reviewed, with a view to ensuring that quality broadcast news reflects Scotland as she stands now and views the world through Scottish eyes. Does the First Minister agree with Blair Jenkins that parallel programming is a step in the right direction—albeit just a small step—for news broadcasting? Can he tell us how the Scottish Government intends to help Scotland's broadcasters to continue to improve news broadcasting in Scotland?

I am sure the minister will join me in welcoming the United Kingdom Government's commitment to sign up to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child after 17 years of opting out. How are refugees and asylum seekers being seen in the one Scotland, many cultures campaign?

In today's economic environment, does the First Minister agree that Scotland's universities will be essential in delivering technological and academic advances that will result in renewed economic growth in Scotland?

As the cabinet secretary said, Labour-led East Renfrewshire Council offered to pilot the use of SFT funding for capital projects. Has the cabinet secretary had any discussions with other local authorities about piloting such projects?

To ask the Scottish Government what support it is giving to sport in Lanarkshire. (S3O-4025)

Will the minister join with me in congratulating New Lanarkshire Ltd, North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council on securing the international children's  games in 2011? Can he assure me that the Scottish Government will support the games?

I am pleased to take part in today's debate as an SNP back bencher. Like others, I congratulate members of the previous Administration—Labour and Lib Dem alike—on introducing the getting it right initiative. Working across agencies and sewing them together to ensure that they address the needs of children was a move for which we waited too long. I am pleased that the initiative came to fruition and that the current Government has signalled its intent to keep up the momentum. Previous and current ministers should be lauded for their actions. Of course, the cross-cutting work that the initiative encourages has its mirror—and, in part, its operational effectiveness—in the concordat between the Scottish Government and Scotland's  local authorities. Therefore, we should also ensure that the councils get the credit that they deserve for helping to deliver the vision of a safe and supportive childhood for all. All young people should have access to the tools that they need to lead a successful and fulfilling life. I believe that the strategy helps towards that. Children's services have been taken down a new track with the pathfinder projects, which we are likely to hear more about over the next wee while. The Highland model, which involves the reshaping of service provision across the spectrum, is likely to refresh thinking on service provision across the country. However, it is to be hoped that service provision, reaching from new born through to school transition, does not create a bureaucratic box-ticking culture. I hope that the minister will ensure that the national guidance takes that into account. Interestingly, the database that could be built from that operation could offer social researchers an invaluable asset if the data can be suitably anonymised and protected. I urge ministers to consider whether that might be possible, especially given that some of the lessons that could be learned could be used to improve the life chances and educational possibilities of future generations. As well as the pathfinder in Highland, four other pathfinders were set up to address the needs of children who are caught in domestic abuse situations. One pathfinder was in Falkirk, where the council has worked in partnership with Central Scotland Police, NHS Forth Valley, the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration and Falkirk and District Women's Aid to find the right path and the correct tools for intervention to enable the child who has lived with domestic abuse to set out on the road to recovery. Having fully engaged with the ethos and forward-planning aspects of getting it right, Falkirk Council will help to set out the future plans and guidance for rolling out the scheme across the country. I do not mean to miss out the other councils that are also delivering on the new agenda, but I know a little bit about how Falkirk Council is going about things. With Central Scotland Police in the lead and council efforts coming from a range of departments, including education services and housing and social work services, the pathfinder project in Falkirk is ensuring that the principles that underpin getting it right are being enhanced. Under a programme that started at the end of 2006, Falkirk Council is integrating the new ways with enhanced services, including a new integrated children's services plan, an assessment framework for children and young people, and the development of a locality model for the delivery of children's services. Such progress, along with the  advances that are being made by other councils, will feed into progress in helping children who have suffered as a result of being exposed to domestic abuse. While the other four pathfinder projects improve how we deal with the domestic abuse aspect, the Highland model should improve all-round care. We should remember that getting it right for every child is about ensuring that we do what it says on the tin and cater for every child. That is why yesterday's announcement on corporate parenting guidance was so welcome—although such guidance on its own is not enough—as was the Minister for Public Health's announcement of record levels of funding to help to give children the best start in life by encouraging them to start eating healthily at an early age. The announcement in yesterday's legislative programme that the children's hearings system is to be reviewed and updated as appropriate will also be welcomed, not least by some of my former colleagues. Over the years since Kilbrandon's first report, much has changed. Our system of justice and protection for young people has been lauded and copied, but we must ensure that it is as good as it can be. The price of that is not quite eternal vigilance but regular review. The review will be a start, but getting it right means that we must keep going, keep learning and keep developing the ground around the subject. No child is an island, but all children are individuals. That was recognised by the previous Administration and has been built on and encouraged by the current Administration. We must keep moving forward. I am pleased to be able to support the motion in the name of Fiona Hyslop.

The convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee has talked in detail about the committee's report to the Parliament. I associate myself with his remarks and will make some comments in support of the committee's deliberations. We have an absolute responsibility, enshrined in the law, to register our interests. We cannot deviate from that responsibility. It ill becomes any member to seek to avoid that responsibility or to seek to lay it at the feet of others, especially if those others are committee clerks or MSPs' staff, who do not have the opportunity to defend themselves in public. In the past, members have found themselves in breach of the rules as a result of their own actions or through no intended fault of their own. The delineation between those members—of all parties—has been between those who have had the good grace to accept responsibility for their breach, apologise to the Parliament and accept any sanction that has been imposed, whether the breach happened as a result of their actions or the actions of others, and those who have not had the good grace to do so. In the case that lies before the Parliament, which weighed heavily on the committee before the recess, there can be little doubt that the member at the heart of the report has still not accepted responsibility for her actions or those that were taken in her name, and that she still seeks to avoid any sanction. I would be pleased to be proven wrong if the member tells members that she is willing to accept responsibility for, and any consequences of, the events that have been reported. In considering the commissioner's report, I found enlightening the clerk's note at appendix 6, about a chat with the member. In my dealings with the clerks about the registration of my interests, there has always been a rider at the bottom of communications from them to the effect that their  advice is their best interpretation of the rules but that it is the member's responsibility to ensure that they comply with the law and any other rules. In that context, the clerk's advice to the member that "any donation could be considered as a gift and therefore it would be required to be registered if it exceeded £520 and met the prejudice test" was clear, but the responsibility still lay with the member and not the clerk. The standards commissioner's report makes it abundantly clear that the rules had been breached on several occasions before the member approached the clerks for advice. I refer to the note to paragraph 16 of the commissioner's summary of his interview with the member. That note also indicates that the dates that were submitted to the Electoral Commission as the dates on which donations were received were not the true dates on which the donations were received, which indicates at the very least a laxity in record keeping. The findings of fact in the commissioner's report are not in dispute. In the member's letter of 13 June 2008 to the committee clerk, she accepted the factual findings, with the exception of a slight quibble over the observation that a fair-minded person would consider that the gifts may influence her actions. For the record, I agree with Wendy Alexander that that is a judgment rather than a statement of fact, but I agree with the commissioner's judgment that the prejudice test was met. The recommended sanction of a one-day suspension can in no way be said to be onerous. Considering the importance of the probity of members of the Parliament and therefore of the Parliament itself, I have no hesitation in recommending that Parliament endorse the committee's findings and recommendations.

Is not the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 legislation that was introduced by the previous, bipartisan Administration? Is the Lord Advocate concerned that she should not be persuaded by those with a vested interest?

Presiding Officer, it may be a week or two since you or even I could be described as a youth, even charitably. However, as we both remember fondly St Martin's summer, halcyon days, children's laughter and the gentle strains of the Sex Pistols wafting across the grass, we come to this debate with the benefit of experience—perhaps not the most recent experience, but experience nonetheless. I am sure that every member in the chamber can trade tales of people whom they have known or come across whose youth was wasted by a lack of engagement with society. It can be argued that society failed those youths. Our deliberations on youth justice must be underpinned by a determination to prevent any further waste of that asset. The obligation that we carry is no easy burden—if there were a simple solution, it would have been used by now. Much as I have had occasion in the past to disagree with my good friends in the Labour Party, I refuse to believe that any Labour member has ever wished ill on the youth of Scotland or anywhere else. Where our attitudes and opinions may diverge is on the most effective remedies for addressing the problems faced by youngsters across the land and the problems that are caused by a minority of those youngsters. I have long had concerns, which I am sure are shared, about the march of the ASBO. A temptation to label, pigeonhole and dispatch problems is common to all politicians, including me, but we should not fall for that temptation easily. I have to admit to a certain reluctance to hug a hoodie. The ASBO has its place, but that place is not at the forefront of the challenge of youth. The justice system and its outriders cannot be a panacea for the problems that society faces and should not be the first tool for which we reach every time; acceptance by and the encouragement of society can be far more effective.

It is the media attitude towards ASBOs. Cathie Craigie and I will probably disagree on this, but ASBOs are not an effective measure for dealing with youth crime. Young people who are integrated into society instead of alienated from it must be a measure of  our success. I am pleased to see the Government taking us down a route that is more likely to lead to engagement than to disengagement. Tackling the drinking culture is essential; it is important to change the idea that drinking as much as you can is the ideal way to spend an evening. Alcohol has a place in our society and in oiling the social wheels, but it should not be the prime driver of socialising. Raising the qualifying age for off-sales purchases is a step in the right direction. It is important to send the message that alcohol consumption involves responsibility, as well as enjoyment, and implementing a unit price will carry that message further; cheap drink is not cheap for society. The oversupply of alcohol has enormous costs in lost productivity, health spending and social breakdown. We should not allow those costs to be underestimated by the people who will pay the price. Test purchasing, a scheme to ensure the enforcement of age restraints, is one plank in the policy raft. Ensuring that the law is enforced as well as strengthened is vital to its success. Likewise, tackling the flow of drugs in our communities is essential. Drug misuse is not the preserve of the poor in our communities, as is so often suggested, but a blight that touches us all. Cutting the demand for drugs as well as tackling the supply—addressing both ends of the chain—requires concerted action across agencies. Educating children about drugs—what is what and what is not, and the ups and downs of drugs—is essential to enable them to make the appropriate choice when the opportunity presents itself. I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Justice on his initiative to take assets away from criminals and recycle them into the communities that have been damaged by those criminals. As members said, the cashback for communities scheme, funded from the proceeds of crime, is delivering societal benefits to some of our poorest communities. That is a step towards alleviating deprivation and the cabinet secretary should be congratulated on that. Encouraging the youth of our nation to engage properly in constructive activities is the way forward. Youth crime is not a universal stain on our young people and youth justice should not be seen as a rod with which to keep all our youth in line. We should aim at rewarding good behaviour, alleviating deprivation, providing routes out of poverty for our youth and allowing hope. We should encourage our youth to lift their vision so that they see the possibilities and reach out to the far horizon, and we should praise the efforts that they make to get there. Speaking with all the experience of my very recent youthful activities, I am encouraged by the direction in which this Government is travelling  and confident that it will pay dividends. We all have a journey to make, and it will be easier if we help each other along the path.

The chamber has been privileged to bear witness to the hungry caterpillar speech. Here, too, the major Opposition party failed to vote for a budget that had been amended as it wanted. Stunning events. Thankfully, they were overshadowed by the implementation of a historic concordat—I repeat, a historic concordat—which is an agreement between the national Government of  Scotland and Scotland's local government to work together. Some of us—I am one—find it incredible that we have had to wait so long for central Government to sit down with local authorities and work out a strategy to improve the governance of Scotland. No wonder that Labour councils are saying, "Thank God for the SNP Government." At the beginning of last month, Wendy Alexander and her staff were running around Renfrewshire, trying to stir up a story about exam choices that proved to be untrue. Scaremongering is bad enough in any circumstance, but when school pupils and their futures are at stake, it is nothing short of a disgrace. At the end of the same month, Wendy Alexander's staff were again peddling lies, putting words into the innocent mouth of COSLA and alleging a shortfall of £400 million—

Let me revisit that. I said that Wendy Alexander's staff, not members in the chamber, were peddling lies.

Okay. Wendy Alexander's staff were peddling untruths. They alleged a shortfall of £400 million and that councils were clamouring for a return to ring fencing.

I apologise to the chamber, Presiding Officer. COSLA, of course, knew nothing about that fabrication and dismissed the allegation. It was revealed later that the figures that had been used were nothing more nor less than an invention on the part of Labour staffers. It has been reported that none other than the chief Labour number cruncher, Arthur Midwinter, came up with them. Fakery, indecision and falsehood—Labour's lines on education funding are about as certain as Labour's referendum policy. Labour's credibility on Scottish education is about as solid as Alistair Darling's credibility on income tax, Harriet Harman's credibility on leadership donations and—after last night—Gordon Brown's credibility. Believing Labour's figures on education would be like believing that it did not do too badly in Crewe and Nantwich. Not only do we have the unedifying sight of Labour members lumbering into this chamber to  churn out inaccuracies, supposition and invention in support of the decidedly dodgy dossier on education, they add to that disgraceful performance by refusing to apologise for the smears when they are challenged. Labour's numbers on education simply do not add up. They have never stacked up, and they never will stack up, as long as its attention is focused on pouring vitriol on the SNP Government rather than on contributing positively to the debate. If last month's nonsense was an indication of the state of Labour's research, it is no wonder that the country was in such a mess when the SNP Government took over last year. It is a long, hard road to restore Scottish education, but the Scottish Government has started out on it. The concordat—yes, the historic one—between the SNP Government and Scotland's councils has freed up local authority funds for education, and councils the length and breadth of this country are taking advantage of that to improve education services. It is a pity that Labour members do not put as much trust in their councillors as the SNP Government does. Perhaps they should pay attention to the joint statement that was signed yesterday by the First Minister, on behalf of the Scottish Government, and Councillor Pat Watters, the president of COSLA, which said: "These changes give power back to local people, better able to judge for themselves, on a consistent basis right across Scotland, the quality and value of their local services." Government in Scotland is no longer focused on the whinges of the past, but focused on how we can build a better future. Perhaps Labour members will want to learn that lesson while they still have a chance to recover some semblance of relevance as a party.

To ask the Scottish Government when the audit of the Scots language will be complete. (S3O-3605)

As the minister is aware, the committee of experts of the European charter for regional or minority languages made it clear in March last year that the lack of any audit of the Scots language and speakers was a major concern and that it has inhibited the development of a comprehensive language policy. Does the minister agree with the committee's finding that the downgrading of Scots by the previous Administration has inhibited the growth and use of the language? Will the audit that she has ordered establish a baseline for the foundations that are needed to build a proper respect for the Scots language throughout Scotland?

As the cabinet secretary knows, the pilot scheme for rapid response vehicles that took place in Lanarkshire, which is in my region, is being evaluated externally. Does she agree that certain incidents that the Ambulance Service faces are best dealt with on a see-and-treat basis, and therefore RRVs can play a crucial role in providing an effective ambulance service in Scotland? Can she assure us that the proper regulations will be put in place to ensure that RRVs are used where appropriate and that traditional two-person vehicles are used where appropriate?

To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had on the future of the Ravenscraig development. (S3O-3295)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Ravenscraig programme is essential for the regeneration of a large part of  central Scotland, in that it offers the opportunity to bring a new vitality to the area, just as this Government is doing throughout Scotland? Can he guarantee that delivery of the project will remain one of the Government's top-level commitments?

So that we can get this absolutely right, will the minister tell Parliament the maximum number of central heating units that were installed in the last year of the previous Executive and the number that were installed in the first year of the SNP Government, which actually cares about people in Scotland?

I commend Elaine Smith for bringing the debate. I am sure that she agrees that Monday's event at Summerlee was very poignant. International workers memorial day, on which we commemorate everyone who has been killed  at or by their work, reminds us all of the dangers that many workers face at work. The SNP supported Karen Gillon's proposal for a member's bill on corporate killing in the previous session of the Parliament. I was not a member of the Scottish Parliament then, but I supported her move from outwith the institution, in my position in Unison. Like MSPs, I accepted the position of the Scottish ministers at the time, which was that such legislation was not within the scope of the Scottish Parliament. However, if that is the case we must surely consider where responsibility for business regulation and legislation lies.

I thank Karen Gillon for that clarification. I am sorry, but that was not how what happened was articulated out there, including by the unions. The corporate homicide legislation that was introduced in London is, quite simply, inadequate. It cannot be allowed to be the final word on the subject. We cannot allow the matter to rest there. We need to improve the legislation in this country and ensure that it is not struck down by the pen of a Scottish Secretary ruling that the Scottish Parliament has acted ultra vires. We should remember the dead, and fight for the living. The number of people who are killed at or by their work is perhaps even exceeded by the number who are injured at work or made sick by their employment. We will be looking not only to improve the inadequate corporate homicide legislation that Westminster passed but to improve workplace health and safety legislation. Scottish workers deserve to be protected at their workplace not only from the danger of death but from injury. Frankly, it is rather disappointing that some employers—I stress that they are in the minority—do not care enough for the safety of their workers. I want to see the legislation improved: both the legislation that covers death at work and that covering injury and danger of injury at work. Those who are responsible for the preventable deaths of workers or their injury should be prosecuted and punished. As previous Scottish ministers made clear, the power to address that legislation lies in London. London has shown that it is not addressing—or perhaps will not or cannot address—those legislative inadequacies. As the debate  demonstrates, there is a clear will in Scotland and in the Scottish Parliament properly to address those inadequacies. Therefore, it is logical that the power to make that legislation should be repatriated to Scotland. If we have the desire to make the workplace a safer place, and we can address the issue in Scotland, it makes sense for us to reform the legislation in Scotland. I will continue to support reform of the law on workplace safety. The issue is one on which we should continue to reflect, debate and bring forward legislative reform. I will continue to speak out for that reform and to campaign to bring the powers to make the necessary changes home to Scotland.

rose—

Today is a good day for this debate. In watching events down south, we see a Labour Government that has lost its way and is being punished at the ballot box. However, Jeremy Purvis will be delighted to know that I welcome some of the positive aspects of the UK budget: the increase in  the national minimum wage, the increase in the winter fuel allowance and the increase in tax credits, as well as the increase in social tariffs on energy bills. However, that is not nearly enough. Tax credits encourage employers to pay low wages, because they know that the Government will subsidise poverty wages and keep people in the benefits trap. Social tariffs are a weak agreement; they are not mandatory and the amounts that the energy companies are being asked to put in are tiny. It is good that the winter fuel allowance is going up, but its existence indicates that our pensioners are not getting a fair deal from the pensions that they paid for. The lack of a policy on full employment from the London Labour Government means that the minimum wage is not enough to lift people out of poverty. Perhaps that is why Gordon Brown did not vote for its introduction, why Malcolm Chisholm missed the debate in 1998, and why Alistair Darling, Donald Dewar and Douglas Alexander missed that important vote.

I could say much more about why the budget was disastrous for the poor, weak and vulnerable, but I am sure that my colleagues will describe the disastrous effects of the doubling of the tax on Scotland's least well-paid workers. Wendy Alexander calls it socialism. It is just as well that Scotland has an SNP Government saving hospitals, and getting rid of prescription charges, the council tax and the graduate endowment. That is neither light nor slight.

Saddest of all is the fact that, during the eight years between 1999 and 2007, that could all have been done by a socialist Labour Party, or by a Scottish Labour Party, or even by a Labour Party that believed in social justice and did not need to wait for London's permission. Wendy Alexander could have done some of it when she was a minister. Jackie Baillie and Margaret Curran could have done some of it, too. What about Andy Kerr? He was shutting down the hospitals. The SNP Government was elected on its promise to serve the people, and it is delivering on that promise day after day. The SNP Government is fulfilling its manifesto pledges and, quite simply, making Scotland better. London Labour's budget is dreadful. Having been designed by Gordon Brown and delivered by Alistair Darling—two of Labour's finest, who are letting Scotland down—it is damaging Scotland. If  I may quote a Labour councillor, "God bless the SNP".

To ask the Scottish Government what benefits it considers will accrue by paying for the new Southern general hospital by traditional procurement methods. (S3O-3088)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the traditional procurement method has its place along with the Scottish futures trust, prudential borrowing and the non-profit model in providing Scotland's public services?

Can the minister tell us whether the spending that was mentioned will allow efficiencies to be factored in? Will that cohesive spending deliver longer-term benefits?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to ensuring flexibility for pupils with high academic achievement. What measures will she take to ensure that there is similar flexibility for pupils who wish to pursue vocational qualifications?

Will the minister guarantee that the Audit Scotland report will trigger a wide consultation on the future of rail services in Scotland, which will seek opinions from everyone with a stake in our railways and will—in a bit of a different approach to what happened in 2002—lead to consensus on the way in which our railways will operate in the future?

To ask the Scottish Government what its current position is on the use of identity cards to access services for which it has responsibility. (S3O-2876)

I am sure that, like me, the cabinet secretary does not agree that ID cards would do anything to stop crime or terrorism but would in fact aid some crimes, such as identity theft, especially if the database could be accessed remotely. Can he assure us that the Government will do all that it can to protect the Scottish public from the worst effects of ID cards if the Westminster Government is daft enough to try to impose them on us all?

Is the First Minister confident that the new focus of Scotland week will deliver greater benefits to Scotland's businesses than the approach that was followed previously?

Scotland has a long and proud history in education. Its Education Act 1696 heralded the first national system of education in the world and is a fine example of what an independent nation can do and of how an independent Scotland can lead the world in education. However, we must be honest and admit that our education system has suffered a bit over the years. Sometimes it has raced ahead, whereas at other times it has been dragged back. Since May 2007, it has, of course, raced ahead, gathering an incredible spirit of adventure. Wendy Alexander might believe that she has done well in her first year in opposition, but it is certain that the SNP Government has done well in power. There has been some good movement in Scottish education this past year. After all, we recently repealed the graduate endowment learning tax, thereby opening up opportunities for pupils who are finishing their schooling. I know that the Government has been working to deliver on its election promises in education, and I am sure that the whole Parliament will welcome the excellent advances that Scotland's Government has made. Last year's change of Government and the spirit of optimism that has reinvigorated Scotland have offered us an opportunity. We have an opportunity to refresh and renew Scottish education, and to examine the basics of education to ensure that they are the appropriate elemental building blocks that will serve well both individual students and society as a whole. The building blocks that are enshrined in the curriculum for excellence must create solid foundations in the pre-school years, followed by the layering of primary school, the reaching of secondary education, the dreaming spires of tertiary education and—dare I say it—the penthouse suite of learning for the sake of learning all the way through life. That is the task that this Parliament faces—we have four years to create the best education system in the world. I know that George Foulkes will say that we are doing this deliberately and that making Scotland a better place is a dastardly, underhand nationalist trick. I will let members into a secret: we are doing it deliberately. We are building a better country, so we will build a better education system to make that country a better-educated country.  Members might have noticed that a consultation on an early years strategy was launched yesterday. I had feared that the First Minister might head for a shot on the swings, but he successfully kept his swings for the opinion polls, as the weekend papers showed. The early years strategy has been a long time coming. Shockingly, Michael Forsyth was the most recent minister to deliver an early years strategy, even though Labour ministers kept promising one for 10 years. That was typical of Labour leaders, who are all talk and no action.

That is another example of talk without action and scaremongering. Labour members need to open their ears and listen. The early years strategy will help us to develop the framework that will give young children the skills that they will need to learn and grow. I am talking about proper skills that are needed and valued in Scotland's economy. I am bemused by those who say that we must force Scotland's businesses to take on apprentices. We do not live in a command economy. If a business does not have a place for an apprentice, it does not have a place, and no apprenticeships bill will ever change that. We will serve Scotland's people better if we tailor the education system to their needs and to the needs of Scotland. Every school in the country should be a school of ambition and every pupil in the country should have the opportunity to progress. The curriculum for excellence will allow that to happen. Every school should deliver an excellent curriculum and every teacher deserves the support of the curriculum for excellence. That is why—unsurprisingly—I support the actions of this Government. The future of Scottish education lies in delivering on SNP promises. We will take the padding out of the system and give teachers, pupils and parents the room to improve the educational experience. We will simplify and streamline the qualifications system, introduce the international baccalaureate, bring about parity of esteem between academic and vocational subjects and remove ring fencing, so that councils no longer need to tick boxes but can do what is needed. We need to give Scotland's teachers the time and space to teach and Scotland's pupils the time and space to learn. We will set an agenda that politicians cannot control. That is right for Scotland. We will bring  Scottish history and culture into the mix. It is ridiculous that we are the only country in Europe that does not teach its own history. We should let our young people have the confidence that comes from knowing that they are as good as everybody else. The curriculum for excellence needs a Government that believes in excellence; one that believes in the ability of teachers to deliver education and that of pupils to soak it up. Thank goodness we have such a Government now. We have a Government that is listening, moving ahead and acting in Scotland's best interests. When we come to 2011 and look back on a successful referendum—aye, it's coming yet—we will see the abolition of prescriptions, the abolition of the graduate endowment, the saving of hospitals, the abolition of council tax, and so on. I want to see an excellent education system among those achievements and I believe that we will.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address the historically low detection and conviction rate for rape and sexual assault. (S3O-2591)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of comments made by solicitor Iain Smith, who serves as a temporary sheriff and who described the 15-year-old victim of a rape as being "not very vulnerable". The cabinet secretary will also be aware of recent comments by Donald Findlay QC on a related subject. Can the cabinet secretary assure us that the Government does not agree with the stance taken by those lawyers? Will he act speedily to introduce legislation after the consultation on the Law Commission's report closes tomorrow? Rape is the only crime in which the character of the victim is used in defence of the actions of the accused. Will the cabinet secretary assure us that he will act to bring that strange anomaly to an end, and will he assure us that the Government agrees with Roseanna Cunningham's motion that clothing is not an invitation to rape?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

I am sure that Jeremy Purvis, Mike Rumbles and my other Liberal Democrat colleagues are delighted that, today, at last, the removal of tuition  fees for Scottish students is truly non-negotiable. I am also sure that the Conservatives will welcome the opportunity to remove an education tax from the shoulders of Scotland's students. There are long-running debates about funding of students through higher education, but we can be fairly certain that student poverty and graduate debt have a negative effect on our country. Gurjit Singh, who is president of the University of Strathclyde Students Association, laid out the case by saying: "Students are facing spiralling levels of debt and immense hardship, and the graduate endowment only adds to this burden." I am delighted that David Whitton confirmed that in his speech. Gurjit Singh's view is representative of the opinion of students the length and breadth of the country who support the bill and who asked us to end the graduate endowment. He also said: "Today's vote will be an important milestone in making sure Scotland has an education system that is accessible to all." That is what we are looking for. The principle that underpins the SNP's policy on education is that access to education should—it has been said already today, but I say it again—be based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay. Education should be free at the point of delivery. We all pay for education in our contributions through the tax system, but we have to consider reducing the massive burden of debt that our graduates carry. At present, they leave university with debts that hamper their life chances and make it more difficult to start a family, buy a house and get on with their careers. As Keith Brown said, 20 per cent of their debt is due to the graduate endowment. Removing the graduate endowment tuition fee will not, in itself, address all the issues around student poverty and graduate debt, but it is the first step. As Fiona Hyslop said, it is "a down payment" on the duty that we all have to improve the education system in Scotland and open up life chances for all.

I am not disappointed at all today—I am delighted to be standing here. I believe that Rhona Brankin is trying to engage me in a battle of wits, but I will not go into combat with someone who is unarmed. I remember the days during the Thatcher years when Labour campaigned for grants instead of loans. Labour has lost its principles. The NUS's support for the SNP's policy might  have been predicted, but the support of lecturers, through the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, is pleasing. The ATL noted that the SNP has moved swiftly to deliver on its manifesto promise to reduce student debt—another promise delivered. Edinburgh College of Art pointed out that the abolition of the graduate endowment will make it easier to attract students from less affluent backgrounds and will therefore help to level the playing field. I am sure that that widening of access is an important touchstone for us all. Opening up education opportunities for all is an important contribution to Scotland's future. A well-educated and highly skilled workforce will be Scotland's best economic weapon in the future and, indeed, is needed now. The more members of our population we can get through the system, the better served our country will be.

I think that Margo MacDonald knows the answer to that question. The matter is already being examined. The Coalition of Higher Education Students in Scotland is also clear about the effect of the removal of this barrier. CHESS says that "for a working class family it"— "it" is attending University— "becomes a question of economics; 'can I afford it? Do I want to spend the rest of my working life trying to clear debts incurred because I chose to study?'" In other words, the choice for potential students from poorer backgrounds is stark, and the fear of debt can be enough to persuade them that further study is not an appropriate route. We have seen unprecedented levels of support for the bill—the students demonstrated that today—and we cannot but be persuaded that it is in the best interests of the people of Scotland that we return to fees-free education. The universities are behind the bill, too. Napier University went as far as to point out that the abolition of the graduate endowment would aid the welfare of students. The Association of Scottish Colleges welcomed the bill, as did the Educational Institute of Scotland, which argued a case with which I agree. The bill is the first step. I am confident that the Scottish Government intends to deliver more in due course and that it has every intention of moving towards a system that allows participation in further and higher education for everyone who  wants it and can benefit from that learning. The SNP believes in providing education opportunities from the cradle to the grave and in ensuring that those opportunities are open to all. The benefits of education for individuals and for our society far outweigh the cost of education. We are constantly reminded about the economic benefits of education—the increased earning potential that it provides for individuals and for our nation, which brings greater taxation returns that pay for the education. We should also bear in mind the improved self-esteem of a successful learner, the improvement in public awareness and the greater engagement in public life that come with learning. We should be doing everything in our power to increase and widen access to education, to improve the educational experience and to bring the benefits of education to us all. The graduate endowment tuition fee has failed completely to serve Scotland's students and potential students. It is time for it to go.

I am grateful to have the opportunity to contribute to today's debate. My professional background is in social work. Although it has been some time since I was involved in an active case, I retain a strong interest in the area. I have taken some time to consider the report that is mentioned in the motion and what the SNP Government has done so far. It is only fair that I make clear that the issues of DNA retention and fingerprinting that are referred to in the motion were not addressed in the Justice 2 Sub-Committee's report. The report made some  reference to police officers' powers to require DNA samples and to the improved requirement for convicted persons to provide a DNA sample. I am sure that no member opposes the proper and appropriate use of those powers. However, we must be clear about the fact that the report contained no recommendations on the retention of DNA samples and no reference at all to fingerprinting. Nor should it have—such considerations were not within the sub-committee's remit. I understand that Paul Martin has worked hard with the family of Mark Cummings and that he wants to see a result for his constituent. His concerns have been demonstrated clearly on a number of occasions, and I hope that he will take my comments constructively. In an emotive debate such as the wider one of which this parliamentary debate is part, it is important that the subject matter is observed carefully and that at least some attempt is made to engage with it dispassionately, although I understand that that is difficult. On 7 June last year, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice indicated that he intended to build on the good work and recommendations of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee. As he pointed out at the time—he has done so again this morning—the problem lies with a small group of offenders. It is those offenders who should be targeted to improve the safety of children in Scotland. I cannot agree that the maintenance of a database that includes many who are innocent would offer any protection to Scottish children. Four out of every five cases of sexual abuse of children that come to light occur within the family unit, with abuse perpetrated by either family members or family friends. Finding the appropriate means of protecting those children is rather more complicated than maintaining a database. The issue is more likely to fall on the shoulders of social work than on those of the police. Such protection cases slot into the child protection system and should focus on what is best for the children concerned. It is important that the focus should be on child protection. For all Scotland's children, it is important that we seek to ensure that, so far as is possible, predatory individuals cannot prey upon them. However, as the cabinet secretary said and as Cathy Jamieson rightly pointed out when she was Minister for Justice, there is a balance to be struck. We must ensure child protection, but also maintain its reasonableness in the eyes of the people of Scotland. In addition, we must take into consideration the fact that events elsewhere may overtake our debate. Yesterday, the civil liberties point that is at stake in this debate was tested in the European Court of Human Rights. Two gentlemen from  Sheffield challenged the right of the state to hold their fingerprints and DNA after they had been acquitted, in one case, and their case discontinued, in the other. They contend that, as people without convictions who are no longer suspected criminals, they should be treated in exactly the same way as the rest of the population. The judgment in the case of S and Michael Marper v the United Kingdom may make this a moot debate.

I am about to finish. I urge Paul Martin and the rest of the Labour Party to come back on board the cross-party consensus on sex crimes and to work with the Government to deliver a safer Scotland. I appreciate that much has been done since 1999. Much remains to be done, but Scotland will be better served if we take forward the issue on a consensual and cross-party basis. I would like to think that we can find an appropriate and effective way of ensuring the protection of Scotland's children, without losing the support of the people of this country.

I welcome the minister's announcement about the acceleration of registration for child care staff. My previous employers and colleagues will be delighted at such a commitment from the minister. Can he tell us about the work that he will undertake with the Scottish Social Services Council and local authorities to ensure that the historically slow progress of staff registration is addressed? Will there be a review of the minimum qualification requirements? There has not been such a review for about six years.

Will the member confirm that Labour closed more schools than it built?

Yesterday, we had a debate on the importance of history in our schools, so I will begin with a short history of our schools—just the recent history, of course. In the Labour Party manifesto of 1997 there is one line—just one—about school buildings. It reads: "Public/private partnerships will improve the condition of school buildings." Let us have a look at how that panned out. In 2003, leading Scottish architects claimed that PPP/PFI had not improved the condition of school buildings as Labour had claimed it would. Sebastian Tombs said that there was too little emphasis on whether the schools that were being provided offered the best learning environment. Bruce Brebner of Anderson Bell and Christie went further, and said: "The whole thing is driven by money and driven by time ... the process is flawed because the bulk delivery model is a blunt instrument."

No thank you. By February of last year, Malcolm Fraser was saying, "these schools are catastrophically poor", the Educational Institute of Scotland was voicing serious reservations about PPP, and the effect on extracurricular activities was devastating.

I will not take any interventions, because I will not take lessons from the Labour Party on the matter.

We know of sports clubs not being able to afford the fees to use PPP/PFI schools. One hockey team from Falkirk travelled to Bathgate to play because that was cheaper than booking into the school that it had always used.

We can be fairly certain that PPP/PFI has not exactly improved the condition of school buildings. Moreover, in 2002, Audit Scotland found that it was 4 per cent more expensive than traditional procurement and limited councils' future options. It is shameful that any politician would allow that. Labour keeps claiming that it built a school a week. Apparently, that level of work from the builders was not enough, so Jackie Baillie told us in March last year that she would set out to build a school every five days. Such industry from the member for Dumbarton! However, she was determined to have the weekends off. Of course, the truth is that 173 schools were built between 1999 and 2007—not made fit for purpose, but built. However, although 173 were built, 177 were closed during the same period, so when Labour was turfed out of office last May, Scotland had fewer schools than when it came into office. That is some record—it is almost criminal. We are four schools down on the deal and Scottish councils are in hock to the tune of 11.25 per cent. Labour has imposed some tuition fee on the children of Scotland. They will pay back the costs of their primary school education for half their working lives. Labour's record is simple—shoddy government and expediency—and its solution since May has  been to pretend that it never happened. With a wave of the new Labour wand, history is rewritten, the demons are airbrushed out of the photograph and new heroes are installed in the pantheon. It is a blessed relief that there was a change of Government last May. Instead of following Labour's school closure programme, local authorities are now free to determine the most appropriate routes for providing the schools that Scotland's children need. We now have a Government that is dedicated to building a decent future for Scotland, wants to improve Scotland's schools and will not leave pupils paying the debt for the rest of their lives. We have had a decade of Labour failure. Now it is time to deliver. We have looked at the history. Now we have a chance to look to the future.

I hold in my hand a piece of Scottish history—the "Chambers Educational Course: History of Scotland". The book is 130 years old. If the education system in the 1870s had the insight to teach Scottish history, what is Labour afraid of today? National pride, maybe?

The First Minister said that the Scottish Building Standards Agency would join a newly formed directorate for the built environment. What other agencies or sections of Government will become part of that directorate?

It is a privilege to stand in Parliament today and to speak to a motion recommending the budget of our minority Government. I know the effort that the Government, operating from a position of minority, has had to put in, with John Swinney having to argue the case line by line. I hope that I can comfort him with the observation that, as soon as this budget clears Parliament, he will be able to start working on the next one, so he will not get bored waiting for something to do. However, let me address this year's budget before we move on to next year's. The budget is an indication of what can be achieved by a Government that is committed to advancing the country's cause. I am delighted that the budget addresses social justice issues and seeks to grow Scotland's economy. It is about time that Parliament started aiming at equality of opportunity while expanding the range of opportunities in this country. I am also delighted that this Scottish budget will make provision for extra nursery provision, introduce payments for kinship carers, increase the number of teacher training places and introduce bursaries for students in the wake of the abolition of the graduate endowment. All that comes on top of the excellent work that is being done by Scotland's new SNP Government. I might add that I am delighted that the Government has trusted local communities by ending ring fencing. That move will be welcomed by everyone who believes in local democracy.  I am surprised that anyone would not support the fine aims that are embedded in the budget and I assume that Iain Gray and Tavish Scott lodged their amendments merely to ensure that they would have something to say in the debate. I note that the subjects that their amendments cover were either not presented to or not supported by the Finance Committee. I had thought that the Parliament's committees—which make this Parliament a prime example of excellent law-making procedure—were the appropriate place in which to pursue such amendments. However, as this is the first time that I have taken part in the proceedings on a budget bill, I am of course prepared to be corrected by those who were ministers in the previous Scottish Executive if they can show why it is better to have a grandstanding finale than to do the work in committee. Having compared the information that was provided for this year's budget with that which was provided in previous years, I am at a loss to understand why Tavish Scott thinks that this year's budget is any less clear than those of previous years. Perhaps he previously had access to information that he lacks this year, but he cannot possibly refer to the level 3 budget lines, which were just ripped apart in each year's autumn budget revision. Can he? I hope not. Regrettably, his amendment does not lay out the principles on which he thinks the budget should have been based if he disagrees with those that have been, and will be, mentioned by myself and my colleagues. It smells of vacuity. At least Iain Gray came with a shopping list—he no doubt has his dividend book as well. He asked for 15,000 new apprenticeships, although no such proposal appears in any of the subject committee reports. He wants support for vocational training opportunities but, if he had read paragraph 37 of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's report to the Finance Committee, he would have seen that the committee welcomes the provision in the budget for vocational education. Iain Gray wants additional funding for universities through end-year flexibility, but he ignores the simple fact that the SNP Government is giving Scottish universities more money than any Labour Administration ever did. In addition, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has already met university principals. She is more interested in levering in more money for them this year than in waiting and hoping for end-year flexibility. Of course, that provision comes on top of the £100 million extra in capital spending that universities have been given to allow them to start to address the massive backlog of infrastructure works that accumulated during the years in which they had to suffer Labour finance ministers.  Iain Gray seeks additional nursery education provision, but he ignores the fact that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee never made such a call because the budget already contains support to extend nursery provision in Scotland. To put it simply, the SNP is delivering education, education, education. The budget will deliver more nursery provision, better student funding, extra money for universities, vocational education, more teachers and support for kinship carers. Some people talk the talk, and some people walk the walk. This is a well-considered, excellent and rounded budget from a Government that cares about our country and is delivering in the face of the tightest spending round that has been delivered in Scotland since devolution. It does not deliver everything that the SNP wanted, but it will make a huge and positive impact. The budget is an excellent piece of work. I compliment Mr Swinney on it and recommend it to Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to mark Burns night this year and how it intends to encourage the celebration of Burns night. (S3O-1951)

I am sure that the minister will find that there is a new sense of pride in Scotland's culture, which is rejuvenating our culture. Does she agree that Burns represents a figurehead for a wonderful, deep and rich literary tradition in Scotland, which is still alive and strong and should be encouraged?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member join me in congratulating the SNP Scottish Government on its leadership in ending the derived grades system, which is a change that supports people from the socioeconomic background that she is describing?

I am, not surprisingly, delighted to support Maureen Watt's motion. I agree with her that the OECD report indicates the strength of the Scottish education system and the challenges that we face in improving it for the benefit of us all. I am delighted that the SNP Scottish Government has begun the enormous task of improving Scottish education, including refreshing and renewing the partnership with local government and freeing local decision making from the dead hand of ring fencing. There is a range of interesting amendments. The Conservative amendment has some merits, especially in its call for greater opportunities for vocational education. I am sure that Elizabeth Smith agrees that Scotland's colleges have been driving that agenda, and we have a lot to be grateful to them for, but more needs to be done. We must take time to examine the possible ways forward, the routes that Scottish pupils can choose and the resources that are available in our schools. We can be sure that the Minister for Schools and Skills is carefully examining the  issues around vocational education and that she will report to Parliament in due course. I look forward to examining the issues and grilling the minister—gently, of course—on the options that she chooses. I take issue with one part of Elizabeth Smith's amendment. I am inclined to agree with her that there is scope for placing a greater emphasis on English and maths, because of the beneficial effects of using the basic tools of those subjects, and because later and more in-depth study of them can offer benefits to the whole country. In particular, the study of maths is a prerequisite for much of the further study of technology and science—we have heard several calls for a greater number of students to travel those routes. However, I point out that, for quite some time, Scottish politicians have relinquished direct control over the curriculum, and for very good reason. In Scotland, we trust education professionals far more than is perhaps the case elsewhere in these islands. I am sure that Elizabeth Smith appreciates that. I am also sure that she agrees that it should not be any other way. I also agree with some of Rhona Brankin's amendment, if that does not cause her too many problems. I agree that there is a massive challenge for Scottish education to close the achievement gap that is associated with poverty and deprivation. It is shocking that such a challenge still exists in Scotland. In 1997, Labour promised us an end to poverty in Scotland—it was not delivered, of course. That was one of Labour's many broken promises. In 1999, Labour came into this Parliament promising continuous improvement in Scottish education—again, that was not delivered, and it was another broken promise from Labour.

The member should look at page 144 of the OECD report, which shows that three in four primary schools are still in the highest poverty band. I will not take any lessons from the Labour Party on that point. In 2003, the partnership agreement for the Labour-led Administration suggested that improving attainment was a matter of providing more staff in schools rather than any other Government function. There was supposed to be a focus on improving numeracy and literacy but, by the end of the 2005-06 scholastic year—the most recent year for which figures are available—no improvement in attainment had occurred at all. Several cohorts of Scottish pupils have reason to regret Labour's failure to address those priorities and to deliver on key pledges in its manifesto. Like the rest of Scotland, Scottish pupils were failed  year after year by Labour's broken promises. Rhona Brankin's amendment calls for the devolution of more power to head teachers. Can we dare to hope that Labour members are beginning to understand the purpose of removing ring fencing? Like the principle of subsidiarity, removing ring fencing allows decisions to be made at the most appropriate level. Given that Labour now displays a desire for decisions to be made at the most appropriate level, I hope that we can expect support from the Labour group for the principle of removing ring fencing. In that spirit of consensus, I note that the removal of the derived grades procedure from the Scottish Qualifications Authority marking process has resulted in a far more equitable system. Without doubt, we now have a far more level playing field than when we had the skewing factor of derived grades. We should be pleased that pupils can be absolutely confident that they gained the grades that appear on their certificate and that they have not been inflated artificially—pupils can be proud of their true achievement. That is certainly an improvement. One main underpinning of the Scottish education system's reputation throughout the world is the inherent honesty in our approach, which has led to the insistence that it is the abilities of the individual that matter, not their place in society. That is a prime support of the Scottish education system and I am glad that we have it. The debate on the direction of travel for Scottish education will, rightly, continue, and from it we will plot a sensible route forward. I am pleased to support the minister's motion.

Can the Scottish Government update Parliament on the progress of the Scottish universities joint future thinking task force that the cabinet secretary and Universities Scotland have established?

I saw the motion for today's debate and wondered why it was that, among the people who have an interest in local government funding in Scotland, Labour MSPs alone do not understand the deleterious effects of ring fencing. Given that Labour councillors the length and breadth of the country have welcomed the removal of ring fencing and that Labour MPs have supported the London Government in following the example set by the Scottish Government, one would have thought that Labour MSPs would embrace changes that will free up local authority spending. I thought that it was strange that they had not done so, so I took the time to have a wee glance back through the Official Report . I would like to offer a few quotes that might help to illuminate the debate. Let us go back eight years to 2000, when the then Minister for Finance and Local Government, Angus MacKay, said: "we want to move away from ring fencing ... we will move away from the current approach of ring fencing in some areas to give the maximum flexibility to local authorities in the delivery of services."— [ Official Report , 7 December 2000; vol 9, c 706.]  So Labour has known for at least eight years that removing ring fencing would help councils to deliver services more effectively.  But there is more. In January 2002, Andy Kerr, the then Minister for Finance, said: "We will consider the potential for further reductions in ring-fenced controls". Michael McMahon was moved to reply: "When the move from ring fencing to local outcome agreements develops further, we will, I hope, see further progress on optimising service provision."

Not right now, thanks. Des McNulty added: "We should also welcome the steps that have been taken to reduce ring fencing."— [ Official Report , 31 January 2002; c 6007, 6016, 6020.]  In June of that year, Andy Kerr was back on the subject. He said: "Ring fencing remains a concern of the Parliament and the leaders of local authorities and I continue discussions on the matter."— [ Official Report , 19 June 2002; c 12795.]  His then deputy, Peter Peacock—I am not missing anyone out—said: "We have listened to the arguments about ring fencing; we want to take action on a case-by-case basis to reduce ring fencing."— [ Official Report , 19 June 2002; c 12834.]

In September 2005, Hugh Henry, the then Deputy Minister for Justice, said: "the Scottish Executive cannot be a substitute for local decision makers making local funding decisions".— [ Official Report , 15 September 2005; c 19116.]  The same applies, of course, to any central Government. In November 2005, in reply to Labour councillor and Glasgow City Council leader Steven Purcell, Des McNulty, as convener of the Finance Committee, said: "I accept that you need there to be less ring-fenced funding."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 1 November 2005; c 2970.] Indeed, that committee, with Des McNulty as its convener, Wendy Alexander as a member and Arthur Midwinter as its adviser, produced a cross-cutting expenditure review of deprivation in April 2006. Elaine Murray was highly selective in her quoting of Professor Midwinter. A key conclusion of that report was: "the Committee believes greater accountability and better effectiveness can be achieved by removing ring-fencing of resources allocation, giving local partners greater scope to identify local priorities and implement partnership outcome agreements." Amazing.

It is abundantly clear that Labour members in the Parliament—especially former ministers—are well aware of how damaging ring fencing is. They know that ending the ring fencing of resources that are given to local authorities will improve the performance of local authorities and of government in general. That begs the question why Labour Party members have become so vehemently opposed to removing that barrier to good governance.

The money is still there. There is an issue about trust in councillors. Because of proportional representation, the IQ of local government has increased considerably—perhaps that is because the SNP has the most councillors. Perhaps Labour members are unable to trust Labour councillors or have a terror of subsidiarity and of letting go and allowing decisions to be made at the most appropriate level. Perhaps they simply have not thought through the consequences of their actions. Surely Labour members are not ignoring what is best for Scotland so that they can try to score petty party-political points. Are they talking Scotland down just so that they can scaremonger about everything from mental health groups to Hogmanay parties? I read the newspapers as they rolled past during the holidays. A procession of Labour members claimed that ending ring fencing would bring plague and pestilence upon the land. Every day I read of another judgment to be visited on the heads of the Scottish people as a result of the sensible move to allow local authorities the flexibility to deliver services in the most appropriate manner for their areas. The messages were so strident that I was reminded of the dire warnings before the May election that if the SNP won the sky would fall in, every employer would immediately leave the country and we would be consigned to a life of darkness. The harbingers of doom were wrong about that and they are wrong about the removal of ring fencing. We know that what they say is rubbish, and so do the people of Scotland. There is a hungry caterpillar somewhere that is starting to eat its own tail and does not have long for this world. I offer the hand of friendship and an olive branch to Labour members. They still have time to recant and restore a tiny bit of pride. They can support the SNP amendment and show that they still have a shred of decency.

Listening to the previous speaker, I thought that the Labour Party should change the title of its policy from civil liberties to taking liberties. I welcome the Liberal Democrats' conversion to the independence cause. It is clear from the motion that they have come a long way since February 2005, when they abstained on a Green motion opposing ID cards. Bizarrely, shortly before he and the other Lib Dems abstained, Jeremy Purvis accused the Conservatives of being indecisive. He said: "The Conservatives are sitting on the fence. They originally supported the proposals and are now abstaining."— [ Official Report , 24 February 2005; c 14719.]  Then the Lib Dems abstained—oh, the delicious irony! In 2005, the Lib Dems' position before they abstained was to welcome the commitment that ID cards would not be needed for accessing devolved services, but today they are going much further: Margaret Smith wants to ensure that our fundamental liberties are not eroded. She will be delighted to know that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice opposed a blanket DNA database back in 2005, when the Lib Dems were busy abstaining. It is lovely to see them finally starting to follow where the SNP has been leading for years. More than that, Margaret Smith's motion asks the SNP Government to pick a fight with Westminster over access to personal information that is held by the Scottish public sector. Not so long ago, the Opposition coalition said that we should never pick fights with London and now the Lib Dems are encouraging us to do so. They really should make up their minds one way or another.

I am sorry, but I am not a minister yet.

I have a short time.  The Lib Dems can rest assured that we will pick the fights that we need to pick in order to stand up for Scotland. They can be certain that every SNP member will stand up for Scotland whenever that is needed and can sleep soundly at night safe in the knowledge that the SNP Government is working hard for Scotland and standing up for Scotland every day. The SNP has been fighting Scotland's cause for a long time. We know what the terrain is like. We know what has to be done and we are prepared to do it. That is why we know that the way to stop Westminster and Whitehall accessing Scots' personal information is to repatriate the power to protect it, which is why I am delighted to note that Margaret Smith advocates the return of all powers to Scotland. That is a remarkable contribution to the national conversation, and I hope that the Lib Dems will give even more consideration to the undeniable case for Scottish independence. The SNP and—to be fair—the Greens have been opposing the insanity of the ID card scheme since its inception. There can be few more telling arguments against giving the London establishment access to our personal information than the recent madness that was caused when the data of every family that is entitled to child benefit—that is, all of them—were downloaded on to a couple of CDs and sent through the post. An old Scots term jumps to mind—eejits. It is abundantly clear that we cannot trust London with our personal data any more than we can trust it with looking after Scotland's interests. The current overhyped panic about terrorism is being used as a smokescreen for the introduction of a number of repressive measures that we would never countenance in other circumstances. The ID card nonsense is just one of them. It is still possible to protect those liberties and save us from the creep of the state, but we must act concertedly. It is time to turn this Parliament into the kind of Parliament that can and will protect our liberties. It is, of course, time for independence.

It was a fairly uncomfortable experience when a whip stopped me in the corridor and said the words "summary justice." It was a relief to find out that he was talking about a debate. It has also been a relief to me that the debate on justice in Scotland has not followed the Daily Mail agenda of wild-eyed ranting; rather, it has followed the far more sensible course of seeking to find what works and ensuring that we aim for that. Parties may have different attitudes on the proper solution—there is even evidence that there are different attitudes within parties—but the general desire in Parliament is for a justice system that works. Such a system would protect us and increase our security, punish wrongdoing, help to maintain society's values and, most important, reduce recidivism. That is why I was pleased by the announcement that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice made a while back that he is considering more imaginative uses of sentencing. He is looking to address reoffending behaviour, rather than just jerk the knee and lock people up. It was recently reported that there are about 7,500 people in Scottish jails. I cannot help but question whether that is not a terrible waste of human life. The number of crimes that are reported has fallen by about 40,000 compared with 20 years ago, but the prison population has increased by a third. Scotland is spending incredible amounts of money on hosting offenders in prisons, and a substantial percentage of that money is being spent on repeat offenders. Addressing recidivism is not only about saving individuals—it is about changing the face of the  justice system and transforming people from offenders who are a drain on public finances into people who make a valid contribution to our society. The argument for addressing offending behaviour is as much about improving the country's economic outlook as it is about protecting society. I welcome the strengthening of sheriffs' hands in sentencing. The current restrictions seem to leave sheriffs in the invidious position of not having the necessary tools at their disposal to play their part in protecting society and punishing wrongdoing. I am not certain that the additional powers go far enough, but I am prepared to accept that the cabinet secretary has considered the issue carefully and will continue to keep a beady eye on our courts' performance. I note that the potential increase in powers of JP courts may lead those courts to take on some elements of sheriff courts' current work. I trust that the matter will be kept under review as development of the courts proceeds, and that we will hear regularly from the cabinet secretary about their performance—not that I want to check up on his work, of course. The cabinet secretary's experience of the law from the other side—as a solicitor, before he became a legislator—and the experience of our law officers gives me confidence that our justice system is in the hands of people who will consider the issues carefully, rather than seek a news headline. Alongside sheriffs' increased powers to impose imprisonment and to levy financial penalties, a number of other disposals will be available to them. I am aware that there are issues relating to resourcing of support for some non-custodial disposals. Over the past few years, there have been a few instances of courts commenting on the paucity of support that is available, but I am convinced that non-custodial sentences are more effective than custodial sentences at reducing recidivism, and I believe that the research supports my view. I look forward to seeing alternatives to custody used more widely and am pleased that the cabinet secretary has pledged Government support for such disposals. I admit to feeling some disquiet about the work orders for which section 51 of the 2007 act provides. It may be the phraseology—"work orders" smacks of chain gangs to me—but I will seek reassurances about how those orders are working once the pilots start. I agree with the intention of depriving offenders of their free time—a variation on depriving them of liberty—but I hope that the orders will not be used inappropriately. While I am on that subject, I make it clear that I welcome Mr MacAskill's recent comments that there will be no uniform for people who are subject to work orders—there will be no orange jump suits. I agree with him that ridicule should not be part of the effort to rehabilitate offenders.  The fixed penalty provisions have obvious upsides and possible downsides. Although the freeing up of court time and increased collection rates are obvious benefits to the running of our courts, there are two areas of immediate concern. First, there is a possibility that the fixed penalty will be seen by some people as an easy option—pay and walk, if you will—and that the seriousness of accumulating a criminal record will be lost on some members of society. Secondly, there is a possibility that some will see paying the fixed penalty as being an easier option than going to court, where charges may have been dismissed, and that small miscarriages of justice will become commonplace. Although we should look to improve the performance of our justice system, we should remain vigilant to ensure that the pursuit of justice remains at the centre of the system. I look forward to getting an assurance from the cabinet secretary that he will keep those points under review. With the small caveats that I have issued, I will support the motion.

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will know that the Scottish Executive that existed before May missed all its targets on class sizes, despite amending them regularly. Does she, like me, welcome the finding of a recent YouGov opinion poll that showed that 78 per cent—yes, 78 per cent—of the people of Scotland support the agreement between the SNP Scottish Government and Scotland's councils to work together to cut class sizes in the first three years of primary school? Does she agree that the Opposition parties should have the good grace—something that is foreign to them—to join Scotland's people in welcoming the work of the SNP Government?

The trauma caused by domestic violence runs deep. The physical trauma that is suffered in each assault is only the start of the damage chain. The deep wounds inflicted on the victim's self-belief, self-respect and self-image have effects that last long after the physical damage has faded from sight. The damage inflicted on children in the household can be just as severe. Even when they suffer no physical violence, children can find the psychological and emotional violence debilitating both at the time and in later life. There is sometimes no escape from the childhood trauma; the captivity persists throughout life, even after apparent physical liberation through being removed from the place where the damage was  done. Children who have lived their childhood in homes where they regularly witnessed domestic abuse can fail to thrive. Quite frankly, that is not acceptable in Scotland today. Domestic violence is not acceptable anywhere in the world, but it is certainly not acceptable in Scotland in the 21 st century. No member of the Parliament would argue, as some people have in the past, that domestic abuse is a private matter that should be left well alone. The scars carried as a result of our society's failure so far to end domestic abuse are heavy wounds. [ Interruption. ]

In delivering on the promise to end domestic abuse, we will help to heal our society. The minister's motion pays tribute to those who work to help women and children who are affected by domestic violence. I add my voice to that tribute in thanking those workers who strive to heal our society. They seek a better future for Scotland, in which people are not held back by what goes on behind closed doors. I am pleased that the minister's motion acknowledges that the scope of the campaign to end violence against women should include rape and sexual assault. Defeating those crimes is a massive undertaking, but it will set our society on the road to properly acknowledging equality between women and men. On that note, I welcome the moves by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to seek changes to increase the pitifully poor conviction rate in Scotland. When we take a serious look at the crimes of violence known as sex crimes and seek to mend the problems that we find in our nation, we are in a position to start helping to prevent the slave trade in sex workers. As Margaret Mitchell said, human trafficking is nothing more and nothing less than a slave trade. Passing people across international borders, denying them the human rights that we all take for granted and using them as pieces of property instead of respecting them as human beings are defining points of a slave trade. We cannot be complacent about that trade. None of this is someone else's problem; each and every bit of it is our problem. I welcome the establishment of the delivery group for children affected by domestic abuse. We have a long way to go before we really start addressing the issues that we have heard about today, but I am glad that we are at least stepping out on to that road. Nothing is achieved by wishing that it was already done. The commitment to action that I hope we  get from all members today will act as a driving force towards a more just society. I support the motion in the minister's name.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that local authorities should be given responsibility and the power to decide how the money that they have at their disposal is spent? Does he, like me, trust councillors—even, in some instances, Labour councillors—to take the most appropriate decisions for their areas? Does he think that the recent deal that was signed between the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is as good a deal as COSLA thinks it is?

During recent months the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has made clear  her commitment to delivering better education and care in the early years of a child's life. The next generation is the most important place to start work to deliver the Scotland that we all want. That is not just about class sizes; it is about nursery provision—

What steps will the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth take to ensure that the SNP Government will provide the best nursery provision for all Scotland's children?

I welcome the minister's commitment to an independent inquiry into Kerelaw and I congratulate Glasgow City Council on having the foresight to commission that inquiry with the Scottish Government. Will the minister ensure that the inquiry looks closely at the role that was played by the council in the running of Kerelaw, and will he ensure that the inquiry takes evidence from the trade unions that represent the workers at Kerelaw? Some of those workers have been accused of malpractice. This issue is an open wound for Glasgow and for Scotland, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government is ensuring that it is investigated. I ask the minister to ensure that the wound is treated properly and that the examination of what went on at Kerelaw is absolutely thorough.

It has been almost eight and a half years since the first elections to the Scottish Parliament. Eight cohorts of primary school pupils have entered the education system since 1999. A child who was born on the day of that first election is now in primary 3. Such children were failed by the first eight years of stuttering administration and I am glad that they now have a Government that will at least try to deliver for them.

I want to continue. I was pleased when I saw the motion that Adam Ingram lodged, which should allow us to debate the important early years in a child's life and how we can add to their life chances by improving services for them in the early years. However, I was saddened to see Rhona Brankin's amendment, not just because it seeks to score petty points in a debate as important as this, but because it misses the point altogether. The Minister for Children and Early Years is seeking consensus in Parliament for an approach to early years services that would reduce inequalities, particularly in health and education, and seek better integration and collaboration.

Perhaps I will give the member that answer when she tells me whether she supports smaller class sizes—yes or no? The Government is plotting a path that seeks to help families across Scotland and seeks to find common ground among all the parties that are represented in the chamber, for the benefit of all Scotland's families. We have a Conservative amendment with which we may not all agree, but which at least presents a point of view that refers to the early years experience. The amendment from Jeremy Purvis puts forward ideas that the minister can at least consider as part of the consideration of the early years strategy for Scotland. However, the response from the Labour Party is predictably sour and it misses the point. While the other parties in the chamber can all use this opportunity to focus on the vital issues at hand, Labour instead has its heart set on worrying at the bruises of its election defeat six months ago. That is as unhelpful to Scotland as it is unedifying to see. While we are concentrating on the early years, Labour is off talking about school years and seeking to criticise the SNP's laudable commitment to cutting class sizes in the first years of primary school. Perhaps that is because Labour does not understand what the early years of a child's life mean for the child's life chances. Perhaps Labour has not had a chance to study any of the research, or perhaps it is ashamed that it promised an early years strategy during the 2003 election campaign, but did not deliver over the next four years. In the eight years for which Labour was in power, it did not produce an early years or early years intervention strategy. There was consultation on what such a strategy should be, but there was no delivery. There was prevarication and no action. The child who was born on the day of the first elections to the Scottish Parliament was failed by Labour. One would think that Labour would have the decency to try to help put that right. While I am on the subject of Labour failures, I ask members to cast their minds back to the pledge that Labour made to cut class sizes in primary 1 to a maximum of 25 pupils. The latest figures for 2006 show that there was only a 3 per cent difference in the numbers between when the promise was made and 2006, when it was definitely broken. More than 41 per cent of primary 1 pupils are still in classes of more than 25. Three years after Labour promised an unambitious improvement, hardly a shred of difference has been made. I will take no lectures from Labour on class sizes.  I applaud Adam Ingram for bringing this important debate on early years to the chamber and I urge members to engage in it. I am aware that the previous Education Committee took a special interest in examining the work of the Scandinavian countries, having visited Stockholm and Helsinki during its early years inquiry. The SNP also has a particular interest in those nations, as they are in the arc of prosperity. We favour their early years partnership model, given the high regard in which the well-trained and respected staff are held and the attitude that allows children to be children. The SNP is painfully aware that Scotland does not have control over the tax and benefits system, which would allow us to emulate the system in Sweden and Finland, which gives so much support to parents and families. However, we are determined to do what we can within the current system to improve Scotland's lot.

Absolutely. At least Mr Purvis has the guts to recognise that we are trying to make a difference in Scotland and that we are making headway on that. Research from the Abecedarian project and Perry pre-school project, as well as evidence from Reggio Emilia, shows that early intervention and an effective early years strategy pay dividends. There are lifelong benefits for recipients of the investment, whose life chances are immeasurably improved, and financial savings in later life social services for the society that provides the investment. The Perry pre-school 21 years on study suggests that the savings could be as much as eight times the spend. That is pretty good gearing. Members of the Parliament have an opportunity today to make a commitment to drive early years provision in Scotland in a direction that will benefit us all. We will have further opportunities to help Scotland's Government refine the strategy and direction of our support for people in the first years of their life. I support the motion and commend it to my fellow MSPs.

What exactly is the Labour Party's position on smaller class sizes? In 2003, Peter Peacock said that they were a good thing; in 2007, Wendy Alexander says that they are not so important. Do you want smaller class sizes or not?

I welcome the innovation that is represented by the public-social partnership in North Lanarkshire. The link between the local authority and the area's voluntary organisations is a good one and it is pleasing to see the PSP model beginning to come to fruition. We have been waiting for a long time for such a model in Scotland. In my previous incarnation in social work services in Glasgow, I had plenty opportunities to see the work that is done along parallel lines by statutory bodies and the voluntary sector. Sometimes those organisations' efforts sat well alongside each other and the overall effect was enhanced, but at other times there was an overlap, which meant that resources and staff efforts were used that could have been used elsewhere. On occasion, there were clashes between the work that different organisations were trying to do. Making sense of that complicated landscape is almost the holy grail. Getting the various bodies that are involved in delivering services to work alongside each other to deliver a more comprehensive and coherent service would be ideal. When I speak to people who work in the voluntary sector, it is obvious that communication channels must be improved so that all the people at the front end of service delivery know exactly what they and the people around them will be doing. I welcome any moves that might help those organisations to work together more effectively. I note that the PSP model is based on the Italian co-planning idea. The Italians have been leading in this area for some time and are working to ensure that all levels of service delivery are part of the decision on output delivery. It might be better described as a co-decision rather than co-planning. It ensures a substantial buy-in to the overall package of services from all the service providers and helps to ensure that providers are offering and delivering closely aligned services rather than competing services. We need co-operation rather than contest and we need trust rather than suspicion. The PSP model could be an effective way of streamlining delivery if there is enough engagement on each side. The big question, of course, is this: how much of our public services do we think should be delivered by voluntary organisations rather than the public sector? There is a serious issue around the provision of Scotland's public services and how much can be delivered by enabling another agency to deliver rather than by delivering. I note that the North Lanarkshire PSP has partners in social enterprise rather than in the traditional voluntary sector, thereby delivering some benefits back to the community by providing employment  for people within the area. I welcome that, and will praise any initiative that creates employment. Members will be aware that the Scottish National Party Government has placed the growing of employment opportunities high on the political agenda, along with growing the economy to benefit all Scotland. The SNP will always support moves to create employment in the hearts of our communities. I thank Michael McMahon for lodging the motion for debate and I am pleased to see Labour members supporting PSP, which certainly makes a change from public-private partnerships. I am only too happy to add my voice to that support. We should encourage community-level engagement in all aspects of civic society, and I particularly like the underpinning of the North Lanarkshire PSP. The provision of furniture packs to households is an excellent move. It is a matter of no small regret that we have deprivation in Scotland, which makes the provision of such furniture packs an invaluable addition to service provision and the benefits system, which has failed, and continues to fail, most vulnerable members of our society. Long before he was making a mess of our elections, and even before Labour gained power in London in 1997, Douglas Alexander claimed that poverty was a scar across the face of our nation. It still is, which is a sad indictment of the poverty of ambition and ideas in Labour's London Government, and an illustration of the failure of Gordon Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer and as Prime Minister to improve the lot of the poorest members of our society. Perhaps it is all part of the betrayal of the principles on which the Labour Party was founded. We must all do whatever we can to alleviate poverty in Scotland, and that means acting to mitigate the effects of the London Government where we can. I therefore welcome the efforts that are being made by the North Lanarkshire PSP to help people who are in need. I have already described the furniture packs; the storage of furniture for those who have become homeless ensures that precious resources are not lost. It would be naive of us to expect that we could force compliance on the enablers or the service providers, so we should be content to encourage them.

To ask the Scottish Government what improvements have been made to relations with European Union institutions since May 2007. (S3O-834)

Obviously, the European Union is extremely important to Scotland. Is the United Kingdom Government taking a constructive approach to Scotland's new Government?

To ask the Scottish Government what  action it will take to extend the provision of free school meals. (S3O-732)

Does the minister welcome, as many members do, the support that many individuals and organisations in Scotland have given to the SNP's plan, as evidenced by a recent letter in The Herald , which was signed by many of the people who have been campaigning for nutritious free meals for school pupils? Will examination of the cooking and dining facilities that are provided in public-private partnership/private finance initiative schools form part of the report on the pilot scheme, before it is rolled out across the country?

I was shocked by the remark, which was made earlier this week at the Liberal Democrat conference, that people who want a referendum on any forthcoming EU treaty are "headbangers". I hope that the Liberal Democrats in the chamber will distance themselves from such a comment and reaffirm that people who want to vote for their preferred option in a referendum are simply democrats. I would hate to think that any of my colleagues would seek to deny Scots the opportunity to vote in a referendum—indeed, that would be most unfortunate, would it not? I hope that the Liberal Democrats agree that referendums are, in general, good things and should be supported, and that if we brought a bill to the chamber that called for a referendum it would have their support. Of course, that referendum would have to be on an issue that covered substantial constitutional matters. I was interested in Menzies Campbell's suggestion that the reform treaty does not need a referendum as it now represents a minor treaty rather than a major one. In this as in many other matters, I am not sure that his reasoning is sound, but I find it interesting that he has called for a referendum on our membership of the EU as a whole because he wants an honest debate. Leaving aside his obvious addiction to referendums, I agree with Sir Menzies Campbell that, on issues of national importance, we should have an honest debate, followed by a referendum.

I would not vote on anything that I had not seen. I cannot answer the member's question until I have seen the text. Perhaps we should have a national conversation as an honest debate, to be followed by a referendum on Scotland's constitutional position. I hear that that conversation has started and that everyone is welcome to join in. It is important, though, that no one prejudges the European treaty and that the debate takes place in an informed manner. We need to have an informed conversation before we vote. I hope that Ming Campbell will follow the fine example of the Scottish Government, which is waiting to see the treaty before it takes any decisions on it. We have seen the draft, but there is still a long way to go. Belgium has failed to form a Government within 100 days. It should look at Scotland to see what can be done in 100 days. It looks as though Flanders and Wallonia might be preparing to go their separate ways in the near future. Both will become members of the EU, of course, and will have to be signatories to any new treaty. That news should delight those who worry, fret and lose sleep over Scotland's entry to the EU when we become independent. The treaty tidies up some of the EU's internal operations. My Conservative colleagues in the blue corner will be delighted to know that the treaty will introduce an exit clause. Personally, I want Scotland to be at the heart of Europe, operating in the international arena with all the va-va-voom that we have seen from Scotland's Government and, indeed, Scotland's football team in the past few months. I invite all colleagues, especially the Lib Dems, to join in the conversation on Scotland's future in Europe, which is being so ably conducted by the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture. It is only when we engage properly in the debate that we begin to see the possibilities opening up. Not only would the Lib Dems' engagement in the debate contribute to the conversation, they might actually enjoy it and derive some benefit from it. I am sure that it will be no surprise to hear that I support the Government on the issue.

My curiosity was piqued by the motion in Hugh Henry's name, which appears to suggest that the new, active and energetic SNP Government is being lax in the education portfolio. That suggests that the first Labour Administration in 1999 came in with all guns blazing, straw hats and trumpets, and got right down to the mark. I looked at what Labour did for education in its first four and a half months in power in Scotland—the period for which the SNP Government has been in power. By mid-September 1999, the Labour Administration had announced its intention to set up an inquiry into tuition fees, which had been imposed by London and—not content with that achievement—had announced an intention to  launch a consultation on a possible education bill, which never came to fruition. That is all. There was nothing else on education—not a peep. There had been no indication that the Administration was giving priority to education, which is what Hugh Henry's motion calls for. The motion also calls for an "urgent explanation" on funding for further and higher education. Although the Administration in 1999 included Labour ministers who had held office at Westminster immediately before the election, by September 1999 there had been no word about funding for further or higher education, far less an "urgent" statement on the issue. No Labour minister or Labour member had expressed concern about student debt, let alone asked how it might be written off. By September 1999, class sizes were not on the agenda for Labour and had not been mentioned, nor had Labour mentioned the appalling conditions in which PPP projects were leaving Scotland's schools. Labour had not even signalled intentions about teachers in early years education—far less made a commitment to ensure that every early years class should have a teacher, as the SNP Government has done. Labour had not provided details on how teachers were to be provided. The indiscipline problem in Scotland's schools had been completely ignored. No Labour politician had uttered a word about the problem, far less set out a plan for tackling it. The schools estate in Scotland was being pimped out by Labour ministers under PPP, as a milk cow for international merchant bankers, without a word to Parliament. The most insidious and disgraceful tuition fees were those that were being foisted on children who were entering primary 1 in PPP projects for which they would pay well into their working lives. However, Labour did not think that Parliament had a right to know about that. Members will forgive me if I regard the motion with more than a touch of scepticism.

Labour created the problems; we are finding the solutions. To be fair, the 1999 Parliament eventually had a chance to debate education. On 30 September it debated a motion on teachers' pay and conditions, which led directly to the establishment of the McCrone commission and the deal that properly rewarded teachers for their efforts. The motion was in the name of Alex Salmond and the debate was led by Nicola Sturgeon. Not much changes: the SNP led the way eight years ago and is still  leading the way. I am sure that Labour members will say that Sam Galbraith had made a ministerial statement on teachers' pay in the week preceding that debate. However, they know that the original remit was flaccid and that the Labour Administration had refused to take part in negotiations, as Mr Galbraith made clear. Only an imminent strike by teachers brought ministers scurrying to the table. Let me be clear. The SNP brought education into Parliament in 1999 and has pursued education issues ever since. The SNP Government has been tasked with cleaning up the education mess that the Labour Administration left behind. The Scottish Government had made early commitments in a range of policy areas, including education. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has pledged to introduce legislation to end the graduate endowment tuition fee that was imposed by Donald Dewar's Administration. A Labour wrong is being righted by an SNP Government. That legislation, which will be introduced soon, will represent a step in the right direction for Scottish education. Fiona Hyslop has made a commitment to improve early years education and make it proper education. Hugh Henry asks how that policy will be delivered and wants costings. I advise him to consider what has happened in the past: the Administration of which he was a member never laid out costings before introducing the budget bill—with good reason, because costings make sense only when they are seen in the round, as part of the whole package. The SNP has introduced holistic government in Scotland. Policy is linked across portfolios, which is far more sensible than the piecemeal approach that Hugh Henry seems to favour. I invite Labour members to think about the issues, discuss them with us and join the conversation. We can find the best way forward for Scotland only by discussion. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has laid out Scotland's SNP Government's vision for education and the case has been put for that vision. Scotland—and the Opposition's needs—would be better served if, instead of indulging in the negative sniping and general impotence that is demonstrated in Mr Henry's motion, Labour took time to examine the issues and come up with positive ideas of its own, or if Labour backed the SNP Government in its determination to improve Scottish education.

I welcome the many positive signs in the skills strategy. Of course, I expect the Opposition parties to welcome most of them too, so that takes a load off my shoulders. The absence from the strategy of artificial short-term targets, tick boxes and other bureaucratic afflictions strikes me as an excellent advance on previous approaches. Nothing has been as stifling to education or the provision of a highly skilled workforce as the desperation in recent years to collate reams of statistics about everything that happens in teaching and training. Nothing is more  dispiriting to staff than filling in endless forms that add nothing to their efforts. The mania for short-term targets, matched only by the frenzy for new schemes and crafty wheezes, fulfilled the need of some politicians to try to prove that they were doing something. I am delighted that the short-term targets, schemes and wheezes and political interference are being removed from the provision of education and training in Scotland. I am sure that that will be a refreshing change for providers. Teachers and lecturers can now get on with the job that they are there to do without having to remember to tick a box every time they have a new thought. Allowing that freedom for the providers ensures freedom for learners to take full advantage of the opportunities on offer. As the skills strategy is put into practice, we should see more opportunities being made available to more potential learners.

If Mr Purvis has spoken to teachers in his area, I am sure he will understand that the bureaucratic affliction of ticking boxes is a nightmare for them. I welcome the fact that they do not have to do that any more. Egalitarianism is one of the underpinning principles of SNP policy, but I also see it as an inherently Scottish trait—the lass o pairts and her male peer are fine examples to follow. Egalitarian training and education systems should deliver equal access to opportunities for every trainee and scholar, which is why the abolition of the graduate endowment and a fairer student maintenance system are being pursued by the Scottish Government. That egalitarianism should extend further; equality should extend across qualifications. That is why I welcome the commitment in the strategy to establish parity of esteem between vocational and academic qualifications. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning worked hard on that issue in the previous parliamentary session, particularly during the passage of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 2005. I welcome her commitment to ensuring that parity of esteem and I hope that she will continue to deliver on it. I see no reason why a fully qualified joiner or plumber should be regarded as any less qualified than a fully qualified university graduate. Indeed, there are arguments for why a good plumber might  be more welcome than a good philosopher, but equality and parity of esteem will do us for now. The provision of a well-qualified and highly skilled workforce is a sure-fire way of ensuring a prosperous future for our nation, but that is not the whole story. Another valid point is that increased employability of learners helps to address their social problems, some of which can seem almost insurmountable at times. The cabinet secretary launched her skills strategy on Monday and then visited Motherwell College. While she was there, I am sure that she had time to learn about some of the work that the college is undertaking with prisoners the length and breadth of the country. She will have been impressed, as I am, with the work that the college is doing to help increase the knowledge and qualifications of inmates around the country. It is known that increasing inmates' skills can help to address their offending behaviour and thus reduce recidivism. The increase in employability and chances of finding gainful employment mean that many more ex-offenders can turn around their lives and move away from being a social problem towards making a valid contribution to society. I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will be just as pleased with such a result as the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism will be. Motherwell College deserves plaudits for the work that it does in Scottish prisons and the results that it achieves. I know that those plaudits have been received from others who work in rehabilitation, but it would be appropriate for Scotland's Parliament to add its weight to them. I am sure that gratitude comes in equal measure from those whose lives have been improved through the efforts of the college staff and I hope that other members agree that our thanks should be added to theirs. There is a sense of hope and anticipation in Scotland just now and we have a moral duty to ensure that it turns into real results for the people of Scotland. The implementation of the skills strategy will help in that respect and I, too, congratulate the cabinet secretary on its publication. The most important task that is faced by Scotland's politicians is how to prepare for the future, and I am delighted that this Scottish Government has taken to it with such relish.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to support Scottish art and culture. (S3O-517)

How will the minister ensure that the creative industries are properly considered?

I believe that it was William McIlvanney who described Scotland, with pride, as a mongrel nation. His valid point is that we are all descendants of people who have arrived here from all over the world and we can be justifiably proud of our internationalism. As Scots, we like to believe that we have a world view that chimes with Burns's lines "That man to man, the world o'er Shall brithers be for a' that", or with Martin Luther King's dream, if we are looking for a modern equivalent. That is why so many of us find the treatment of asylum seekers in Scotland so abhorrent. This morning's Herald carried a report into Dungavel and the claims made by staff working there about the conditions in which they find themselves and the detainees whom they have in their custody. I am aware that the Border and Immigration Agency will deny the story all the way down the line, and will insist that the staff have all the training and support that they need and that Dungavel is suitable for holding criminals as well as innocent families. I am sure that the agency will  also claim that no sex offenders or violent criminals are held there. I find the staff at Dungavel to be, overwhelmingly, good people who do their job conscientiously and well, and who care about the people who are detained there. They are not the ones who set the objectionable policies and rules that govern asylum cases, but they are the ones who have to enforce the policies and rules while trying to inject a little humanity and dignity into the proceedings. If the staff at Dungavel tell me one thing and the Border and Immigration Agency tells me another, I know who I will believe. I am led to believe that the Border and Immigration Agency does not know how many foreign criminals are held in Dungavel, so we cannot even be made aware of the balance of prisoners and asylum seekers in that institution. The idea of keeping children on the same premises as prisoners, no matter what their crime, is shameful and should not be countenanced. We would not lock up children alongside prisoners in Barlinnie or Peterhead. Why is it thought acceptable to have children locked up alongside prisoners in Dungavel? I welcome the commitment that the SNP Government has already made to act as if the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child is in force in relation to asylum-seeker children. I would expect nothing less from nationalist politicians and it is nothing more than those children deserve. The state of political affairs in the home country of such families can in no way be described as the responsibility of the children, and the children should not be punished for where they were born. We can debate the rights and wrongs of individual points of asylum-seeker policy—I would be on the side of people who seek to welcome those who are in need rather than rejecting them as someone else's problem—but surely there can be no debate about whether we protect asylum-seeker children, just as we would not debate whether to protect our own children. I appreciate that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice—with his hinterland of fighting and campaigning for social justice—will consider what he can do to address the issues that arise every time asylum seekers are discussed. I also appreciate that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will continue her hard work to ensure that the protection of asylum-seeker children is maintained. However, it is not enough for us to leave action to the Scottish Government, no matter how good it is. As has been said repeatedly in the past, morality cannot be reserved and decency cannot be apportioned according to law. That means that pressure in support of those who are in need has  to be applied by all those who care. We should all be intent on removing the blights that we see in our society. One of those blights is the treatment that is meted out to asylum seekers who come here seeking succour but instead find themselves being treated with suspicion and distrust. As a wealthy nation, it could be said that we owe a debt to the world and that we should be seeking to improve the world's peace, security and prosperity. It is regrettable indeed that the cheque that asylum seekers who come here are trying to cash is being returned as if there are insufficient funds to cover it. I refuse to believe that the bank of justice is bankrupt or that the vaults of human decency are empty. There is no acceptable alternative for Scotland—or indeed for any decent modern nation—but to welcome those who are in need into our country when we are asked, as set out in the 1951 UN convention on refugees. Scotland is a nation that is proud of its internationalism. Scotland should be a nation that works to be an example of how a modern state should treat asylum seekers and refugees. I thank Sandra White for bringing the matter to the chamber and I urge all Scotland's politicians to join Scotland's people in calling for decent and humane treatment for asylum seekers in this country.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the recently signed agreement between the First Minister and representatives of the Northern Ireland Assembly will benefit Scotland. (S3O-394)

What work is under way to meet those objectives?

I thank Margaret Mitchell for bringing the issue to the Parliament. Motor neurone disease is a devastating illness. As doctors will say, the prognosis for anyone who is diagnosed with the disease is not good—the expectation is that the patient will be dead within a few years. As a child, I watched my father struggle with the condition. Unlike most sufferers, he lasted for some 12 and a half years—an astonishing result—as the condition went through intermittent stages. There were times when he wanted nothing more than to be allowed to die. It was horrific to grow up with that, but that desire in sufferers is perfectly understandable when we remember that while their bodies fail, their brains remain intact, with the result that their bodies are almost turned into prisons for minds that are still active. Modern medicine knows of no cause and no cure for the condition and cannot predict where it will strike. Any one of us could develop MND, as current good health is no guarantee of continuing good health. As the motion states, the number of people in Scotland who live with MND is rising and the provision of support for sufferers is not all that readily available; as it points out, we should praise the work of the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association, which I thank for supporting my family. Its commitment to improving the lives of sufferers and to helping people to live their lives as comfortably as possible is admirable and should be supported. The case for the association receiving some financial help from public funds should be considered. That is only one of many claims on scarce resources that ministers will receive, but I hope that it will be given careful consideration. I hope that the minister will look hard at the possibility of providing funding for the association, directly or indirectly, through asking health boards to ensure such provision. I hope that she will  ensure that research into possible causes and cures continues. I hope that she can tell us that our ministers will support the research or that she will ensure that such support will be forthcoming as soon as possible. Few conditions are more distressing than motor neurone disease, and whatever we can do to alleviate the suffering and distress of patients will be most welcome. I hope that ministers will thoroughly consider in the coming months the full case for support of motor neurone disease sufferers and research into MND. I do not expect the minister to make a commitment today to provide funding and support, but I hope that we will hear a commitment to examine the case for it thoroughly and speedily. I do not wish to take up too much time with my speech; I think that the facts speak for themselves. I hope, for all of us, that the minister will agree to take the necessary time to consider the issue. I support the thrust of the motion we are debating and I hope that the minister will feel similarly disposed.

The cabinet secretary's speech will have energised the education debate. I am sure that teachers and parents alike will welcome her announcements. I would not quite say that pupils will welcome the pledges because having more teachers is never likely to be a favourite outcome for children. Children who entered primary 1 in 1997, when Labour came to power, are now coming to their final years at school. They will have seen no improvement in their schooling throughout their  school career, no real difference in class sizes or teacher numbers and no improvement in attainment. They will have seen public-private partnership and private finance initiative schools that architects describe as not being fit for purpose, and school gates being closed to community groups. Those pupils will have completed most of their schooling during the years of big promises and no delivery. However, we can be grateful that the political culture that failed that cohort of pupils has been swept aside. The change of Government has obviously resulted in the refreshment of ideas, a fresh dedication to the cause of Scottish education and a quickening of the pace of improvement.

I will finish this point first. The generation of children entering school this year can be sure that they will see improvements long before they leave school.

It is fantastic news that 300 extra teachers will be employed this coming year. As I am sure has been said before, it is the number of teachers in classrooms that matters and not the number of teachers on the register. It is essential to get those professionals to the chalkface. Targeting the new resources at improving pre-school education and cutting class sizes will do more than anything else the cabinet secretary could have done today to deliver the improvement in school education that our children so desperately need. Early intervention has been shown to be far more effective than any amount of later remediation at delivering high-quality education. I congratulate Fiona Hyslop on proposing measures that will help to fulfil the SNP's manifesto commitment to invigorate Scottish education. I welcome her commitment to ask councils to concentrate on addressing problems in areas of deprivation. Children with few other advantages in life should at least be able to benefit from a decent education.  The capital investment in our schools is also welcome. The delivery of resources into the school estate early will allow work to proceed and allow pupils and councils to make changes that will free up the physical space that is needed for more classrooms in which to teach and learn. The firm foundations that are being built will provide a launch pad for our education system. I was pleased to hear that the BEd programme will be expanded and that there will be extra places on the postgraduate training programme. The four-year route not only delivers new teachers who can step out into their careers with confidence but allows more time for the examination of the principles that underlie teacher training. The one-year course offers a route into teaching that allows for a late decision to enter the profession, but the four-year course should be valued for the immense benefits that it delivers, especially given that the cabinet secretary wants science specialists to be among the new entrants to the profession. I ask the cabinet secretary to keep in mind problems that affect science teaching in our schools, such as equipment shortages, and to seek solutions to those problems. I am sure that she is well aware of the need to ensure that pupils leave our schools well enough versed in science to be able to follow a path in science through university. SNP education policy is based on three As: availability, accessibility and ambition. I am delighted that the SNP Government is keeping those principles in mind as it decides on the direction of our education system. Our ambition for Scotland's children is our ambition for Scotland: may their options never be limited by a fear of lifting their eyes. It is never enough to stand still. We would fail in our duty if we did not seek to move our country forward. We must bring education up to date and provide a modern system that allows our pupils to compete in today's global marketplace. The announcement that pre-school provision will be expanded, that more teachers will be employed in primary schools, that resources will be made available to create new classrooms, that teacher training places will be increased, that a long-term early years strategy will be developed and that investment will be concentrated where it can do most for the country makes this a good day for education. A good education can transform a life; a good education system can transform a country. The Parliament can work with the Government to transform the lives of Scots throughout the country and to transform the country's prospects. The cabinet secretary's announcement points us in  that direction and represents a good start. Her proposals set us fair to make a huge difference to education during the next four years. I look forward to witnessing other parties' support for the SNP's transformation of education in Scotland, which will transform Scotland and her people.

I thank Rob Gibson for bringing the motion to Parliament. The motion and the debate that it creates should help to inform opinion on the necessity for Scotland to rebuild its trading links across the North Sea. Scotland cannot afford to have a fortress mentality and to cut itself off from the world. We are a medium-sized country and we need to build and maintain our links, especially our trading links, with other countries in order to maintain and improve the living standards of our people. Rob Gibson mentioned the new service that is taking in the northern arc, including the Faroes and Caithness. I will talk about another project that offers many benefits for Scotland. A proposed ferry service is being promoted by local government and the private sector in mid-Norway. They are joined, in Scotland, by the Shetland Development Trust and are supported by Tavish Scott in his constituency role—a fact that he has just confirmed. The project needs ministerial approval to be able to apply for support from the new EU trans-European network for transport motorways of the sea programme, for  which the proposed service has already been positively pre-checked with European Commission officials in the directorate-general for energy and transport. I hope that the minister will be prepared to give this important transnational proposal his full support so that the relevant agencies involved can promote the opportunity immediately as an EU TEN-T motorways of the sea transport project of common interest. That would allow the service to apply for start-up support through the EU TEN-T motorways of the sea programme during the forthcoming call for proposals, which is expected before the end of 2007. The proposed service could become a strategic link for Scotland's economy, especially as the freight cargo would be likely to comprise high-value products such as engineering components and parts, as well as fish and materials for the oil supply sector. The four counties of mid-Norway comprise the second-largest export region in the country, so the trade possibilities are extensive. If Scotland is to look outwards and towards a better future, we should look to Norway and other Scandinavian countries, and the proposed ferry link would offer us easy passage into those markets. The link could allow trade into Sweden and Finland through Kristiansund—I hope I said that properly—and it would open up markets. Scotland could be the gateway for trade with Norway, not only for the rest of the UK but for other parts of the EU, because there is the possibility of using the Rosyth to Zeebrugge route for onward freight. The Rosyth to Zeebrugge service might be increased and a daily ferry service could perhaps be restored. I hope that the minister will move quickly, because the promoters of the link are considering a link to Newcastle. I sailed from Newcastle to Norway; it took 22 hours and it was horrific. It would be a shame if Scotland lost out on the link for the want of speedy action. The Norwegians cannot understand why the initiative has received so little support or interest from Scotland. Of course, the current Government is not to blame for that. We might have thought that VisitScotland would be interested in a new way of bringing visitors to Scotland, or that Scottish Enterprise would be interested in the business opportunities that the link would offer. We might have expected the previous Administration in Scotland to encourage the development of the ferry route. But none of that has happened. I hope that the minister will tell us that he is carefully considering the project and the help that he can give it.

I am delighted that my first speech in a debate is on an issue that has been close to my heart since the age of about 15. During the recent elections, some Labour candidates argued that Scots should drop our principled objection to nuclear weapons. That is from the party that committed our armed forces to war on the pretence that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq that had to be found and destroyed. We were told, however, that we should  tolerate weapons of mass destruction on the Clyde, because jobs depended on them. The truth is out now. Jobs are going at Faslane, but the weapons of mass destruction are still there. The jobs have nothing to do with Trident. They are not dependent on it and, whether it stays or goes, they are at risk from UK Government decisions. In fact, the STUC and Scottish CND produced a joint report in March year that showed that renewing Trident would cost jobs. Just to be clear: if Trident is renewed, it will still cost jobs in Scotland. We are told by the Labour Government in London that the running costs of son of Trident will be about the same as those of the current system. That is £2,000 every minute, £120,000 an hour, £3 million per day and more than £1 billion a year on top of the capital costs of £20 billion to buy the beasts in the first place—for a weapon that we are told will never be fired. It is like saying that everyone should carry a knife to avoid being attacked with a knife, or that we should all carry guns to make society safer. Trident is economically inept, morally repugnant and spiritually bereft. The presence of those weapons in Scotland's waters is an insult to all of us who believe that peace is preserved by diplomacy before war and compassion before coercion. It is also an insult to all of us who believe in spending public money wisely. I am not a pacifist, but I recognise the impotence, vanity and sheer waste in a weapon such as Trident. It cannot be a defensive weapon, but we are promised that it will never be used in aggression. What exactly is its purpose? I would rather be a citizen of a nation that looks to persuade and co-operate than bully and cajole, and I would rather be such a citizen safe in the knowledge that my country was free of weapons of mass destruction. Mutually assured destruction is not the only mad aspect of nuclear weapons. The very idea that London is considering renewing Trident falls into that category. Defence may be reserved in the strict legal terms of the Scotland Act 1998, but morality, decency and common sense are not. We have a moral duty to oppose that which we see as a waste of national resources. I support the motion in Patrick Harvie's name, I welcome the stand taken against nuclear weapons and I am pleased that it is the majority viewpoint of the Scottish people. We have the opportunity to make it clear that we believe that nuclear weapons have no place in Scotland, and we should take that opportunity and make Scotland's voice heard.